CERTAIN GODLY AND LEARNED Sermons, Preached by that worthy servant of Christ
M. Ed. Philips in S. Sauiors in Southwarke: Upon the whole four first Chapters
of Matthew, Luc. 11. verse. 24.25.26. Romans 8. the whole, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Tit.
2.11.12. James 2. from the 20. to the 26. and 1. Ioh. 3.9.10. And were taken by
the pen of H. YELVERTON of Grayes Inn Gentleman.

So run, that ye may obtain. hear, that ye may learn. practice, that ye
may live for ever.


LO^^ON, Printed by (...) widow and are to be sold at her sho^ (...) Church
yard at the sign of the (...).

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR CHRISTOPHER YELVERTON Knight, one of the Judges
of the Kings Bench, and the Lady his wife: H. Y. wishes to your present
prosperities the addition of many days in the fruitful fear of the Lord
Jesus, etc.
RIght Worshipful, it is inspired to man by grace, to fetch the compass of
this life within the reach of a spanne, Psalm. 39
and it is suggested to him by nature to spin out his web in many days, though
it be with many dangers. Howbeit if the wings of pride did not transport us
to the height of worldliness, and the weight of opinion did not beguile us in
the taste of happiness, we might discern in variety of delights but
superfluity of desires, Eccl. 2
in increase of riches but excess of sorrows, in length of years but
strength of cares, and in the choicest footing that we take, but a changeable
fleeting of our estate. For if our affections might always feed on Manna, we
would loath it; Number. 1
if our inheritance did stretch to the plains of Jordan, we would enlarge it;
and if our pre-eminence (...) to heaven, yet would we raise up our heads
higher. These were the itching humors of Euah lineally descended to us, who
thought not Paradise spacious enough for her habitation, nor the dainties of
Eden sweet enough for her taste, nor that presence of God good enough for her
company. But where the superscription of Holiness to the Lord is engraven on
the head, and the persuasion of godliness to be gain is engrafted in the
heart, there the lust of the world, and the dust of the world shall be shuffled
together as paires and pearls of equal account and continuance. For let the
glory of a Christian be never so eminent, it is not greater then Salomons; nor
yet Salomons so great as the Lillies: let the arm of the wicked be never so
mighty, it is not stronger then Pharaohs; and yet Pharaohs inferior to the
course of waters: let the power of his command be never so absolute, it is not
larger then Nabuchadnezzars, and yet stifned in pride, he was straightened for
7. years within the walks of wild asses; yea let the apparel he puts on be
never so royal, the place where he sits never so judicial, the phrase of his
speech never so plausible, and the praise of his voice never so popular, yet
can he not be lifted up above Herod, nor Herod by these defended from the
worms. Whether then we peruse the steps of the Saints, or the state of
unrepentant sinners, we see their lives equally bound up with the cords of
corruption, though unequally matched in the joy at their separation; the one
falling away like a flower transplanted to a better soil: the other rushing
upon the rock of Gods wrath, either shamefully dejected with the terror of
judgment while they live, or else fearfully entangled with the sense of
torme^^ when they die. It is not therefore amiss, since an interlude is as it
were appointed to be played on this earth, (...) we abound, covetousness
creeps in so closely, as it grudgeth the comfort of society; if we be
scanted, impatiency breaks out so fiercely, as it despises the law of
property; if we be provoked, wrath roareth out so bitterly for revenge, as it
is no manhood to sheath up injuries; if we be pleased, flattery follows on
so shamefully for reward, as it is no masterie to obtain victories; if we be
weak, we blame the work of nature, that we were not made of a firmer metal;
if we be strong, Job 6.12.
we blaze the art of nature as if we were steel, that could not turn the
edge; if we be sick, 2. Chr. 16.12.
we plant our faith in the Physician to cure us, yet being sound we shake off
temperance that might preserve us; Job 32.4.
when our leaves be green and our wits fresh, because we want the reverence
of the aged, we cry that hoary hairs might quickly cover us; and being
arrived at age the door of death, we wish that slipper youth might again
beguile us: ever perverting the times and preventing the means that God has
prefixed, and wearying and wasting our selves soonest in possessing that we
would enjoy longest. For though it be the pleasure of the Almighty, that we
should cherish this lamp of life, yet ought we not to consume the oil in
prizing our delights at too high a rate, James 4.3.
nor in spending on our lusts in too large a measure. And though like wary
shipmen we provide for this crazie bark, which is the body, Mat. 6.25.
yet must we not permit immoderate care like a merciless canker to eat
through our bones. But the way to balance our selves even, and not to stray
beyond our tether, is to captiuate our thoughts thus far, as to reckon the
world but as a cradle, wherein we are rocked, till we aspire to some age and
growth in Christ: our desires but as dreams wherewith we are deluded, till we
attain to some taste of Gods love in Christ: this life but as a race wherein
we are wearied and perplexed till we can recover some sight of Christ; and
this body but as a prison, wherein our souls lie shakled under the hope of
being blessed in the death of Christ. To which affection and perfection we
shall then ascend, when being taught by his word which is truth, and led by his
spirit which is life, we can shake off self-will that runs on so fast to
destruction, and sway down self-love that swells up so high to presumption,
and can walk in humility as in the sight of God, contenting our selves with
the portion assigned us as his gift; and with the affliction sent us as his
trial, crucifying the flesh as an enemy to the quickening of the soul, and
trampling on this earth as an insnarer of our feet in vanity, weighing
sickness but as the forerunner of sleep, and welcoming death but as the
sickle of the Lords harvest; beholding the grave as the faithful treasury of
our bodies, and looking up to heaven as the undoubted Paradise of our souls.
Now there being but two impediments to this persuasion and tranquillity of
spirit, (...) 9.35.
either the corruption that rests within us, or the sorrows brought upon us
while we breath here: the first cleaving and clasping so close about our
loins (sin being like a leprosy that has covered the skin) as we seem
to stand but on one foot from slipping into hell: the other striking so deep
into the joys of this life, that feeling as it were a quotidian ague of
discomforts hanging upon us, we can hardly weane our thoughts from listening to
the knell of judgment founding in our ears; it is fit we provide for our
inward peace, there being no outward balm able to assuage a raging conscience,
nor no external Physic of force to relieve a distressed soul. We may not
therefore judge our selves safest, when we are freest from the buffetings of
Satan: for bearing in our bodies a divided kingdom between the flesh and the
spirit, represented unto us in the wrestling of Rebeccahs twins within her
womb; Genesis 25.22.
if we have peace with God, we shall have war with the dragon; and having
forsaken Egypt, and in the way to Canaan, Reu. 12.9. Exodus 14.9.10.
we shall have Pharaoh and his captains fly like grasshoppers to feed upon us:
yea the liberty we have in Christ, the corruption of our hearts will labor to
inuert to voluptuousnes: the sweetness we taste in his word, Gal. 5.13.
the vanity of our minds will endeavor to ouercast with drowsines: Act. 20.9.
the faith which we ground on his promises, Genesis 3.4.
the subtilty of the serpent will seek to undermine by doubtfulnes: the
conscience we make to offend, the lusts of our flesh will contend for to cover
with hypocrisy: the detestatio^ we have of sin, the concupiscence of our eyes
will strive to out-reach with profaneness: and the interest we have to heaven,
the pride of our lives will persuade us to exchange for trifles. Genesis 25.30
With which temptations we may not be dismayed, for where the siege is laid,
there is watchfulness to withstand; but where no fear of the enemy is, there
the weapon rusteth: and feeling a continuance of this contention between the
law of the flesh and the spirit of life, we may be assured that the seed of
grace given us from above, which first drew us into fight with our
uncleanness, is well grown, and that imputing the first thought of our peace
to the love of God, John 3.16.
the full accomplishment of it to the death of Christ, and the alone messenger
and perswader of it to the holy Ghost; and knitting the whole power of the
work, the mercy in our preservation, and the glory in our victory to the arm
and action of the almighty, we shall have our corruptions as it were closed in
our hands, and the pride of our resistance so abated in our lives, as sin
shall but droupingly be seen in us, and mortality that cannot be privileged
with perfection, shall yet be beautified with sanctification, in such measure
as we shall walk here but as dispatched from heaven on our Lords message, to
give the sons of men a pattern of good life, and to forewarne them of their
woes, (...) 7. (...) 28.20.
by bounding our desires within Jacobs compass, the presence of the Lord to
guide us that we do not stray, his providence to feed us that we do not
starve, and his bounty to cloth us that we do not perish. On the otherside, so
tender are our thoughts, and so jealous our meditations of the love of God, Io^
6.4.
as we are stricken with a trembling distrust, to have lost the star of our
direction and comfort in Christ, when we see our selves exposed to the shame
of the world, and the winds still to beat on our rudders, where the wicked
sail away proudly in a set calm; our houses to be enclosed with snares, when
theirs are peaceable without fear; and our lives to be bound up in sorrow, Job
21.24.
when their breasts (as Job speaks) are full of milk, and their bones of
marrow. And when the apprehension of this fear has taken such hold of our
flesh, as we think our selves smitten in displeasure, and the tree of our hope
to be torn down in wrath, we then wrestle with sin as if the steps of our
strength were restrained, and look upon death as the Iailer, that commits us
to the grave as a dungeon. Hobeit even in this does the Lord reach forth a most
approved cordial to remove the faintness of our hearts; for having access
into his sanctuary through the union and communion we have with Christ, the
vncleanues of our birth being wiped away in the sanctification of his nature,
our transgression removed in his innocence, our rebellion discharged in his
obedience, and the utmost farthing paid in his sufferings; and having the image
of God we lost in Adam not renewed only, but a fairer and deeper stamp thereof
engraven and set upon us, it being not now in our power to listen any more to
the counsel of the flesh, Christ bearing our names before him as his
breast plate, and our bodies with him as members whereof he is head; and having
this written in the tables of our heart by the finger of no forgerer, but of
that comforter was sent from heaven, and testified by ourselves in the piety
of our religion and purity of conversation, setting salvation before us as a
binding benefit, even to the loss of our souls to venture for the Lords
glory: Romans 8.33.
we may in a Christian resolution give challenge at the gates of hell, that
nothing can be charged upon us as a debt, and therefore nothing can light upon
us as a punishment. Wherefore if the Lord do cast his cloudy countenance upon
us, it is that we should watch against the weakness of the flesh, Mat. 16.41.
which is then readiest to sleep when temptation is nearest: and yet if the
stream of temptation carry us into some sin, and from thence we slip into some
shame, in his compassion he cures us, and yet in kindness does correct us. If
he mingle our bread with care, and lodge us in the bed of darkness and
discomfort, it is to weane us from the flesh pots of Egypt, and to advance us
in the way to Canaan; yet being driven to any strait or exigent in this
wilderness, rather then we shall want it shall rain Manna, Exodus 26.4. and 27.6.
and rather then we shall thirst the rock shall yield us water: yea though the
wicked be like the bramble, who in confidence of their shadow dare challenge to
be kings over the trees of the forest, and our selves like sheep, Judge. 9.15.
who in simplicity grazing upon the mountains, are either fleeced of the
shearer when we are grown in wool, or snatched up by the butcher when we are
grown in flesh: yet when death has made us both even with the earth, the
grave shall be to us a fold till our shepherd come, and to them a shambles till
the destroier of their souls shall have received an endless commission to
torment them. What cause then have we to shut our gates against the gasps of
death, or like trembling leaves to entertain the gale or blast of sickness,
which does but prune our feathers, the more easily to fly toward our abiding
city? For if neither the weight of corruption, though it sorely press us, nor
the violence of affliction, though it soundly beat us, can separat us from the
love of God, Job 5.23.
nor the league with his creatures; nay if this mass of sin, and storm of
sorrow we sustain, be the most sensible motives to draw us under Christ's
covering; and living here as sinning faints though sanctified, and as
crucified saints though beloved, we have yet but our ioies eclipsed, 2. Cor.
13.1^.
and that beauty of blessedness set forth unto us in a counterfeit, which
shall clearly hereafter be discovered; into what profound vanity are we fallen
if we would still be hedged in and inthralled in this vale of misery and
mortality, and not desire to ascend on that ladder which Jacob knew to be the
gate of heaven, Genesis 28.17.
the skirts whereof but seen and felt of the Apostles, did leave them in such
a slumber of delight, as they only vanted in the cross of Christ, Act. 4.24.
which was their preservative against the fear and infection of being folded
up with the worms, and their spur and preparatiue to set the houses of their
hearts in order before they descended to the dust.

Most comfortable persuasions and instructions tending to this purpose, shall
be found dispersed and sprinkled in this treatise following; into which, who so
shall walk for religious recreation, if he cannot furnish himself with
Joseph's store to serve Egypt and other countries, Genesis 42.6. 1. King. 17.15.
yet can be not fail of the widows store, that had to feed her self and
Eliah. For from hence may be observed, that the foolishnes of the Gospel does
prescribe the best directions to a blessed end; 1. Cor. 1.27.
that the poverty of a Christian does forerun the riches which he has in
heaven; that the love of the world is an exemption from the life of God, Mat.
5.3. James 4.4. Luke 16.13. Job 5.17.
and that the Lords correction is but love: and on the contrary shall be
discerned, that the eloquence of the flesh is like the cry of the Lapwing, that
traineth us furthest from that we seek; that the pomp of the earth is like a
blazing star, that dreadeth the mind by presaging ruin; that the
temptations to pleasure are like canded wormwood, that cozen the taste, and
kill the stomach; and that the schedule of our days being summed up, is like
a large debt set down in golden letters.

These things to a moderate and mortified mind, seasoned with the fear, and
seated in the favor of God, cannot but be welcome, though with the covetous
and carnal man, that has his desires like the Mole, scraping in the earth,
they shall fare as Christ did among the Cadarens, Mark 5.17.
who was entreated to depart from them, when he was but coming near them.
Howbeit in these desperate diseased times, wherein we are all so universally
drunk with our own conceits, as we despise to be reformed by the word of
grace (some yoking religion with policy, as if they were grapes of the same
vintage: some trampling down religion with profaneness, as if she wore a weed
that ouergrew the corn; some disguising religion with hypocrisy, as if she
were a garment of diverse colors: some poisoning religion with Popery, as if the
immortal seed of God could be leauened with the traditions of men: and few
laying religion to the heart, which simply embraced and sincerely followed,
would and ought to be the square and level of our lives,) it is good we get as
many buttresses as we can to uphold the building, and raise as many bulwarks
as we can to beat back the shot, that Satan showing himself more sharp
witted, and if it may be more spitefully minded then before, in laying new
kinds of allurements to surprise our faith and subvert our hope, that we should
not so much as grope after our life which is hid in Christ: we may (if it be
possible) with fresh and new supply of skill and cunning unwind our selves out
of his enuenimed snares, and hold fast our profession, which is a schole of
chastisement for a time, that in our peace at the last we may be partakers of
the Lords holiness. Heb. 12.10.


(...) ^^ue therefore presumed, though unable of my self to carry the least
stick to the altar, and unworthy of all others (since lowest of the form) to
offer either diet or direction to any, that has touched but the hemme of
Christ: yet being taught a receipt, which carefully applied will purify the
head from profane humors, strengthen the heart against vain terrors, and
cleanse the conscience from that accursed guile of spirit, Psalm. 32.2.3
whereby we have learned to lessen sin, I have presumed no longer to
suppress the quintessence of his skill from whence it came, but shadowed with
your allowance to send it forth, not so full and hearty a medicine (I
confess) as it might have been from the immediate hand of him that made it.
The man ye knew, and this iron and irefull age that frowneth most on them that
are freest from profaneness, could not but approve him to be zealous of the
truth of God, painful in his calling, faithful in his message, powerful in
his speech, careful of the flock of Christ, peaceable and blameless in his
life, and comfortable and constant in his death. So as if there appear any
skarre or blemish in the work, it came by passing through my fingers, that
carried my pen too slowly, and attended the voice too slightly. Howbeit,
putting on the armor of proof and experience of your favors, toward whom
chiefly I have set my byas, that ye will be pleased to be no severe examiners,
but mild perusers of these papers, and that affection may somewhat mediate with
your judgments, to censure not as ye see, but as I mean; I have adventured
the hazard to be reproved of others, upon assured confidence to be accepted of
you. And though many may happily balke the alley, and not lend their eye to
behold the iarres between the flesh and the spirit, upon opinion that my self
have leaped beyond my last, in striving to bring this boat to land, which the
owner never meant should see the shore: yet when I considered the word of God
to be like the rain, Heb. 6.7. Mark. 11.13.
and the hearts of men like the earth, that if the tree answer not her fruit,
her leaves will not protect her from the fire: that he shall come short in his
account of faith, Romans 10.14.
that makes no conscience of hearing; and that if the voice of the Preacher
perish in the air or in the ear, it shall quicken again to question with us
for our negligence; I was not ashamed to humble my self to others view, that
by the mercy seen on me, who have been thus far led into the secrets of
God, Exodus 19.13.
they may be likewise encouraged to press within the border of the mount, when
the horn of salvation shall be blown.

For it is a misery and madness to imagine the labor of a Christian to be
mued up within the wales of the ministry, or that men are so straightened in
their vocations, as that they may not look aside to a sermon: or that because
the these was saved on the gallows, Luke 23.43.
therefore heaven may be won with a wet finger: or that since the workers
for an hour, Mat. 20.9.
had the penny with them that bore the pain and heat of the day: therefore it
shall suffice to come as Nicodemus did to Christ by night. Ioh. 3.2.
Nay, we must know, that as the promise of mercy is equal to all, so the
prayer and practice for mercy must be the same in all; that we are no longer
within the compass of the Lords protection, Psalm. 91 11.
then we walk in fear within the bounds of his direction; that if religion
be not the commander in our callings, scarcity or discontent will be as
mothes in our blessings; and that if presumption misleade us to pledge only a
pang of devotion for a sacrifice when the pleasure of our days be past,
judgment shall but requite us, if either death do strangle us before we
speak, or the wrath of God rebound upon us when we have wept our fill. For it
stands not with the Lords honor to be shaken off so often when he would lodge
with us, Ier. 32.33.
nor with our duties to run away so fast, when we should turn to him: but
that at length justice must arise to preserve the majesty of his mercy, so
much abased, and so long abused, which we have sensibly felt, the stripes being
yet seen in our streets, and may fear hereafter to be more fierce, 2. Sam.
24.14.
by how much the sword of the enemy sharpened to destruction, does exceed the
correcting hand of God tempered with compassion.

The Lord grant this short setting of his face against us, may haste us to
have peace with him, that has the ends of the world subject to his power, and
the plagues of the world restrainable at his will: so shall we be preserved
from the venime, and ransomed from the violence of them that seek our souls,
and either still praise him in the land of the living, Psalm. 56.13.
or eternally dwell with him in the habitation of his Saints: which God grant
may be your portions, and the inheritance of your posterity. Amen.

Yours in all duty. H. Yeluerton.

TO THE READER.
Think not (gentle Reader) that the turning back from the world is any
looking back from the plough; Luke 9.62.
but by example judge it safer to bend thine eye toward Zoar a place of rest,
then to wrest thy sight toward Sodom the city of wrath. Genesis 19.22.
And since the earth was cursed for thy sin in Adam, Genesis 3.17. Gal. 2.16.
Romans 3.22. Matt. 6 20. Phil. 3.20. 1. Ioh. 5 6.
and thy self art saved by thy faith in Christ, let the direction of thy
thoughts to him be the messenger to thy heart that thou art in heaven: for thou
art not placed that thou should be planted here, but being bought from this
earth by blood, cleanse thy self in this earth by water; that since some
inferior affections must needs be foul, Ioh. 13.8.
the dust may only cleave to thy feet, thy head and thy hands be lift up to
God. For if in the pride of thy flesh thou do build thy nest near him, or in
the profanenes of thy heart do strive to be rich without him, Esaias 14.15.
Genesis 11.7. Luke 12.20.
the least breath of his mouth shall batter thy seat to be seen no more, and
scatter thy wealth as before the wind. Yea the Lord has choked thy fields with
thistles, Genesis 3.18. Iam. 5.3.
and wrapped up thy treasure in rust; that seeing the ground whereon thou
stand to be out of Paradise, and the staff whereon thou leanest to be but
wood of the woorst sort, thou might pray to have the sword put up that stops
thee from the tree of life, Genesis 3.24.
and those boughs cut off that shadow thee from beholding thy sins borne in
Christ's body. 1. Pet. 2.24.
Now the humor that hinders thy sight, is the Crystal show of brittle honor,
that sets thine eyes on fire to follow after it; for if Adam may be as God,
Genesis 3 5.
there is no commandment can hedge him: Genesis 33.^^
if Esau may have a train of men at his heels, he will soon digest the
loss of his birthright: 2. Tim. 4.10.
and if Demas may but win the world, he will haste to shake hands with the
Saints of God. But remember how with the fruit thy father swallowed wrath,
Ier. 31.29.
which to this day has set thy teeth on edge, M^. ^.3. Mat 4.10.
that the joy the reprobate has in his flesh, is joined with the hatred of God
upon his soul; and that if the sons of men shall take the devil at his
word, as the Son of God did not, it is but a bitter recompense for the loss
of the better part, Mat. 16.26.
when themselves are compassed with confusion.

Take the counters into thine own hand, and see what reckoning thou can make
of life: what is past frighteth thee with the remembrance of it, because so
much of thy light is spent: what is present, burdeneth thee with the weight of
it, because in sweat and sorrow thou do waste thy time: what is to come
troubles thee with the incertainty of it, lest the grave do swallow thee
before thou see it: yea make thy account as thou ought and thou shall find it
swifter then the weauers shittle, Job 7.6. Job 9.25.
and speedier then a Post carried upon the wings of the wind; for if the Lord
step not between thee and death, before thou can lay one thy breath is
gone. What booteth it then so unseasonably to ripen thy cares for the tares of
this life? for if thou heap up silver as the sand, and prepare raiment as the
clay, yet building thy house as the moth, not in thine own but in another
garment, when thou shall make thy bed in the dark, Job ^8.13. Io^ 16.^^.
and the first borne of death shall consume thy strength, where then be the
strings of thy hope, thy horn being thus abased to the dust? Of thy self thou
art but a tree turned upward, having no sap from the earth; and if thou be
not moistened with the deaw from heaven, though by the sent of water thou
may bud, yet shall thou perish in the blade, because thou have no spirit at
the root. Therefore if thou expect in thy labor blessing, in thy peace
continuance, in affliction comfort, in thy death triumph; thou must respect in
thy calling honesty, in thy pleasures judgment, Eccles. 11.9. Tit. 2.12.
in thy sorrows mercy, and in thy life religion. For if God be not with thee
to direct thee that thou stray not, to correct thee that thou swell not, to
preserve thee that thou famish not, to pardon thee that thou despair not, to
curb thee that thou stumble not, to strengthen thee that thou fall not, to
sanctify thee that thou sin not, and to glorify thee that thou perish not:
Psalm. 145.14. Psalm. 19.12.
so many be the errors of thy life as thou can not heal them, and so safe is
thine iniquity sealed up, as thou can not choose but have change of sorrows.

I have therefore presumed in a Christian love of thy soul, if not to cure thy
iealosie of the world, yet to prescribe thee Physic to crucify thy self. It
is a field sown by the hand of another, though some fell not unfruitfully I
hope into my ground; and albeit many years have now ouergrowne my papers since
I first plowed it, and that the seeds-man himself sleeps in the earth, yet
somewhat to awake the memory of the righteous, and to quicken and give heart to
the desires of the religious, I have shot some few arrows that I had of his,
which if thou peruse with diligence, and lay up with conscience, thou shall
find of greater force then the shafts of Jonathan; since these forewarne thee
of the fury not of Saul, 1. Sam. 20.21.
but of Satan, who rejoices more in thy damnation then he sorroweth for his
own. So hoping thou will either look upon me in love, or lay me aside without
shame, I commit thee to God, who give thee and forgive thee much.

Grayes Inn, December. 24. 1604. Thy friend, H. Yeluerton.

To the Christian Reader.
CHRISTIAN Reader, when thou take a view of the books already abroad, and
daily increasing, as also according to thy measure of grace received, do
discern of and censure the weakness and insufficiency of too many: I speak
not now of those idle and vain, oh that I might not say, tending to Atheism
and prophanenes; which are rather to be bewailed in a Christian commonweal,
than censured: but of those, whose subject is profitable, and workmen desirous
to profit. Even in too many of these thou have cause justly to complain, there
is no end of making many books, the reading of such being but wearisomnes to
the flesh, and so breeds a distaste of the necessary use of reading. But when
thou shall lift up thine eyes, and spy out as in a foggie mist, Eccle. 12.10.
diverse also wherein is an upright writing, the words of truth, able to teach
and to convince, thou art now to be encouraged, and not to be weary to
exercise thy self, as thy calling and means will afford, in books that are
necessary, precious and godly. Among these, if thou will take the pains to
read, thou will easily condescend, that these Sermons deserve, both for their
matter and penning, to be preserved for the use of Gods Saints. Which will
appear, if with me thou will a little nearer observe the frame and
comeliness of this work: namely, the doctrines naturally raised, the reproof
of the adversary soundly concluded: and that in such a pithie phrase, and words
sauouring of grace, that thou can not but with me acknowledge diverse
excellent graces of God shining clearly in the Author, in the Penman. By the
Author the word is truly interpreted, and in a most excellent manner brought
home to thy conscience, both for mortification of life, and quickening in
heavenly duties, as also for settling thee against that accursed heresy of
Popery, which is too much neglected of too many able teachers. In the Penman
observe diligence, wisdom, godliness; he took this pains only for his own
private use: for very hardly could he be drawn to communicate this to the
common good: yet so carefully is it performed, that undoubtedly not a sentence,
yea hardly will it appear, that a word of moment escaped him, as those who
were diligent hearers with him may remember and can witness. His godly wisdom
appears not only in attending on the Lords own ordinance, the public
ministry of the word, on the Lords day and other set times, but also in
treasuring the same up by writing: knowing well, that the voice working
inwardly for a time, through man's weakness and infirmity does quickly perish:
to this end, that with his ordinary sanctifying of the Sabbath, he might (and
that lively) set before his own eyes this powerful means also of salvation:
thereby nourishing the same faith and godliness in himself, which he saw from
his infancy, and daily does see to dwell in that reverend and truly religious
Judge his father, and in that virtuous Lady, always ready to refresh the
bowels of the Saints, his mother: to whom I also owe my self, both for
encouragement in my entrance to the work of the ministry first begun in that
their well ordered family, as also for many favors since, principally for that
charge where I now dwell, bestowed on me by that worthy and most religious
careful disposer of the Church-liuings, the right honorable Sir Thomas
Egerton Knight, Baron of Elsemeere, Lord Chancellor of England. Lastly,
Christian Reader, with me consider of the blessing of God upon the labors of
this godly and learned Gentleman in his own profession, who has taken these
pains now for thy good, evident to all those that know him: which does
clearly convince, that the keeping of the sabbath is not the loss of one
year in seven, as too many of his rank, and I would they only, by their
practice do discover they think. Indeed if the fourth commandment were
ceremonial, and consequently abrogated, if there were no heaven, no hell, and
that man were only for this life, they might have some color. But that the
care of thy calling and of holy religion may go together, yea hand in hand,
here thou have a pattern and example: benefit thy self by this his pains,
and tread in the same steps of godly wisdom.

Thine in the Lord, George Bard, Minister of the word of God at Stanes in
Middlesex.

GEntle Reader, whereas by some oversight, the 19.20.21. and 22. verses of the
eight chapter to the Romans follow not in their due place, thou art to be
advertised that they are handled in the end of the chapter, after the 38. and
39. verses; where thou art to look for them.

MATH. chap. 1. verse. 1. to the 18. verse.


THE four Evangelists have been resembled by some writers to the four beasts
spoken of Ezec. 1.10. and Reu. 4.7. This Evangelist Matthew being compared to a
man, because he begins with the pedigree of our Savior Christ: S. Mark to a
lion, because he begins with the preaching of John Baptist, who roared like a
lion in the wilderness the doctrine of Repentance: S. Luke to an Ox or
Bullock, because he begins with the story of Zachary the Priest, whose office
was under the Law to offer sacrifice: and S. John to an Eagle, because he
flies aloft, and begins with the eternal generation of the Son of God
according to his Divinity. It it is true indeed their beginnings are as
before, but their comparisons are too curious; for as the finger of God
directed them, so did they write, and such was the Lords love to his church, as
not to suffer us to be unfurnished of any thing that might further us in the
course of our salvation, but from time to time to raise up instruments and
penmen to set down his will, that seeing the way wherein to walk, we need
not nor cannot pretend ignorance.

The whole chapter divides it self into two general parts: first is set down
the lineall descent of Christ: secondly, the manner of his nativity, from the
eighteenth verse to the end.

In the first part note three members: first, a general comprehension of the
matter in the first verse: secondly, the large narration of it, from the second
to the seventeenth verse: thirdly, the conclusion, in the seventeenth verse.

In the first of these observe two parts: first, what matter he will entreat
of: secondly, of whose pedigree, namely of Christ's the great King of
immortality.

In that it is said, the book of the Generation, it is not to be taken as a
title prefixed to the whole book, but it is meant according to the Hebrew
phrase, that it is a Catalogue or recital of such a stock as our Savior
Christ came of.

For the second, which is the narration, it is distributed into three members,
every one by equal proportion having fourteen persons: the first, of the
Patriarchs: the second, of the Kings of David: the third, of the Captains and
inferior Governors which had only some fragments left of the royal regiment
after the transportation and carrying them away into Babylon. Now the cause why
the Evangelist divides them thus into three foureteenes, is, not only that
the number and the story might the better be borne away, but principally
because he is to prove that Christ came lineally from the Jews, he sets
down the threefolde, estate of the Jews, and whereunto they were subject till
Christ came, who should reign in the hearts of men: showing how at the first
the Tribe of Judah increased greatly till it was established and settled in the
kingdom of David, then the greatest excellency thereof was in David's son
Solomon, and then the abatement and greatest diminution that could be which was
in their carriage away into Babylon, and that a Carpenter should be right heir
to the Crown, shows the great eclipse whereunto it was fallen: so as in the
Patriarchs it was like the Sun dawning, in Solomon like the Sun in his full
glory, and afterward like the Sun set and gone down, leaving the right of
the kingdom as in a dark place, namely in Joseph a poor Carpenter, of a base
trade and mean condition, nothing at all respected. Now further in the
narration, the Evangelist (as we may see in the old Testament) reckons up
some that lived before the going down into Egypt, some that were borne and
died in Egypt, and some that returned out of Egypt, and were led as slaves into
Babylon.

In that it is said, Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar, observe that our
Savior Christ did not disdain to debase and disparage himself so far as to
come of the line of such as were borne of an incestuous generation, that we
might be ravished and astonished with his love, who refused not to come out of
the family of gross sinners that he might save the sinful souls of
believers. And whereas in the blazing of Christ's arms by this Herald the
Evangelist, there are but four women named every one of them has their
several blemish and reproach left behind them in the book of God. The first,
Thamar incestuously abused by her father in law, Genesis 38.18.29. The second,
Rahab, Josh. 2.1. by nation a Cananite, as vile as to be a dog, by profession
an idolater, Josh. 6.17.
by city of Jericho a place so cursed, as that no soul should escape thence
alive, in trade a victualler, and in conversation a whore: yea the place she
dwelt in so cursed, that who so should build it up again should do it in the
blood of all his family: and yet this woman must be put in the royal descent
of Christ. The third is Ruth, who came of that nation, that was begot in
incest, and caused the children of Israel to sin in fornication. Numb. 25.1:
so as it is said for the Edomites, the Lord esteemed them no more then as an
old shoe, and Moab should be but as a chamberpot; and as appears in her own
book, Psalm. 60.8.
Ruth 2.3. she was poor, gleaning after the reapers the ears of corn. For
the fourth, which is Vrias wife, she was the worst of all, of her Solomon was
borne, 2. Sam. 12.24. whereby the holy Ghost does insinuate the adultery
committed before his birth, and consider Solomon borne of such an infamous
woman, that he should be heir, and yet not the eldest son, it was merely of
Gods mercy and not of any merit; and by reason of this woman, David not only
committed adultery to have made a bastard to have inherited the Crown, but to
this added blood, 2. Sam. 11.4.17.
the death of her husband and of many others, and such a death, as to die by
the sword of the uncircumcised, which was most reproachful: that now the holy
Ghost should direct the pen of the Evangelist to draw Christ's lineage by name
from these, and not to derive him from Sara and Rebecca, that were excelle^tly
famous, and that David the type of the Messiah should be such a bloody man, may
be a consolation to al bleeding christians, and may teach us, that though our
sins be never so heinous in respect of the quality of them, or never so many
in respect of the multitude of them, yet if at any time we be weary with a
full detestation of them, Mat. 11.28.
and a resolute purpose to amend them, Christ will refresh us, and will scatter
them before him, even as the dust before the wind: and the greater is our
condemnation, if having so much mercy we repent not.

Secondly, observe in that it is said, Iesse begat David, and David Solomon,
whereas David only is named king, being the last of the first fourteen, that
the estate of the Patriarchs was now changed into kings; and though Judah had
some pre-eminence, before that the kingdom fell to them, yet this was the
greatest glory, that it should be such a kingdom whereof the king that should
be borne should be God the Son: which may teach us, that the highest honor that
can befall a family, or a cuntry, or a Christian is, to have the Lord to dwell
with them: for all other titles are folded up in time that perishes, but the
presence of the Lord brings comfort that decaieth not. Howbeit we must note,
that as this kingdom of Judah was a type of the Messiah, 1. Sam. 15.28.
it was begun in David only, for Saul though he was king before, yet was he no
type of the Messiah. And for this second order which is all of Kings, we shall
see if we peruse the book of God, that Christ came of some as wicked kings as
ever were; for where from Solomon to the captivity there were 19. kings, 13.
of them were most wicked, and some of them had such special blemishes and
spots upon them, as it is doubted whether they be saved or no: Solomon had
great enormities, but there is no doubt of his repentance, witnessed by his
book of retractions called Ecclesiastes. Asa began well, but in his old age he
imprisoned the Prophet that told him of his sin, and in his sickness trusted
more to the Physician then to God, 2. Chr. 16.10.12. Iehosaphat did the woorst
act that could be (2. King. 8.18.) to marry his son Iehoram to Athaliah the
daughter of Iezabel, whereby many prouocations were committed, and yet these
were the best. Iehoram he caused all Judah to commit idolatry, so as the Lord
forsook him, and (2. Chro. 21.15.) he died a miserable death, his guts falling
out of his belly, not all at once, but day by day, which was more grievous.
Ahazia his son was slain (2. Chro. 22.9.) by Iehu in the field, and never
any revenged his blood. Ioash his son (2. Chron. 23.3.) was mightily
preserved by Iehoiada the Priest from the hands of Athaliah. Yet when the
Priest was dead (2. Chron. 24.78.) when the Prophets came to tell him he was a
bused and misled by his Princes to idolatry, he caused them to be slain in the
temple, and himself ( Verse. 25.) was afterward killed by his own servants.
Amaziah his son fell to Idolatry after a victory obtained of the Edomites,
and (2. Chro. 25.27.) was traitorously slain by his own subjects. Azariah his
son, (2. Chro. 26.21.) because he usurped upon the Priests office, was
immediately smitten with the hand of God, that he came to be a Leper, but some
of those last Kings are not here named by S. Matthew, because he meant to
make a proportionable and even number that should consist on foureteenes. For
Ahaz he made all the altars like the altars of Damascus, and (2. King. 16.3.)
made his own son pass through the fire, according to the sacrifice and
abomination of the Heathen. Iehoiakim he contemned the threatenings of the
Lord, and caused the roll to be burnt ( Ier. 36.23.) which Baruch had writ
from the mouth of Jeremy; he was therefore buried like an Ass, (as was
prophesied by Jeremy, 22.19.) even drawn and cast forth without the gates of
Jerusalem. And for Zedechiah, he imprisoned the Prophet Jeremy and contemned
the Lord, therefore were his eyes put out by the king of Babel, ( Iere.
39.7.8.) and he bound in chains, and led like a slave into captivity. Out of
which observe, that there is no privilege in the Princes chair to keep them
from sinning, neither yet that the majesty of their places can protect them
from the Lords vengance: Understand these words touching Christ's descent
legally, as Deu. 25.5.6. and page 8. line 29.
but that if their hearts be lifted up against God, his hand shall fall upon
them to their destruction: for the grace of the Lord must season their palaces,
else do they stand but in slippery places. And though our Savior Christ
vouchsafed to come out of the loins of such wicked Kings, it was not at all to
give an^e countenance to their offenses, or to embolden them in their sins,
but only to open the fountain of mercy to us, that we may know he is able to
sanctify the vilest sinner.

Now for the third order, which is of them who were carried away into captivity:
note first the cause of the captivity: secondly, the cruelty of it: thirdly,
the mercy of the Lord in their deliverance. For the first, which is the cause
that Gods own children, and them of the blood royal should be carried into
slavery, it is set down (2. Chro. 36.12.) to be, first, for that the king
rebelled against God, and humbled not himself before Jeremy the Lords Prophet.
Secondly, for that both Priest and people trespassed wonderfully, set down in
two things principally. First, they polluted the house of the Lord with the
abominations of the heathen. Secondly, they mocked and misused the messengers
of the Lord, and despised his words, until the wrath of the Lord rose up
against them, and that there was no remedy, but he was enforced to give them
to the bloodthirsty Babylonians. Wherein observe, what a fearful thing it is
to fall into idolatry; after our eyes have once been opened; and how nothing
prouokes the Lord so much, as the contempt of his embassage. For if having once
seen the goodness and power of God, we decline from him, and lay hold on
other helps, and contemn the face and speech of his Ministers, whom he has
made acquainted with his secrets, and that we wax strong in our selves, we
do but as Vzziah did (2. Chron. 26.16.) lift up our hearts to destruction, and
force the Lord to take his cup of indignation in his hand, and to hold it as
well to the mouth of the king as to the people: for where all conspire to work
mischief, all shall be overwhelmed with the same madness, as Jeremy speaks,
chap. 25.18. For the second, which is the misery they sustained being
captives, it is to be seen, first, in their usage before they came to Babylon,
set down, 2. Chr. 36.17. they took both young and old, men and women, and
though they fled to the Sanctuary for succor, yet were they there stabbed
with daggers; they burnt the house of God, and took the precious vessels of
it, to abuse in their superstition when they come to Babel. Now to see the
temple on fire, and young and old slain without mercy, had been enough to have
rent their hearts in pieces, to see the worship of God thus defaced, and
themselves reserved but as an after pray to the enemy. But now secondly coming
thither, namely, to Babel, to behold such grosie idolatry, and to hear such
high reproaches, as no doubt were given against the God of Israel, as, Psalm.
137.3.
Come sing a song to the God of Judah that has forsaken you, and, Behold,
here be the people whom the Lord has spued out; besides the bondage wherein
themselves were kept; how could they but strain forth tears of blood, and
send forth deep sighs from a mournful spirit? Yea their case was so
desperate and miserable, as ( Ezech. 37.11.) their raising up again and
restitution was made of the Lord as great a matter, and as hard as to put life
into a company of dead bones: for their the Lord says: These dry bones are
the house of Israel, neither yet did this their captivity last but a while, but
they were wintred and sommered there full 70. years, as was foretold by the
Prophet Jeremy, chap. 25.11. that they should be an astonishment, and serve the
king of Babel so many years. For the third, which is the Lords mercy in their
deliverance, they be the words of his own mouth. For thy sake (O Israel) I
will not do it, for thou art filthy, Ezec. 36.22.
but for my own sake I will, that they may know I am able to do it, and for
David my servants sake, I will not utterly put out the light of Israel.

Hence learn generally, that there is no nation so free, but the Lord may
captiuate, and if they decline and leave their first love, the Lord may and
will abandon them. For if any people might have presumed, it was this, who had
the promises, and a more peculiar presence of God then any nation under heaven,
yet were they vile, and did stincke in his sight, for abusing his kindness,
and setting at naught his Ministers. Howbeit, never were they more scorned then
in these days, wherein either men make themselves deaf that they will not
hear, or hear, but there is a noise of vanity higher and louder in their
ears. Here then is the same cause of captivity, why should we not fear the
same judgment? We see it is our selves can do us the greatest hurt: for when
we once give our selves over to looseness of life, and to distaste the word,
the Lord then disarmes us both of policy and strength, that even a weak enemy
may soon surprise us. Let therefore every man amend one, albeit these times
be so mischievous, as it is to be feared lest many of us be as willing to
return to Babylon for religion, as ever were the Israelites to come forth.

Secondly, observe the cursed and hard-harted disposition of the enemies of
God, that they think no torment nor cruelty too exquisite nor too sharp for
his people: for Zedechia and Ahab did the King of Babel burn in the fire, Ier.
29.22. and the rest were slaves to him and his sons, 2. Chro. 36.20. With
which malice the devil has poisoned and filled their hearts, because they
cannot be avenged of the Lord himself, for even at him do the proud Nimrods
of the world point their fingers, Genesis 11.4.
and against him do they lay their siege to pluck him out of his seat: for
the Babylonians were more fierce to the Israelites then to any other whom they
subdued, only because they were the chosen and beloved of the Lord. Lastly,
observe in their delivery the compassion of the Almighty, that he will not be
angry for ever; and the truth of his promise, that he will at the length visit
his people in mercy, when they think the clouds so thick, as they cannot be
ouerblowne: for now when Israel was even rent to rags, he harbored ( Ier.
29.11.) the thoughts of peace and not of trouble, and gave them an end of their
fainting hope, even a mighty deliverance by the hand of Cyrus king of Persia,
2. Chro. 36.22.

Where it is said, Iechonias begat Salathiel, observe, that Salathiel was not
his natural son, but ouely succeeded him in the kingdom by legal
succession as next heir, for Iechonias had no sons, but the house of Solomon
ended with him, as appears Ier. 22.30. Write this man (that is Iechomas)
destitute of children. So also Ezec. 21.26.27. the Lord speaking of Solomon, I
will ouerturne (says he, repeating it thrice) the diadem of this king, and
never shall any out of his loins wear it, until he come whose right it is,
(that is, the Messiah) and I will give it him. To prove also that Salomons
line must cease, and that Christ must not come of him lineally, appears by
the prophecy of Isaiah: 2. King. 20.18.
that there should not one be left of the house of Iehoiakim: which could not
be so, unless the line of Solomon were utterly extinguished: and for
Salathiel, he came of Nathan the second brother, as Saint Luke sets it
down, chap. 3.31. which nothing disagreeth from this of Saint Matthew, for he
was but to show the line of the Kings, and not naturally of whom Christ came,
but whom he should succeed in the kingdom. Where note the wonderful
providence of God, that Solomon who had so many wives and children, has not
now any left to sit upon the throne, to teach us that Solomon was to be
punished for his many wives: so as the Lord would not have Christ to come of
him naturally, but of his younger brother. Whereby all nobility may be
swallowed up in the glory of the Lords progeny and generation that drowneth all
nobility: that since Solomon in all his glory wants natural heirs, that
they stand not upon these outward shows and dignities, but seek to continue
their posterity, by living in a clean and holy course of life: for the Lord,
will wash away the unholy seed, and serape out their names from under heaven,
that seek to establish their house in filthiness, and to pollute the marriage
bed.

Further, in that Christ is said to come of Joseph the poor Carpenter: herein
are the ancient Prophecies fulfilled, ( Esaias 53.2.) that Christ should come and
no man regard him, and that he should grow up as a root out of the dry ground
without form or beauty, and as Esaias 11.1. that the should come as a rod out of
the stock of Ishai the Yeoman, 1. Sam. 16.3. whereby we observe, that when
things are most desperate, then the Lord recouereth them: and now when the
kingdom was come to a poor Carpenter, then Christ was borne, to teach us,
that in the greatest exigents and extremities, we must never distrust, nor
seek to extricate our selves out of any sorrow the Lord has brought us to,
but still to wait upon him: for as David says, Psalm. 32.7. The Lord is our
secret place, that is, he has many privy deliverances we know not of: and
(as Psalm. 4.3.) will strengthen us upon the bed of sorrow, as he did David,
who when Saul with his army was even at his heels, and he no doubt much
anguished, yet the Lord had his secret deliverance for him, and turned Saul on
the sudden another way, 1. Sam. 23.27. Even so here, when it had been night
with the Israelites a long time, and that their enemies thought they should
never recover their sight again, then arises Christ like they day star, and
restores the beauty of their kingdom to greater glory then before: let us
therefore wait with Simeon for the salvation that shall come.

Now remains to show the difference in the recital of Christ's pedigree by
Saint Matthew, and that of Saint Luke chap. 3.23. and it stands in three
points: first, Matthew does descend from the first to the last, from Abraham to
Joseph; Luke ascends from the last to the first, from Joseph to Abraham.
Secondly, Matthew was to fetch his pedigree so as he might prove him to be the
Messiah of the Jews, and to come directly from the feed of Abraham: Luke
deriueth him not only from Abraham, but from Adam, that he might show him to
be the Savior, not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles, and to be
that seed of the woman promised Genesis 3.15. Thirdly, S. Matthew shows his
royal line, and that he was rightly interessed in the kingdom: S. Luke setteh
down the natural line of him, of whom he came according to the flesh: So that
understand, whereas all the light of Solomon was extinguished in Iechonias, all
the rest that followed were not the natural posterity of Solomon, but such as
succeeded him legally in the kingdom, so as Saint Matthew in following his
purpose could not set down his natural descent: S. Luke brings him from
Nathan, to prove he came from Adam: and howsoever there be some contrariety
whether he came naturally from Solomon or no, yet it is certain he came
naturally from David, which suffices.

MATH. chap. 1. verse. 18, 19, 20, 21.





JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sins.


NOW follows the manner of the birth of our Savior Christ, wherein consider
two parts: Joseph to suspect his wife, and how he commanded his heart to
think the best of it, because it might be she was with child before marriage,
and then it was no adultery, so as he would not prosecute the matter too far
to her infamy: Joseph receives, and the information given him extraordinarily
by an Angel of the whole matter how it was wrought: He took her again.
named, that Mary was betrothed, whereby we may understand that there be two
degrees of marriage: the first, betrothing: the second, the perfecting and
confirmation of it; and these two we have, commanded by the law of God,
commended to us by example, and justified by the law of nature. For the first,
we may see Deu. 24.5. that the man betrothed was privileged from war-fare the
first year, that they might know one another conditions; and Deu. 22.23.25.
he was to be stoned that should force and abuse a betrothed woman. For example
we have this of Christ, which may serve for all, that he was borne of such a
woman as was betrothed before marriage: for the law of nature it may suffice, in
that all the heathen make mention of betrothing before marriage by way of
commendation; for since marriage is such an obligation as binds so strongly,
not to be dissolved, it is reason and convenient there should be a time
between the mentioning and the perfecting of the contract, that if any
occasion should happen in the mean time, the bond might not be made. The
equity also concerning Christianity is great in this respect, to the end
there might be a stay of immoderate lust, which men would brutishlie run
into, if presently upon the contract made they might company together:
therefore that there may be as it were a bridle laid upon our lust, it is
good we rush not suddenly into the marriage bed, but by this distance of time
between betrothing and marrying, that we learn to tame and take off the edge
of our inordinate desires.

Further observe, that it is not lawful for any man to use his wife barely
contracted, for Joseph and Mary came not together when they were only
betrothed: by which example we have the chastity of our vessels recommended to
us, that we intermeddle not before the Lord has laid open the bed unto us,
that is, before she be given unto us by Gods instrument the Minister, Genesis
2.22.
even as Eve was given by God himself to Adam: for the institution of marriage
being partly to beget sons and daughters for the Lord, we must not dare to
venture or break into any unsanctified course, because the Lord cannot bless
what his mouth has cursed. What shall we say then to the fleshly and brutish
generation of the world, who will be kept within no limits, but like beasts do
range after their own appetites, and as if there were no distinction of
bodies, nor expectation of blessing, nor fear of punishment, do neither make
the Lord acquainted with their match, nor rest themselves in his ordinance, but
do scale as it were the walls, and cut asunder the lists wherein God has set
them, passing by their wives to other women? Surely as such men can hope for
nothing else but that their posterity shall inherit the wind, as Job speaks:
so may they look for nothing surer, but that themselves shall fall in their
own uncleanness without great repentance.

Further, in that Christ was conceived after espousals, but not borne till the
marriage was consummate; we learn, that as God honored this estate in Paradise
with his own presence, so has the Lord Jesus sanctified it with his own
birth: for howsoever a betrothed wife was not to be accompanied with, Deuter.
22.23. yet she was a wife. We must therefore correct our selves, not to think
meanly or basely of the estate of marriage, there being no such fountain of
earthly comfort set open unto man as this is, whether we respect society or
posterity, and therefore fitly has the Apostle to the Hebr. chap. 13.1.
termed it honorable among all, as a blessing equally distributed unto all.

Again observe in that Marie is said to be with child, that there was just
cause for Joseph to suspect her, yet mark what counsel he took to make the
best of the worst: he was loath to put her away because he was just, and he is
said to be just in two respects; first, because he abhorred to take her to wife
whom he suspected to be a whore: where we learn, that Joseph's justice did not
consist in a base reputation of this manner of filthiness, but in a detestation
of it, for it is the basest mind that can be to marry a woman that has been
abused; and by this example it appears, that he that does tolerate the
unchastity of his wife, is himself herein culpable of bawdery. Secondly, his
justice regards this, that being doubtful, before apparent proof he
construeth a doubtful action at the best, namely that she was gotten with
child before the espousals, and then he would not mary her, as by the law he
might have done, and after have put her to death, Deu. 22.21. if she could not
have showed the tokens of her virginity but he would have put her away privily,
and resigned his interest to him who (as he suspected) had abused her. Wherein
we learn, that just men are to take all things at the best, and not to seek
occasions of others hurt, or means to wreake their malice on them that have in
sort abused them: for love must cover, and religion must pass by offenses. If
Nabal be so churlish as to deny refreshing to our servants, 1. Sam. 25.10. we
may not be so impatient as David to vow their destruction, but with the
mildness of Abigael we must leave them to the Lord. A pattern of this also
we have in Joseph of Egypt, who though he was sold by his brethren in the depth
of their malice, yet never vpbraided them with their fault, but gently passed
by it, and freely forgave it, accounting it as the hand of God that had sent
him thither, Genesis 45.8. And this indeed ought to be the affection of all Gods
children, Gal. 6.1.
not to blaze, but as as S. Paul speaks, to support one another in their
infirmities, and not to shame them when the actio^ committed may in some sort
be well construed.

Further observe, that this example of Joseph's in making the best of his wives
honesty, is no warrant for husbands to keep their wives that may publicly be
convinced of adultery, but they may safely relieve themselves by the law of the
Magistrate, so as their end in prosecuting the matter be not to defame them but
to reform them: for the sword is a notable means, to bring us to repentance.
And though Joseph complains not, it does not prove that others should be
silent, for the cause is diverse. First, Joseph seeing her defloured did abhor
to accompany with her: Secondly, knowing her great piety and singular modesty,
he wondered how it came: he could not accuse her for an adulteress, for it
might be the act was done before they were betrothed. Now in this perplexity he
staieth his thoughts, and recommendeth it to God, and so this was of a matter
altogether doubtful, therefore not like to that where she is publicly
convinced of such shameless filthiness. Again, in this of Joseph's the whole case
was extraordinary, and the Lord had the full stroke in it, for he suffered
Joseph to be abused by the error of his judgment, and restrained Mary from
speaking one word to her husband how all this matter was wroght; whereas he
loving her to entirely, and being fully persuaded of her piety, and thereby
half induced not to make suspicion of her chastity, he would have rested
contented with her relation, but the Lord stopped her mouth, that as this
action proceeded immediately from God, so Joseph should be satisfied only by the
oracle of God: and therefore this is not to be matched and resembled to that
where women shamelesly break then vow which they made to God and man, as we
may see 1. Cor. 6.15. and Mal. 2.14. where the Prophet brings in the Lord as
a witness between man and wife, and urges this as a reason why the one
should not trespass against the other, because out of the abundance of his
spirit he has made them one.

Now for the second part, which is the satisfaction Joseph received, and the
means whereby his thoughts were appeased while he was musing of this event,
we must consider three points: first, what messenger God dispatcheth, namely an
Angel: secondly, at what time; when he was even upon the resolution to have
put her away: thirdly, what message was brought while he was thus reasoning
with himself, and was anguished with blind discourses; which contains
several parts: first, that which is set down in the very first words, as much
as to say, as, Thou have not done amisseto take such a moderate course in this
matter, but fear not, she is a virgin: Secondly a confirmation of this; That
which is in her is of the holy Ghost: Thirdly, he declares the blessed
condition of the child, foreprophesying of this name: Fourthly, a reason of his
name; He shall save his people: Fifthly, because the Angel know Joseph
prepossessed with preindice, and therefore yet there might rest some scruple in
his mind, he allegeth an ancient record of the Prophet Esaias, 6.7.14. written
800. years before, which expressed as much as the Angel now told him, and by
this testimony concurring with his speech he does absolutely resolve him: for
an angel speaking according to scripture is not to be doubted.

For the first, the messenger that is dispatched from the heavenly palace,
being so excellent as an Angel, let us learn to be carried into an admiration
of the Lords love, that the Angels elect shall be messengers and ministers for
his chosen. Hereupon David ( Psa. 8.4.) being confounded with the Lords goodness
breaks forth saying, O Lord what is man that thou should be so mindful of
him, and should thus exalt him, for thou have made him little lower then
God: not that the Angels in themselves are baser in nature and condition then
we: for as it is Esa: 6, 2. as they have two wings to hide their face from the
glory of God, so have they two wings to hide their feet, because we cannot
behold them in their excellency: for the service they do, is not to us for our
own sakes, but they do it as to Christ their head, as is prefigured by Jacobs
ladder ( Genesis 28.13.) whereon the Angels ascended and descended: Ioh. 1.51.
this ladder being Christ, and Christ vouchsaffing us this honor to sit with
him at his table, the Angels minister to us as owing all duty to him. Now this
ministry of Angels is so deputed as every particular member elect, has not
one but many continually attendant on him, as Psalm. 91.11. He has given his
Angels charge to bear us in their arms, lest we should dash our feet to hurt
them; not that the Lord is unable to rescue us, or insufficient to support us
from any danger, but he does it only to provide a remedy for our infidelity,
who must ever be held as it were by the hand, Mat. 14.20.
or else we cry with Peter in the least temptation, Lord help us we perish.
Even as a man desiring safe conduct out of the realm, should receive of the
Prince not only his letters, but his royal guard to wait upon him: which were
a matter ex abundanti, that by this means he could no way doubt of quiet
passage: so lest we should distrust the Lord, or be too much confounded with
his majesty, he hasteneth to help us by more familiar means, and has given
us as it were his royal name to guard us, that we may be sure, as Satan has
many ways, and lays many snares to entrap and to hurt us, so has the Lord
pitched his tents about us, and compassed us with fenced soldiers to preserve
us safe. Hereupon it is, that the Angels are called fiery in two respects:
First, because they (...) (...) may stay us in all our weakness, and cherish
us in all infirmities, to esteem him as our rock, and the truth of his word
as a most stable tower that cannot totter: having this warrant from himself in
this place to urge him with his word and promise of deliverance, who as he
faithfully performed it to David, so will he graciously remember us, even when
we are most tossed in tribulation, and in the least hope.

Fear not to take Mary to thy wife.

This is the first part of the message: where the Jesuits observe, that Mary
was Joseph's true wife, yet he knew her not; so as (say they) there may be true
marriage, where notwithstanding the parties vow to live in continency. We
answer, it was true in this example: but this particular is not to be given in
precept, because though it be commanded in this singular person of Joseph, yet
we find no warrant for it in any general place or commandment set down in
the Scripture. We must therefore know, that the Saints of God are not to be
followed in two things. First, in their infirmities, as we may not lie with
Rahab, Josh. 2.4. Genesis 26.7. etc. Exodus 34.28. Mat. 14.29. 2. King 1.10.
nor dissemble with Rebecca. Secondly, in their personal and miraculous works,
as Moses in fasting forty days, Peter in walking on the Sea, Eliah in calling
fire from heaven, nor Joseph here in a parpetuall separation from his wife:
for this example was altogether extraordinary, and what flesh and blood durst
touch that vessel the Lord by his spirit had taken up for himself? Otherwise
that marriage cannot be lawful, where the parties mean to separate themselves
continually; for as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.5. man and wife may not defraud
one another, except it be, first, by consent: secondly, but for a time,
otherwise (as 1. Pet. 3.7.) they must dwell as heirs together of the grace of
life.

Secondly, the Jesuits note this, that where Christ vouchsased to be borne in
marriage, yet of a Virgin, that in this he honored both, but principally
Virginity. We answer, that mariagein it own nature is better then virginity:
for God in the first creation ( Genesis 2.18.) saw, it was not good for man to be
alone, but even in his innocence, that he should have the woman as a help
before him. And therefore Saint Paul (1. Cor. 7.26.) is not to be understood,
as enioyning virginity to any, or as commending it before marriage, but only as
persuading and praising it for the necessity of those times that were so
troublesome, as the Church of God could scarce find rest in any place: and
therefore such as had no families were more free and readier for the service of
God: otherwise, continency is not better as a better ordinance of God: but the
betternesse of that came in by the disorder sin has brought in, because
marriage is clogged with so many cares, as distracteth the mind much from
religious exercises, and men in their single estate be more emptied of cares,
and so more vacant for prayer and other holy duties. And where they say, that
virginity in marriage is better then society in marriage, it is an accursed
speech, this example of Joseph's only excepted: for it is a plant growing only
in this garden, in respect the womb of the Virgin was the bed of the Lord
Jesus: and yet if their own speech be true, that virginity in marriage be
better then virginity out of marriage, it were good for their Priests and Nuns
to mary.

In that it is said, Fear not, observe, that all our security from fear
stands on the Lords word, for flesh and blood auailed Joseph nothing at all,
neither could his own judgment lead him to any stable comfort, till the
mouth of God had sent it. Howbeit, we see the blind boldness of the devil,
who ( Genesis 3.4.5.) would needs take upon him to rid our first parents from all
fear in their breach of Gods commandment: but we have found him a lier and
the Lord true from the beginning; let us therefore qualify our selves
according to his prescript, to tremble when he bids us fear, and to run on
rejoicing when he says, Fear not: for he has always the tempering of the
cup. And in that there is a reason added why Joseph should not fear, we may
behold the tenderness of the Lords compassion toward his children, who will
not only have them to stay upon the majesty of his commandment, but in
relief of their infirmities will give them a reason of it, that comprehending
it in their judgments, they may the more safely lay hold on it. Even as our
Savior Christ ( Luke 12.32.) comfort his disciples, and armeth them against
the troubles to come, saying: Fear not. Why? for your Father will give you a
kingdom, the power and yet the comfort of the commandment resting upon the
reason of it, in this sort: Those that have a kingdom prepared for them, need
not to fear: but such are you, therefore away with fear.

Out of the reason it self, namely: That which is conceived of her, is of the
holy Ghost, we note, that his humanity was so sanctified, that even from the
moment of Christ's conception, there was a setting apart of that nature from all
uncleanness: so as Christ was borne the Son of God: for Christ-man was never
adopted to be the Son of God: for adoption presupposes wrath; but his
manhood was personally even at the first united to the Godhead, and was no
person of it self, as shall appear afterward.

Now the third thing Joseph was informed of by the Angel, was to name him
Jesus: with a reason of the name. Wherein consider two points: first, from what
he shall save: from sins. Secondly, whom he shall save: his people; and these
be very few, as himself says, Luke 12.32. Mine is a little flock. For the
first, in sin consider these three things: first, the disobedience to the
law: secondly, the original corruption: thirdly, the condemnation for this
corruption and disobedience. The first of these is double, either in breaking
the law, or not fulfilling it: the second is the original cause of this
disobedience, which is the evil inclinations of our heart, and our corrupt
affections: and the third is the punishment of this disobedience, namely, hell
fire. These be three running sores, satisfied and cured by three running
streams in Christ: for our rebellion to the law is satisfied in Christ, who
not only paid for that we had broken, but actually fulfilled every point of
it. For the second, which is our original corruption, we have the holiness
and sanctification of his nature, who was ever separate from all uncleanness,
so as in Christ we are better then Adam was in his first estate: for though
he was made good, yet it was changeably good; but we in Christ are absolutely
good, and as the stoutest mountains that cannot be stirred. For the third, we
have Christ by his passion to deliver us from condemnation; even as in the
sacrifice under the law, the blood of the innocent beast was shed for him that
had sinned, to lay before his face the punishment he had deserved, Leuit. 16.15.
that so worthily his throat might have been cut, and more justly then was the
throat of the beast: so we by the shedding of Christ's most innocent blood, are
purged from the guilt of our sin. And as by the beholding only of the Brazen
Serpent lifted up in the wilderness, Numb. 21 9.
as many as looked upon it, were made whole: so we having our eyes anointed
with the eie-salue of the holy Ghost, that we can behold the Lord Jesus
exalted on the cross, shall be freed from all the fiery stings of Satan,
wherewith he had stung us to damnation.

For the second, whom he shall save: observe, not all, but his people.
Therefore they deceive themselves that think Christ died for all men: for
there are but two parts of his priesthood: the first, to supplicate or to pray:
the second, to sacrifie: Now it is certain he never sacrificed for them for
whom he never supplicated: and John 17.9. he excludes the world out of his
prayer, therefore for the world he never died; but he prayed only for
believers, and that they might be sanctified, that is, set apart wholly for
Gods service, the word (sanctified) being a metaphor or borrowed speech taken
form the Temple, wherein the first fruits, the flesh, the garments, the
vessels and all things else were holy, so called because none might use them to
worldly purposes. So as if we will be his people, we must keep our selves
only for one husband the Lord Jesus, and like a jewel peerless, as if we
were peculiarly laid up for him, as S. Paul speaks Tit. 2.14. And he that
cannot assure his soul of this, for him Christ never died: for if we be
Temples; only to set up in them the idols of our affections, Christ never
dwells there. Now every man will assume to himself to be a Christian. If a
woman that had two children should swear she were a maid, or he that had the
plague should say and face us down he were sound, or one reeling in the
channel that he were sober, would they not be spectacles of shame to all that
saw and heard them? And for an unseemly and filthy liver to challenge this
honor to be carried in Christ's bosom, and to be remembered to his Father in
his prayers, and to apportion part of Christ's death to himself, is as absurd
as the other, and this his fained repentance shall lead him but into a fained
hope against the latter day which will deceive him. For such kind of boasters
be they, spoken of Proverb. 30.12. that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
they be not washed from their filthiness, that is, that are as filthy in their
souls as is his body that lies in his own excrement. Can out of thorns come
grapes? or can a sinful wretch be a sober liver? It is certain, there is no
salvation without faith, no faith without repentance, no repentance without
amendment of life; nor any amendment without forsaking of sin: the conclusion
whereof is, that no evil liver has part in Christ's passion, but the marks of
Gods vengance are yet upon thee, and thou venturest thy salvation peremptorily
by deferring thy repentance: for what know thou whether to morrow shall ever
come? Dally not therefore thus with God, till the devil take thee in the
lurch: for as Christ came to save us from the damnation of sin, so also to free
us from the dominion of sin; and as to destroy the devil, so likewise to
destroy the works of the devil. And as none shall be saved by the law, 1.
John 3.8.
without fulfilling the law, so none shall be saved by the Gospel but such,
who as God has couenanted with them to remit their sins, so have they
couenanted with him to amend their lives. It is therefore an intolerable
absurdity for them that being slaves to sin, do notwithstanding vaunt
themselves to be the servants of God, and who being as profane as Esau, and
have sold their birthright, Genesis 25.33. Math. 25.26.
will yet claim their birthright, when they have no more interest then the
dogs in the bread of Children.

MATH. chap. 1. verse. 22, 23, 24, 25.





Jesus.


THIS is the fifth thing formerly pointed at, that this testimony of the Prophet
is alleged for the further confirmation of Joseph, and his better
encouragement in this matter; that if he should not rest in the majesty of the
Angel for the truth of the message, yet that he should not think that strange
which was recorded so long before. Wherein consider, first what cause the
Prophet had to speak this. It may be gathered out of Esaias chap. 7. where the
king of Judah being cast into fear of the overthrow of his kingdom, by the
combination and joining together of the two armies of Syria and Israel,
thinking it impossible to be rescued from their strength, the Prophet Esaias was
sent to offer him a sign in that consternation and trouble of his mind,
either in the depth beneath or in the height above, that thereby he might be a
certained the Lord would deliver Jerusalem from that army: the King measuring
all by policy, refuses to ask any particular sign; whereupon the Prophet
seeing this, descended to the general sign, the covenant made Genesis 3. that
the seed of the woman should break the serpents head, that is, not only
perform a temporary deliverance, but an everlasting freedom from the siege of
Satan; and this covenant was especially made to Abraham. Now the Prophet
speaks to him by way of exprobration in this sort: How can thou, O King,
mistrust this small matter, and that the power of the Lord is not able to
perform this, since he has promised to do the other, which is far greater?

Hence generally learn, how excellent and needful a thing it is to be
acquainted and familiar with the Scripture, which is as the storehouse of
comfort when we be distressed, and a guide to direct our thoughts when they
be distracted. For if Joseph had well compared the times spoken of by the
Prophets, and had called to mind this speech of Esaias here mentioned, it might
much have stayed him in his perplexed discourse with himself, the Angel
himself intimating so much in alleging the prophecy and yet concealing the
Prophets name, as a thing that Joseph could not be unmindful of. And this
indeed is the duty, and ought not to be the labor of every trembling
Christian; to lodge as it were with the book of God in their bosom; and with
the Noblemen of Beraea ( Act. 17.11.) to receive the word with readiness, and
to search the Scriptures daily, which is the garden of the Lord, where runs
the river of wisdom to resolve all doubts, and where is to be had the oil
that softeneth all our afflictions.

Now in the testimony it self here alleged, consider two things: first, the
person that should bear, a virgin: secondly, the person that should be
brought forth, Emmanuell, consubstantiall with us in nature: for both these
the Prophet begins with a word of wonder (Behold) as of a miracle never
performed but once. If it be asked, how it was possible a virgin should
conceive, we must believe it was so, and rest in this, nothing to be
impossible with God, Mat. 19.26. For as it was possible at the first to make a
woman out of a man without the help of a woman, as we may see in the first
creation, Genesis 2.22. so was it possible for him in this new creation to make a
man out of a woman without the help of a man. Which was done to this end,
because if there should have been any corruption of the seed of man in Christ,
he could not have sanctified others. Concerning the person that should be
brought forth, it is Emmanuel, the same that Jesus, and they both imply one
thing: for he that is Emmanuel is God with us, as Jesus is God saving us. Now
he is God with us many ways: and albeit in the Arc under the law, the Lord
was always speaking through the Cherubins, insomuch as the very enemies of God,
the Philistims (1. Sam. 4.7.) could say when the Arc came, that the God of
Israel came: and therefore cried, woe unto us; yet is he far nearer with us,
namely, in such a spiritual manner as the Prophet speaks here, a God not
only present and favorable to us, but connaturall to us, and upon which did
depend all the graces of God formerly given to his Church. Therefore if Moses
did say in admiration of the Lords goodness: ( Deuter. 4.7.) Look if ever the
like came to pass, that God from heaven should speak unto his people, and
show his glory so to appear on earth: much more may we break forth into the
like astonishment, to whom God is come so near, as to be of the same nature
with us, and to speak unto us, not in the publication of the killing law, but
in the manifestation of the quickening Gospel, whereby we may receive comfort
in the deepest dangers, that gathering our selves under his wings, and seeking
rest and refreshing at his hands, he will first give us a general charter of
grace for the pardon of out sins. And because pardon of our sin will not save
us from hell, but our judgment shall be just, unless we yield full obedience
to the law, he will secondly impute and lay all his obedience and
righteousness upon us, so as in him we shall fulfill it. And yet because we
are still sinners, as carrying about us the orignall uncleanness we brought
with us, Ephesians. 5.30.
the third rest he will give us, is so to sanctify us, as we shall be bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh; not that we are absolutely sanctified in this
life, but that that which this our Christ brings us is all-sufficient to
salvation. And being sure of this, we need not to be dismaide, for the waters
of trouble are but a bath to cleanse and purge us from those corruptions we
gather by walking in this dirty world.

Further, let us consider here, why it was necessary, that he that should be
Jesus should also be Emmanuel: first, it was necessary he should be the
Emmanuel, that is, the strong God: for when we were all enwrapped in sin,
and shut up under death, then was there need of remedy. And what shall that
be? Mercy? No, God is just, and we having smitten his Majesty by our sin,
must be smitten again by his punishment. Shall it then be justice? No: for we
have need of mercy. Here so to be merciful as not to disanull his justice,
and so to be just, as not to forget his mercy, and to make a way both to
appease his wrath, that his justice might be satisfied, and yet so to appease
it, as his mercy might be magnified in forgiving, there must needs come a
mediation: and if all the world should be offered to God for satisfaction, it
is nothing: for it is his own, the work of his own hands. If Angels should
step in before the Lord, it were nothing, for they are engaged to him for their
creation; and being but temporally good, they cannot satisfy for an infinite
sin: howbeit, he that must satisfy must be infinite, to suffer infinite
punishment for an infinite sin, committed against an infinite Majesty,
therefore he must be God; he must be also Emmanuel with us: for how can there
be satisfaction for our apostasy, but by humility? nor procurement of life,
but by death? Now when God comes to obey, he must needs be humbled, and when
he comes to deserve, he must needs serve, which God alone cannot do and when
he comes to die, he must needs be mortal, which God cannot be. Therefore he
was man to be himself bond, God to free others; man to become weak, and God
to vanquish; man to become mortal, and God to triumph over death. The
situation also of the Ladder spoken of, Genesis 28.12. is an evident demonstration
of the two natures of this Emmanuel, for the word must be understood of the
second person in the Trinity. By the foot to satisfy his Fathers wrath, as
being of our nature, that he might stand close to Jacobs loins and to his
Church militant; and by the top to express his divinity, which touches the
seat, and reaches to the bosom of God, that he might in time bring thither
his Church triumphant. Now every ladder is a Medium or mean, whereby weascend
to some place that otherwise we could not reach unto, which this Emmanuel is to
us; for we being evil debtors, and God a severe creditor, Colos. 2.14
Christ is the mean to cancel this debt, and to set it on his own score: and
we being ignoant clyents, and God a skillful Judge not able to understand our
tale, Christ must be our advocate, (1. Ioh. 2.1.) to plead our cause for us.
And as between God and us, so between the devil and us he is a mediator: for
he casts fiery darts against us, which we only drive back by the shield of
faith in Christ, Ephesians. 6.11.

Further, in the word Emmanuel, observe three things: first, the truth and
verity of the subsistence of both these natures in Christ: secondly, the real
distinction of them: thirdly, the personal union of them. And these three
points wisely and soberly weighed, do confute those four maine heresies risen
heretofore in the Church, concerning this great mystery.

For the first; that there be two natures in Christ, is plainly expressed by
Saint Paul, Romans 9.5. First, he was according to the flesh of the seed of the
Jews: secondly, he is God over all, blessed for ever. And Esa. 9.6. A child is
borne, and his name shall be the mighty God. Here then first is confuted the
heresy of Martian, who said, Christ was God but not man; but had only an
heavenly body of an imaginary substance, and alleges Phil. 2.7. for his
ground, where it is said, he was made like unto men, and was found in shape as
a man; therefore no man indeed. By the same reason he might have concluded
as well, he had not been God: for in the same place ( verse. 16.) it is said,
he was in forma Dei, in the form of God. But the Apostle there fully proves
his humanity ( verse. 8.) by his obedience to the death of the Cross: for if he
had not taken true flesh, he could not have died, nor yet have satisfied for
our sins. And Gal. 3.16. it is said, the promises were made to Abraham and to
his seed, which seed is Christ: and Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was
come, God sent his Son made of a woman: which proves, that he was truly
man. Secondly, here is confuted the heresy of Arius, who denies the divinity
of Christ, and says, that only in his human nature he had participated
unto him some divine thing, and some heavenly virtue. For as we see here he
must be Jehovah, not an inferior God, or a God by participation of some divine
excellency, but he must be Deus ex seipso, filius a Patre, a God of himself, a
Son by reference to his Father. And so much is expressed by S. Paul, Romans
9.5. for when he says, he was borne of the Jews according to his flesh, he
implies, he had somewhat else he had not of them, set down in the words
following: Who is God, blessed for ever: which word (God) howsoever in the
Scripture it be taken essentially and personally: essentially when it
signifies the whole Trinity absolutely: as Thou shall worship the Lord thy God
only, and Act. 4.19. It is better to obey God then man: yet in this place it
is spoken personally of the Son, as it is also 1. Tim. 3.16: God is
manifested in the flesh. Now there be four arguments, to prove Christ God
equal to the Father and to be Jehovah coeternall in the Godhead as the Father:
first, by the property of of his person: secondly, by the property of his
essence: thirdly, by the power of his divine works: and fourthly, by the
divine worship that is due unto him. For the first, he is proved to be God by
his generation, for he was begotten of God: whereby is understood, that he was
of the same substance with God, even as he that is begotten of a man is a man:
and therefore he is called the proper Son of God, which he is not as he was
conceived of the holy Ghost; for then Mary has a part as he was borne of her.
And this is proved by the Scripture, that when we call him the Son of God,
we understand that he is God as his Father is, John 10.20. I and my Father are
all one: and Ioh. 5.17. I work the same works and after the same manner that
my Father does: meaning that he was God as well as he. And so the Jews
understood him speaking in their language, which made them go about to kill
him. For the second, it is proved he is God by the property of his essence,
which stands in these four things: first, eternity: secondly, infinity to be
in all places: thirdly, by his knowledge of all things: fourthly, by his
omnipotency. For the first, that he is from all times, is proved Reu. 1.17. I
am that first and that last, spoken by Christ himself: and lest this should
have been understood of the futher, he says, ver. 18. and am alive, but I was
dead. For the second, which is his infinity, it is said in Jeremy, that God
fills all places: and Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I fly from thy presence?
If I go into heaven, thou art there, if into the deep, thou art there also.
And Christ says of himself, John 3.13. he being on the earth, No man
ascends up to heaven but he that came down from heaven, that son of man
which is in heaven: and in an other place he says, Where two or three be
gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst of them. Math. 18.20.
For the third, which is his knowledge of all things, Reu. 2.18. it is said
that the Son of God has eyes like a flame of fire: Ioh. 2.24.25. Math. 9.4.
and verse 23. All Churches shall know that I am the searcher of the reins and
hearts: and in another place it is said, he durst not trust the Jews because
he knew their hearts. For the fourth, which is his omnipotency, it is proved
by sundry examples in the Scripture, that he was able to raise up the dead by
his own virtue: and John 5.17. he does the same works which his Father does:
and Phil. 3.21. Christ shall raise up our bodies by the same power whereby he
subdueth all things. For the third, which is the power of his divine works, as
himself says, John 5.17. I do the same works my Father does: all which are
of three sorts: the first, concerning the creation: the second, of miracles
extraordinary: the third, that tend to the salvation of his church. For the
first of these it is said, John 1.3. by him all things were made and nothing
was made without him: and Col. 1.15.16.17. he is the invisible form of the
father. for whom and by whom all things were created, and in him all things do
consist And likewise for sustaining them being made, we have Heb. 1.3. He
bears up all things by his mighty word. For the second, that is for miracles,
he raised up dead men, even as his Father did, without any invocation to any
other, which the Apostles did not but by calling on his name, whether it were
for raising the dead or dispossessing the devil, as, I command thee in the
name of Jesus to come forth, Act. 16.18. but Christ says of himself. John
11.25. I am the resurrection and the life: and John 10.37. I do the works of
my father: Now for the third, which are the works he did for the salvation of
his church, they are principally sieve: first, election, Ephesians. 1.4, God has
elected us in Christ; and 1. Cor. 1.5. In all things we are made rich in
Christ: and Ioh. 3.17. through him we are saved. and in another place he says,
John 13.18.
I know whom I have elected. The second is vocation: now to enlighten the heart
of man must needs be the work of God, Math. 16.17.
as it is said in Saint Mat. flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee,
but God: and in another place it is said, when his Disciples were going to
Emaus, he opened their hearts* And for the ministry, which is a means to call
men, 1. Cor. 12.6.8. it is said to be the work of God: and Ephesians. 4.11.12. it is
said, Christ gave some to be Apostles, some Pastors, etc. for the work of the
ministry, and the repairing of the Saints. Thirdly, remission of sins and
justification is the work of God: as it is said, Esa. 40.29. It is that holy
one that gives strength unto him that faints, that is, it is God that
forgiueth sins: and Mat. 9.6. the some of man as son of man has this power
to forgive sins: and Stephen Act. 7.60. prays, Lord Jesus lay not this
sin to their charge. Fourthly, sanctification is only the work of God.
John. 1.13. We are not borne of the will of man but of God: and verse. 12. As
many as receive him he gives prerogative to be the sons of God: and Mat.
3.11. Christ will baptize you with the holy Ghost: and again himself says,
Without me you can do nothing; which is true only of God: and Ephesians. 5.26.
Christ gave himself for his Church, to sanctify it. and Heb. 10.10. We are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Christ. Fifthly, to give glory, is the
work of God; and this does Christ, as appears by the speech of the thief
upon the Cross, Luke. 23.42. Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom: and John 10.28. I do give eternal life unto my sheep. Now for the
fourth, that he is known to be God by the divine worship is to be given unto
him, and worship is due only to Jehovah, Prove. 16.4. the Lord has made all
things for his own sake. And for this worship, first it is not lawful to
serve any so much as God: now Christ is to be served only: for as himself
says, I have the keys of life and of death. Secondly, it is not lawful to
believe in any but God, and Job. c. 5. etc. 6. Christ says, He that believes
in we has eternal life. Thirdly ^im whom we ought to love above all things is
God: and Christ, Mat. 16. says, Love me better then thine own soul. Fouthly,
whom we ought to obey in all things is God: and Mat. 17.5. (...) is said. This
is my beloved Son, hear him, speaking of Christ ^iftly, it is not lawful to
swear by any but by God, and S. Paul ^^m. 9.1. swears by Christ, and says,
I say the truth in Christ, (...) not. Sixthly, invocation or prayer is for
none but God, as Da^id says, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hea^ you: and Stephen, Act.
7.60. when he was stoned prayed to Christ Lord Jesus receive my soul, and with
prayer to Christ end most (...) S. Paul's Epistles. Seventhly, Jehovah only
must be blessed fo^euer: and S. Paul Romans 9.5. says, Christ God, blessed for
ever: an^ in the Revelation it is said, Revel. 19.7.
All praise and glory be to the Lamb and 2. Pet. 3.18. Grow in the grace of
Christ, to whom be praise f^^euer. Eighthly, God only is to be bowed unto; and
it is said (...) Christ, Heb. 1.6. Phil. 2.10.
Let all the Angels in heaven adore him: and by S. Paul, H^^ has a name given
him whereat every knee must bow. And thus b^ these many parts of Gods worship,
it does appear that Christ^ God equal with the Eather.

For the second point, which is the real distinction of the^^ two natures, we
say they be not confounded, against the thi^^ heresy of Eutiches, who held
that the person eternal of the wo^^ of God was turned into flesh; for by this
it follows, that ^ther there must be an abolition of the Godhead, or a
permi^^^^^ of both the natures, both which were blasphemous: but (...) say
according to the scripture, Phil. 2.6. that Christ became th^^ he was not
before, namely man, and retained that he was before namely God; and he was man,
not that it was transfused in^^ his Deity, or any property of the Deity
transfused into his h^manity, but by assuming the flesh, and so by personal
union b^came both; and albeit the humanity of Christ be much magnai^^ed by the
Divinity, yet is the Divinity nothing altered by (...) humanity.

For the third point, which is the personal union of both the natures: from
hence has arisen that fourth heresy of Neft^^us, who said, that Filius Maria
was not only Aliu^ but Ali^^ that is, that as there were two natures in Christ
distinct, so (...) there also two persons. We say, that the same person that
(...) the son of Mary, was the son of God: so as the great matter here,
i^, whether Christ be one person; wherein let us ^^derstand these two things:
first, what a personal union is: secon^ly, what is the fruit and effect of this
union. For the first, (...) is a person in Christ: Is it a thing compounded of
Deity (...) humanity? God forbid. Nay Christ by his humane nature ^^perly
considered, is not a person: but the Divinity assuming his flesh, his humanity
subsisteth and staieth it self in his Divinity, for his humanity never vpheld
it self till it was united to the Divinity. It was a nature before, but no
person; his Divinity was both a nature and a person before, so as out of them
neither compounded nor confounded does arise Christ Jesus out Emanuel. And as
in the Trinity there be three persons and but one nature, so in Christ there is
but one person and two natures, union of nature in the unity of his Deity. For
the second, which is the fruit and effect of this union, it is two fold:
first, the exaltation of his humane nature by being joined to his Deity:
secondly, the communication of his properties. For the first, that the Deity
that united the flesh did so glorify the flesh, that by unsearchable degrees
it has made it far above all Angels, is proved by three privileges which it
has: first by the dignity of his personal union, as he was the son of man
he was naturally the son of God, and he that was God was borne of the woman:
for Christ is one son of God in two respects: first, by generation eternal:
secondly, according to his humane nature, not as man nor by adoption, for he
was never the son of wrath, but by personal union, for he was the son of
God. The second privilege, is, that all gifts that can be in any of the
creatures, Col. 2.9.
are powered without measure upon the flesh of Christ, namely all that can be
given to any creature or to any nature, that keeps it a nature still, and does
not defy the creature: for as he is man he knows not the day of judgment,
Mark. 13.32.
nor is not in every place, for these be essential to the Godhead, but his
humane nature was so beautified by the Godhead dwelling in it bodily, as that (
Heb. 1.6.) all the Angels must worship him, and yet as man, no essential
quality of the Deity rested in him. The third privilege is this, that his
Divine nature has given the participation of his office to him as man; that as
God is Mediator, so is man; as God has deserved salvation, so has man, and
that he as man shall judge the quick and dead, not that he shall judge by his
manhood, but Christ-man shall judge the world. The second fruit of this union,
is the communication of properties; not that the properties of the one are
communicate to the other, but that one may be attributed to both: as Christ
God died, Christ man is eternal; and this is either when we give that to the
humanity which is proper to the divinity, or give that to the divinity which is
proper to the humanity; as God by his blood redeemed his Church, yet God had no
blood, but Christ God had blood: so this man Christ forgiueth sins, not that
this power is in his manhood, but he does it merely as God: for these and
such like speeches be true in Concreto, not in abstracto, as they be both
joined together, and not as they be separate one from the other.

Lastly in the word God with us, observe that Christ is not only God with us in
nature, but in person; for the reprobate are of the same nature with him and he
with them, yet is he not God with them, but against them: but we (as the
Apostle speaks) are flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and bone of his bones, even as man and wife, which are not only one in nature
as all other men and women are, but one person by special covenant: and even
so are we one person with Christ by the covenant of grace, and being one with
him, we are also one with the whole Trinity, as himself says, I and my Father
will come and sup with him: and according to his last prayer, John 17. Father I
beseech thee that as I am one with thee and thou with me, so these (speaking of
the faithful, and pointing at them) may be one with us both: which brings
great comfort to Gods children, that through Christ we have the whole Godhead
reconciled to us and dwelling in us.

And Joseph did as the Angel had commanded him.

Joseph, according to every thing that was prescribed: out of which gather
generally, that when we are acertained it is Gods pleasure we should do such
a thing, that we stand not still, consulting with our own perverse natures,
n^^ inclining too much to tender our own frailties, but that knowing it to be
the voice of God we admit of no contradictions, but we are to constrain our
affections to be pacified and persuaded according as the Lord has disposed.
This was the infirmity of Sara, Genes. 18.12. who laughed when the Angels,
promised to come again, according to the time of life, she r^^^^ting rather
the order of nature, then believing the promise of God. And this likewise was
Lots fault, Genesis 19.16. who prolonged the time when the Angels bad him arise
and be gone, for the which he might justly have been destroyed in the
punishment of the City. But the contrary to this we see in Abraham, Genesis 22.3.
who when he was commanded to sacrifice his son, than which what could be more
contrary to nature, than for a father to be the butcher to his own son, yet
being assured that it was the voice of God speaking by the Angel, he presently
commended his affection, and rose up early to execute that bitter message.
Wherein observe, that all the children of Abraham must be children of
obedience, which must be showed by walking in every thing, according as it is
written. For now seeing only the voice of the Lord is the voice of the
scripture, Luke 16.29.
which is as certain as if Christ were to speak immediately from heaven, so
far as is commanded so far is to be performed, howsoever it may cost us
dear and cross us much; yea though it be with Joseph to embrace her for a
wife whose honesty we might justly suspect. And if Joseph did this at the first
word of the Angel, what shall be said to us, who have heard the voice of God
so often, beating upon us, that we should forsake our sins, and yet we spread
curtains over them? But that as his obedience is here recorded for his
praise, so our stubburnnesse and disobedience be regestred in our punishment,
that it may be as a hissing and astonishment to other nations.

Further observe hence, that the obedience of a Christian stands not in a
general subscribing to the truth of that is taught them, no nor yet in a
verbal confession of it: but the commendation of a Christian rests in his
works of obedience, as it is said ^eere, Joseph (did) as he was enjoined: 1.
Ioh. 3.1^.
so that the hand and the mouth must go together, as our Savior Christ
teaches: Not every one that (says) Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.^^.
but he that (does) the will of the Lord shall be an heir of heaven. Whereby
we must learn, that the calling of a Christian is noidle but a painful
calling, wherein we must strive daily to pluck up some weeds or other that
ouergrow our godliness, and to live as children in the sight of our Father,
always doing what he commends unto us. For if Joseph after this time had no
more suspected his wife, yet if he had not taken her again, and dwelt with
her as his wife, he had failed in his obedience, and had been like Lots wife, (
Genesis 19.22.26.) who beginning well in going out of Sodom, and yet forgetting
half her obedience to the commandment, in looking back behind her, is left
as a monument to this day for us to take heed by.

And he knew her not, till she had, etc.

Though it be said, he knew her not (till) she had, etc. yet it does not
follow necessarily he knew her (after:) for the word (till) in the Hebrew
tongue signifies as well, that a thing shall not come to pass in time to
come, as that it came not to pass before: as Mat. 28.20. I am with you
(until) the end of the world: not that he will leave us then, but that he will
by his spirit be with us then and ever after. Like to this is the phrase used,
(2. Sam. 6.23.) Michol had no children (till) the day of her death: and it is
certain she had none after. So in the speech following: Christ was her (first)
begotten Son, it does not therefore follow, she had any more sons, for the
phrases only exclude the time before. And this we are to believe upon our
salvation, that Joseph knew her not till Christ was borne, and that Christ was
the first borne. And it is very probable and agreeable to the best churches,
that he knew her not after, nor that she had any more sons after: for what
flesh durst touch that vessel that was sanctified to entertain the Lord Jesus?

MATH. chap. 2. verse. 1, 2. etc.



















Mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped him, and opened their
treasures, and presented unto him gifts, even gold, and frankencense, and
mirrhe.




THE Evangelist in the former Chapter having set down two things, first, the
royal pedigree of our Savior Christ, secondly, the manner of his conception;
now he proceeds to show his manifestation to the world, and the manner of it;
beginning with a certain memorable history of certain men renowned among the
heathen, who being most learned, though most superstitious, did undertake a
tedious and dangerous journey, to do homage to a poor babe lying in a cratch,
as if it had been to a mighty Monarch. In the words there be six circumstances
set down: first, that these Wisemen came from a far country, by the
direction of an extraordinary star, created of God for that purpose, and
enqured where the king of the Jews was. Secondly, is remembered what effect
this news and enquiry had and wrought, namely, a wonderful fear in the Court
of Herod, and a great perplexity in the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Whereupon the
King called a Parliament or a Convocation of Divines, God working withal in
his conscience, knowing himself to be an usurper, to know of them, not where
this King of the Jews should be at that present, but where he should be
borne. Thirdly, is declared the resolution that was given to this question so
propounded, satisfying the matter truly, out of an ancient record of the
Prophet Micah, chap. 5.2. set down in the 5. and 6. verses. Fourthly,
follows the privy and sly practice which Herod most maliciously, but most
politikely attempted; his conference with the Wise men being only to be
informed when the star appeared, that he might guess the birth of the child,
to go about his murder, in the 7. and 8. verses. Fifthly, what befell these
Sages or Wisemen in the way, having received resolution from the Council, and
encouragement from the King: namely, the star appeared again, and led them
directly to the place where the babe was, and how they rejoiced, in the 9.10.
and 11. verses. Sixthly, is set down an Oracle from God given them, commanding
them to go another way, in the 12. verse.

For the first, which is the coming of these men to see our Savior Christ in
his baseness, the Evangelist sets down five circumstances. First, the
persons that came: they were Magi or Wise men, such as were reputed among the
heathen most learned, but yet the practisers of the Art of Balaam, that is, of
coniuring, and the very Chaplains of the devil. So as they were not Kings, as
some have taken it, abusing the Psalm. 72.10. The Kings of Sheba shall come and
offer gifts: for this stands full West, and these men came from the East. But
thus has the Lord infatuated them that would incline to their own shallow
brain, that they should speak things repugnant in themselves. Others set
down the number of them to be three, because they brought three gifts, which
is not so to be taken, but only that they which came, presented unto him the
chiefest commodity of their country. The second circumstance notes the time,
set down doubly: first, that it was after his birth: secondly, that Herod the
son of Antipater, who had got the Kingdom by force and flattery, then
reigned: but for the day when they came, we know not: some take it to be the
sixth of January, which is a great deal too curious; howbeit of the year and
month somewhat may be gathered, and it is probable it was not long after his
birth, and under two years. Thirdly, he notes the circumstance of the place,
from whence, and whither they came, from the East to Jerusalem. Fourthly, the
question they demand, Where is the King of the Jews that is borne: not that
should be borne. Fifthly, lest they might seem to be besotted with
Astrologicall conjectures, he sets down the direction they had to come
thither, namely, the star, and the end wherefore they came: to worship him.

Out of the circumstance of the persons that came, observe, how it pleased God
when the fullness of time was come, to manifest the truth of his promise to the
Gentiles, and to salute them first with the comfortable news of Christ his
birth, who had been so long forsaken: for these Wise men were as it were the
first fruits of the Gentiles, who before this time lived without God in the
world. Hereby teaching us, first, not to hasten but when the Lord does call,
and to wait his time and pleasure with patience: for though he had suffered the
Gentiles by the space of four thousa^^ years, to follow the greediness of
their own lusts, and to be drenched in the whirle pit of their vile
affections, yet these at length in his due time, does he visit in great mercy,
and shows them the light, first, that they may come out of darkness; that
though the Jews had many privileges, as elder brethren above them, yet at
length the Lords mercy should make them equal, as was prophesied, Ose. 2.23.
and is set down by S. Peter, 1. chap. 2.10. yea and of the Gentiles, that his
Church should especially be gathered, that they which in times past were not
under mercy, might now be seen to have obtained mercy.

Secondly, from hence note the riches of the Lords mercy, who to show the power
and virtue that was in this Savior, begins to draw them and to open their
hearts, who had run furthest from him, and given themselves most over to the
devil: for such were these Wisemen, who consulted with Satan and practiced
the most detestable art of coniuring and witchcraft, which by the judicial law
of God was death; yet at the doors of these men does his spirit knock. From
whence every man may draw this particular comfort to himself, that whatsoever
his former conversation has been, though most irreligious toward God, and
unrighteous to men, yet there may a power be given him from above to travel
toward that heavenly Jerusalem the City of God, where he shall not now see
Christ in his baseness as these Wisemen did, but in his absolute and perfect
glory. For if we have but faith to believe Gods promises, and shall so far
proceed in the work of repentance, as being called to the light to walk in
the light, and not to think much of our pains, though we go far to worship
Christ: but can walk on cheerfully after the example of these Wisemen, we
shall be sure with them to have our joys more increased at our iourneys end,
than they were a first.

Now where they show they were directed by a star: first, understand, that
the Nativity of Christ depended not upon the star, but the star upon his
Nativity. Secondly, we must not think that the Wisemen had this power to
divine by the star that Christ was borne: for first the star was not
natural, for it kept not a set course, but as we may see in the text, it did
appear and not appear, neither could this divine light speak that such a
Messiah was borne, though it might portend the birth of some great Monarch: but
this light was purposely created by God in heaven: for verse. 2. it is called
Christ his star, and there was a secret impulsion by Gods spirit in the hearts
of these men on earth, otherwise they would not have told so dangerous a
matter to Herod a king so cruel, and an enemy to the king of Persia whence
they came: and though perhaps their Art might tell them somewhat, and that they
had the prophecy of Balaam the coniurer, Number. 24.17. There shall come a star
of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise of Israel. and though they had the prophecy
of Daniel, ( chap. 9.24.) of the 70. weeks in which this great king should
come; yet by all this they gathered it not, but by Gods own opening it unto
them. Out of which we learn, that when we have any thing reveled to us from
God, or that we have a commandment to do a thing, that we cast off all
doubts, and shake off all fear even of the greatest tyrants: for let Herod be
never so much perplexed at the name of the true and newborn King of the
Jews, yet must the Wisemen ask the question, and not depart from his Court
till they be resolved. And let Pharaoh be never so cruel, and ( Exodus 10.28.)
threaten Moses if he do but see him to kill him, yet must he run on in his
duty, and pronounce the death of the first borne, even the first born that
sits on the throne of Pharaoh.

But the more special doctrine from hence is, that God in wisdom does so
strangely qualify the baseness of Christ his birth, that howsoever he might
seem to the eyes of men a vile abject, as Esaias prophesied, chap. 53.3. void of
outward dignity, yet God beautified him always in his greatest vileness, with
some certain mark of his Divinity, that it might be discerned, that he that
was in that flesh was more then a man; as even at this time, that he having
but an ox stall on earth for his cloth of estate, should have a star in
heaven to set forth his glory: and that when there was no more thinking of
Christ than of the man in the Moon among Herod's Courtiers, then he prouides
that some Magical practisers should humble themselves before him, when the
high Priests did despise him. Thus did the Lord ( Luke 2.8.) reveal him first
to shepherds, the basest of ten thousand: but to testify his majesty at the
same time; an host of Angels and a multitude of heavenly soldiers sang glory
to him. So was he ( Mat. 4.1.11.) led into the wilderness among wild beasts,
but the Angels waited on him as his pensioners, and ministered to him in his
wants. So ( Mat. 17.25.27.) he must pay tribute, a token of subjection, and yet
the kings son ought to pay none: but as this showed him to be a man and a
subject, so he told Peter his thought, saying: I will pay it, but go to the sea
and take it out of the fishes mouth; so as to show his divinity, he commanded
the sea to pay it. Again, he was maintained eleemozinarily, having no garment
but what was given him, and the good women kept him by their contributions: yet
to magnify himself again, he oftentimes fed many thousands with a little. So
( Mark. 11.12.13.) he comes hungry to the fig tree, wherein appears his
baseness; but in the same action springs forth his majesty, as when he
said, Never fruit grow on thee hereafter: and it was presently dried up. So
God had appointed he should die, and before his death to be whipped, Mat.
26.67. to show his humility: but see how he exalted himself again, Mark.
11.15. he whipped out the exchangers out of the temple, and none durst so much
as look or make resistance against him. Again, he must be hanged between two
thieves, but ( Luke 23.42.) he so qualifieth the baseness and shame of his
cross, as he works faith in the heart of one of them, to call on him as a
Savior, and him he saves. And though at last he died to declare his manhood,
yet that he was more then a man, was expressed by the breaking of the veil of
the Temple, and by the strange eclipse of the Moon, which was in plenilunio,
when it was full Moon.

For the second general circumstance, which is the effect of their inquiry,
what fear it wrought. For the word, Fear, it signifies such a troubling of
the water, as that mud arises; showing, that this kind of fear seized on
Herod and his Court: howbeit, their fear arose upon several respects. Herod
feared because he was somewhat acquainted with the prophesies which foretold,
that one should come to deliver his people out of servitude: and he knew that
all would worship the Sun rising rather then the Sun setting. And that he
was strangely afraid is noted by this, that he called unto him the Wisemen,
and would have learned of them somewhat; whereas if he had been provident, he
would have sent some of his Courtiers on the journey with them, in color of
doing them courtesy, that so they might have gone to the very place to have
seen the child, and by them the King might have been sure to have known the
truth: but it pleased the Lord he should be so besotted with this gross fear,
that his wisdom was turned into foolishness, that so the poor child might as
yet escape the bloody claws of this cruel tyrant. The people they were
afraid and troubled, because they had been so long acquainted and made
familiar with slavish servitude, that their hearts were even grown hard, and
they were willing to sustain this bondage, so they might be quiet, choosing
rather to abide some tolerable servitude, then to endanger themselves further,
by the commutation of their state, and change of their king.

Out of the fear of the king, observe the nature and condition of wicked and
profane Princes, who if the finger of God do but come near them, and shake
them in their seats, they murmr and grudge, and are smitten with fear as
with the spirit of giddiness: for Herod feared lest he should lose his
kingdom if Christ should reign; so as it was the loss of the Crown did so
much affect him. Even so was the countenance of King Balthazar changed and his
thoughts troubled, when he saw the hand writing on the wall, Dan. 5.6. which
signified the division and loss of his kingdom: for it is not in the power of
Princes to stay their conscience from checking and accusing them, nay it is as
a butcher that will first flea and rifle them when their destruction draws
on. Therefore let the great men of the earth beware how they spurn against the
government of Christ, for he is no less a King now then he was then; nay
he gouernes now with more majesty then before, and therefore they may not be
as Lions over his heritage: 1. Pet. 5.3.
but if they will have their Scepters blessed in their hands, they must suffer
Christ to rule, and themselves though Lords over others, yet to be but
subjects under him.

In that the people were also afraid, observe the grosnesse and profanesse that
was in these Jews before these Wisemen came thither: for as soon as they
heard of the birth of their Messiah, they were presently astonished, as if they
had never heard of any such matter before, and yet they knew that the Kingdom
was now translated from the tribe of Judah, and that it was to be restored,
they were exercised and vexed with great calamities, as were their forefathers
under Pharao, Exodus 5.7.
so as that might have made them cast up their eyes to have looked for a
deliverer. The sacrifices they daily offered portending the dteah of Christ,
might have put them in mind of his coming, but they were so dead in sin and
licentious living, as they dreamed of no such matter; yea they sung out of the
Psalms continually in their Service, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord: Ma. 21.9. Psalm. 118.26.
yet when he is come it appalleth, and like beasts void of understanding, they
had rather sleep in a known slavery, then enjoy an unknown liberty, their
religion being but common devotion, and a set kind of serving God without
sincerity, which wrought no more in their consciences, but that now as if they
were heathen they tremble to hear of the name of a Savior. Which ought to
teach us to lay religion at the heart, and to keep the fire burning, lest if
we neglect this acceptable time of grace, and shuffle off the service of God as
a thing of course, we grow and become as senseless and profane in our selves
as these Jews did, to be troubled with Christ's coming to us in his word
preached.

Again, in that it is said, All Jerusalem were afraid, it is to be understood
only of the greatest part, for some waited and expected his coming in great
hope, Luke 2.28.37.
as Anna, Simeon and Zachary; but these were but as a spark in comparison of a
mighty fire. Where we learn, not to fashion our selves to follow multitudes,
the greatest number being always enemies to the Cross of Christ, Luke 12.32.
as himself testifies, Mine is a little flock. But such is the power of the
Prince of darkness, and such strength has corruption in us, as they lead us
altogether from the way of holiness, and the least occasion moves us to be
offended at Christ: howbeit let us retire our selves into the straites of
godliness, and let pirates roue upon the maine Sea: it is the narrow path that
leads, and the smaller company that enters into Sion. For in Sodom that
great city, Genes. 18.32. there shall not be found ten righteous nor
religious, and the house of Noah only excepted, Genes. 6.11. the whole earth
was corrupt before the Lord. It cannot therefore be safe for us to join in
amity with the sons of men, least we be wrapped in the same destruction,
and overcome of the same fear we see all Jerusalem troubled with.

Further observe hence, that if the birth of our Savior Christ in this
baseness struck such terrors into the hearts of Kings, how much more shall
his second coming cause the very mountains of the earth to tremble, when he
shall appear in power, accompanied with hoastes of Angels, and when heaven and
earth shall fly before him? That therefore his presence may bring us joy,
Psalm. 125.1.
and that we may be as mount Sion not to be shaken, let us lay aside the
leaven of the flesh, and put on this our Christ, by whom we have redemption,
even the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7. for faith in him shall drive
out all trembling distrust whatsoever; and where his coming works fear,
there the conscience threatens destruction, else would the wicked never cry to
the mountains to fall on them, Luke. 23 30.
and to the hills to cover them.

Observe again by this great perplexity that arose both in Prince and people,
that it was always the destiny of the Gospel to bring commotion to States,
and alteration to Kingdoms: for now besides the general fear that fretted
their hearts, the whole company of Divines are troubled to turn their books
and to seek out what shall become of the matter. This was but a beginning of
that Christ himself spoke afterward, Matthew 10.34. I came not to bring peace,
but a sword: not that the Gospel in it self causes wars, but that the
wrath and vengeance of God might redound upon the faces of his enemies, for it
makes peace between men and men and God and men, that the love of God boiling
from him to us through his grace in the word, might again issue from us to him
through our obedience to the word. Yet before the Gospel can enter to take
root and work upon us, it causes hatred, even to the effusion of blood, this
proceeding from the malice of Satan, who by the growth of the Gospel loses
his jurisdiction, and from our own corruption that love darkness more then
light, because the Gospel discovers our sins as the Sun does the motes,
that otherwise lie hid. And again, it is a cause of war which the godly have
with the worldlings, to show the division between the seed of the woman and
the serpent, and to exercise the patience and prayers of Gods servants; for
these ends the Gospel breeds commotion.

Now for the effect of this fear, it makes the King to call a Synod of
Divines, and he gathers the learned, and all the learned, omitting none, to
this end, not to satisfy the question of the wise men, Where he was that was
borne, but to satiate his own bloody purpose, That he might know the place
where he should be borne. Where we learn how Princes do use religion, and to
what purpose they call for Divines, not for conscience but for policy: for it
was the matter of the crown only troubled Herod, so as he called them not for
any reverence he bare to them, for he knew them to be miserable claw-backes,
but to serve his turn, and that they might relieve him in this his trouble and
scruple. Thus did Balak ( Numb. 22.5*) send for Balaam, only to curse the
people: and Ahab (1. Kin. 22.8.) sent for Micah only that he might concur in
opinion with the four hundred false Prophets.

For the third general circumstance; namely the resolution given by these
Divines, which is right and sincere out of the Scripture: the Jesuits hereupon
note, that these priests though their persons were never so wicked, yet God
does force them to speak truth by virtue of their unction. John 11.50.
So Caiaphas only as high Priest shall say, and that truly, that one shall die
for the sins of the people, though he neither know what he speaks, not
believe what he speaks. We answer, that if the privilege of o^le did this,
then could he never sentence any thing amiss: but if this unction work but by
fits like Saul's frenzy, 1. Sam. 16.23. then must they seek out some other
cause of the upright judgment of these Divines in this place. Balaam ( Number.
24.17.) prophesied true, not because he was a Priest, but he spoke even as his
Ass spoke, God putting it into his heart to do so. And it is strange that the
Popes person may be an heretic, and yet the Pope himself as Pope be a
Catholic; and that though his person be overflowed with wickedness, yet that
as some grounds will bear no poisoned beasts, so his Consistory will breed no
errors. We say the seat of Moses had no such privilege, much less they: for
though Caiaphas spoke true, that one should die, yet as high Priest he
condemned the Lord Jesus that was innocent. So we must take it here, that
these Divines resolved Herod of the truth, not by inforcement, but voluntarily
even as they thought, for their lips preserved so much knowledge as to be
acquainted with the Prophets, even in these special and secret points of the
coming of Christ.

Note further in the prophecy of the Messiah here cited, the great mercy of
God, that set down particularly so many things by so many sundry instruments,
and all fall out to be as true as if the Prophets had then seen them. It was
first prophesied Genesis 3. he should be the seed of the woman; then to what
nation he should be given, to the Jews: then to what Tribe; to Judah: Genesis
49.10. then to what house of this Tribe, to David: then at what time he should
be borne, Dan. 9.25. and Genes. 49.10. when the Scepter shall go from Shilo,
then shall the Messiah come: then the person that should bear him, a virgin:
his name Emmanuel, Esa. 7.14. his office, a Savior: the place where he should
be borne, Bethlem, Micah. 5.2. the manner of his life, to be poor, Za. 99. he
shall come riding on an ass: the manner of his death, Esa. 53.12. he should be
condemned with sinners: the price should be given to betray him, and what
should be done with it, to buy a field, Zach. 11.12. that he should be pierced,
and yet that in his death not a bone should be broken, Exodus 12.46. that he
should thirst, and vinegar should be given him, Psa. 69.21. that lots should be
cast upon his garments, Psalm. 22.18. Let us therefore, seeing this sweet
harmony of the Prophets, and as persuaded of the verity of the whole scripture,
labor to learn all things that are written, and so to learn them as to do
them, that we may be contrary minded to these Jews; rejoice at his coming who
will fill us with all joy.

Further, we are to consider by what occasion the Lord wrought that the
virgin should be brought to bed at Bethlem: Luke recites it chap. 2.1. that
Mary having purposed to be delivered at Nazareth where she had conceived,
which had been contrary to the scripture, the Lord changes this
determination, and sends a thought into the heart of Augustus the Emperor to
impose a tax upon all the world: Mary though great with child and near her
travel, yet is constrained to go to Bethlem. Thus does the Lord turn the
purposes of wicked men to a blessed end, and makes all wind blow good for his
children, and prouokes the Emperor to be an executioner of the prophesies: not
that he any whit regarded them in his heart, or did this upon any voluntary
obedience, for his end was to enrich his fist, and to show the Majesty of his
Empire, that by this men might testify their submission unto him. Thus did the
Lord turn ( Genesis 45.7.) the mischievous malice of Joseph's brethren to an
honorable end, that he might be a purueyor and a nurse to his Church, as Joseph
himself testifies Genesis 50.20. speaking to his brethren, Ye thought evil
against me, but the Lord turned it unto good, that I might preserve the lives
of many.

Note further in the resolution of these Divines, that we are to wonder how
they could so sincerely and willingly answer to the question propounded,
whereas afterward they pervert all the scripture, rather then they will subject
themselves to this Messiah: it is because as yet the Messiah had not opened his
mouth, to convince their sin and show their shame, nor challenged them for
murdering of souls; but when he comes to discover their hypocrisy, and
persecution of the truth, then he is no more the King of the Jews borne at
Bethlem, but he is a Nazarean, and no good thing can come out of Galile, John
7.53. reproving also Nicodemus, verse 52. that would not have him condemne^
before he was heard, granting the truth in the general, but denying it in the
particular: which is the nature of all Atheists and Non-residents, 2. Tim. 4.2.
Mat. 15.14.
which subscribe to the general places of Scripture, that the word must be
preached in season and out of season, that if the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the pit of perdition, that where the vision fails the people
perish, Prou. 11.14.
and that the price of souls is blood: but that he himself is in this
danger, that takes the fleece, yet feeds not the sheep: or that he does
ieopard his own soul^, in suffering the souls of others to famish, he will
instantly and shamelesly deny, their consciences condemning them in the
particular. So will the Atheist and profane person confess in general, that
God is just, that he hates sin, yea and that he will be avenged for sin:
but that Gods hand shall ever come near him, or that the euillday shall fall
upon him, though he wallow in his own filthiness, his senseless soul will
never allow of. Howbeit, let every one of us beware after the example of these
great Scribes, who found that to be true to their particular condemnation,
which they only held to be true in their own general opinion: namely, that
the Messiah was borne; but that Christ was he, though he wrought with power,
and taught with authority, they utterly denied it. For though in the whole
book of God, most of the promises and cursings be set down in general, yet
they are not effectual to comfort us, nor powerful to terrify us, if our
own souls do not assume particularly to our selves: as, generally to believe,
that whosoever is weary shall be refreshed, yet shall thou never find rest in
thy soul, unless thou likewise believe, that Christ shall even be the water
of life to thee.

Lastly, in the resolution of these Divines, observe how diuersely men use the
Scripture, which are here set down to be of three sorts. First, the Scribes
they used them for speculation only, thinking it enough if they so studied
them, as they could know such a thing should be, strengthening only their
judgment, and never suffering it to sink into their affections. Secondly,
Herod he inquireth of the Scripture to compass mischief, that this babe
might likewise have fallen within his butchery. Thirdly, the grave wise men
they enquire after them with a single eye, and an honest heart, that being
resolved according to the truth, they may go to the worship of the Messiah. So
as even of those that will be accounted professors, we see there is but one
sort only that bring forth the simple fruits of righteousness. Answerable
almost to these, may we say we have three sorts of congregations in this time.
The first, of them that love the evil which they have, contenting and pleasing
themselves with a dumb Minister, committing the cure of their souls to them
that know no Physic. The second, of them that have not the good they love,
they wanting a good Minister, and heartily desiring him, that he might lead
them forth into the pleasant feedings of the Lord. The third, of them that
love not the good they have, enjoying a good Minister and not regarding him.
And all these may well be counted miserable, though the affection of the second
sort be most righteous.

Herod's pretending of piety, and using of policy to destroy the babe our
Savior, set down by three circumstances. First, how after the resolution
delivered, he calls the Wisemen privily and in secret, (for this news came
upon him like the pangs of death) and commands them to enquire of the (babe,)
not the (King,) for this was it that gauled him to the heart. Secondly, to
return what success they had. Thirdly, he pretends a good end, namely, that
he also would go to worship as they had done.

In the first of these note two things: first, his extreme sottishness:
secondly, his extreme fury. His sottishness, that having a remedy at hand, to
have been sure to have caught the child, namely, to have sent some of his
Courtiers, under pretense of gratifying these Wise men, and then he could not
doubt but have grasped him in his claws: howbeit, though this was a matter
touched the kingdom and his crown, yet the Wisemen go alone, and he sends
not one with them. Thus the Lord delivers his Church out of the paws of the
Lion, by striking their enemies with the spirit of giddiness and astonishment,
that either they cannot see the way to revenge, or being in their hands, they
become foolish. His extreme fury, impiety, and audacious hardness appears
in this, that he knowing this babe, spoken of by the Prophets, was to be set
up and advanced for King, and that heaven and earth could not depose him, whom
God would have lifted up: and that considering the star appeared, that these
Wisemen came so far to worship him, whereby he could not but know, that it
was the ordinance of the most high, yet he goes about to cross the Lord, and
to resist his providence: yea he knew out of the Oracle cited by his own
Scribes, that such an one was to be borne, yet he labors to dispossess
him, when he might as easily lay siege against the seat of God, and seek to
batter heaven, or to stay the course of the Sun, or to hold the winds in his
fist, as to keep this babe from the kingdom. But thus do the wicked make God
an Idol, and so lightly regard him, as they dare fight hand to hand with him,
saying as it is Job. 21.15. Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?
Exodus 8. and 9.
Thus did Pharao bear often plagues sent by the immediate hand of God, before
he would let the Israelites depart, against the express charge and
commandment sent unto him by the mouth of Moses. And thus did Saul follow
David at the heels, to have had his life, 1. Sam. 15.28.
though he knew he was set up of the Lo^d to succeed him. Howbeit, we must
incline to the counsel of Gamaliel, ( Act. 5.35.) to say, that if it be of God
it will prevail: for how can the hand of the creature destroy that, which the
breath of the Creator will have preserved? or how can the Lord give blessing to
that course, which his hand has cursed? Nay, his decrees shall stand
unchangeable (being far more wise then the law of the Medes and Persians (
Dan. 6.8.) that alters not) how ever Herod and his brethren have made a
covenant with hell, that come what can come they fear it not: for vengeance is
both above from heaven to smite them, and beneath on earth to swallow them, and
they can no more avoid it, then the old world could avoid the flood.

Further observe in this speech of Herod to the Wisemen: that he also would
go to worship the babe: that some man may speak that in hypocrisy to the
damnation of his own soul, which another believing in simplicity may hear
with comfort. For no doubt the Wisemen here were glad when they heard. Herod
say, he would also worship, though himself meant nothing less. Which example,
we that are Christians must still follow: for so long as men bear up their
heads in the Church of God, and join with us in his service, we must leave
their hearts to him that made them, and rejoice that by the leaves of their
profession, they seem to be trees of the Lords planting.

Herod's Court, and when they came to their iournies end, set down by five
circumstances: First, that they went when they were resolved: Secondly, that
the star appears again, and goes before them: Thirdly, that it stands
upon the particular place where the babe lay: Fourthly, their exceeding joy:
Fifthly, how coming thither, they find the babe in a base place, yet they are
not discouraged, but reverence him and give him gifts.

For the first it is showed, that they went alone, not one with them, though
this was the King specially borne for the salvation of the Jews. Wherein we
may admire their ingratitude, and the impiety of the Scribes, that pointed the
way to others, and yet vouchsafed not themselves to go one foot to enquire
after Christ. Thus may Preachers be as Mercuriales statui, set up a^ directors
of others, showing the way to heaven, and yet go themselves to hell. Perhaps
they feared the cruelty of the king that if they should have been carried with
an affection of seeing him, it might have cost them their lives, or at least
their honors. Though it were so, yet does it not excuse their ungodliness, to
prefer the fear of a King that could but kill the body and touch the goods,
Mark. 8.36.
before the fear of the great King of the heavens, that can destroy both body
and soul. For though the disciples and Apostles ( Act. 4.18.) be commanded,
that they should teach no more in the name of Jesus, yet if the burden of the
Lord be upon them, they may not but speak ( verse. 20.) the things which they
have seen and heard. And though Micaia^ the Prophet (1. King. 22.13.) do know
what message will please the King, yet though he be smitten on the cheek and
cast into prison, he must deliver the counsel of the Lord. For as Saint Paul
says, Gal. 1.10. If in these things I should please me^ I were not the servant
of Christ.

In that none of the people accompanied these Wisemen, observe their dullness
and Atheism, that they all stay at home, and yet they kept an outward show and
devotion in serving God, and offered sacrifices, which unless they knew that
they praefigured the death of Christ, what made they of their temple but a
butchers shambles? Yet by their idleness, that they would not step one foot
to see him, is perceived, that of the Messiah spiritually they knew nothing.
Which is likewise to be feared of us in these days, that we only rest our
selves within the reach of the Gospel, for that it has brought us peace,
which peace has purchased for us profit and promotion: but if the state might
stand in quiet, though Christ were banished from us, or if we might gain more
by Diana of Ephesus, ( Act. 19.24.) then by the God of Israel, it is to be
doubted Christ might lodge long enough at Bethlem, before we would go to visit
him.

Further observe, if these Wisemen had not left Herod to his canuassing of the
matter, the Scribes to their speculation, the people to their trades, if they
had respected the example of the mighty or of the learned, or considered the
danger, that it was a matter of treason, if it had so been taken, they had not
had this glory and honor to have seen the Messiah, but they are glad to go
alone though they would be desirous to have company. Whereby we learn, that to
embrace religion, and to join our selves with the congregation of the Saints,
it is good in going if we can get company, for the greater blessing falls upon
a multitude: howbeit we must have this resolution, to go, what danger soever
may befall, and not to stay until others go: for thou shall never see the
Lord Jesus if thou stay till all Jerusalem do go with thee to Bethlem. These
Wisemen might have said with themselves: Wherefore should we go see him,
since his own people will not? as Judas asked Christ: Ioh. ^.22.
Why do thou show thy self to us, and not to the world? but they take no
occasion of stay, but are resolute to go alone. Now if these heathen men were
so earnest, as to admit of nothing which might hinder them from beholding
Christ in the flesh, how much more ought we to be eager to hear Christ in
his word, and to see him in the Sacrament? The Queen of Saba shall rise up in
judgment against us, that came so far to hear the wisdom of Solomon, 1.
Kings 10.1. and yet as Christ speaks, Mat. 12.42. a greater then Solomon is
here, yet are we negligent in attending the voice of God.

Now for the second circumstance, namely that the star went before them:
consider the wonderful wisdom of God, that he does so qualify and moderate
the trials and afflictions of his servants, that even to the greatest
temptations (if they mistrust not) he gives a most blessed issue; for it might
have stricken these men with a strange astonishment, and driven them into great
perplexity, that they being of special reputation in their country, and
coming this tedious journey, and having such cold entertainment both in the
Kings court and of the meaner people, and having lost their direction, the
star being vanished, these things might greatly have dismayed them not to
have gone any further, yet they proceeding forward in their obedience, the
light that was quenched was again of the Lord revived; and with this they were
comforted greatly, seeing the resolution of the Priests concurring with the
dumb message of the star. Wherein also mark, that the star guided them to
the particular place where the babe lay: for if they had come to Bethlem it is
likely none there knew it, Christ his birth being a thing not dreamt of, and he
being a babe unregarded; and so much the more because he comes of the house of
David. And if they had enquired of wicked men for such a thing, they would but
have scorned them, or else sought to have intrapped them: if of good men, they
had endangered themselves by discrying it. Therefore not to need any help, the
Lord from heaven points out the place unto them: wherein for our further
instruction learn, that God in every good purpose does go before us by his
grace, to make us willing, Phil. 2.13.
as Saint Paul speaks, and with the same grace does follow us and confirm us
in the first work, that we shall never wash our hands in vain, but that as we
are by his direction come to Jerusalem to seek after Christ, so we shall by
the same direction go strait to Bethlem, where we shall see him, as David
says, Psalm 25.12. They that fear the Lord, shall know how to choose the
right way.

For their rejoicing at the sight of the star appearing again, it implies
they were strangely discomforted at the loss of it. Where note, that if the
Lord do at any time quench the light of his spirit in us, or change the
pleasure; and eclipse the joy of his countenance, if sometimes we cannot apply
to our souls the sweet comfort of the scriptures, yet the Lord after he has
sufficiently humbled us, if we go on with a simple heart, and persevere as
these Wisemen did in their journey, in a time unlooked for he will kindle in
us the former light, and take away that foggy mist that obscured the Sun of
righteousness, and it shall clearly shine upon us, and our joy in the holy
Ghost shall be multiplied, and the Lord will ease that heart that was before
trodden down with the burden of sin.

Now in that it is said, they found the babe lying in a cratch: we may consider
how strangely and strongly the Lord did exercise the faith and persuasion of
these Wisemen, that after the former discouragements passed over, they find
the babe lying in this base place, which had been enough to have made them
repent their long travel, in the end to see no other sight then this; but such
was the quick sight of the eye of faith, and the special instigation of the
holy Ghost, as they were not dismayed with the baseness of this King. Here
they find neither guard to defend him, nor resort of people to see him, neither
Crown on his head, nor Scepter in his hand, but such a child, as for outward
beauty they might have seen many a thousand equal and far beyond him in
their own country without this great travel. Where learn, that for the
believing of the promise, and to be resolved of the truth, the Lord does so
incline the heart and bend the conscience, that whatsoever does seem contrary
does nothing offend them: for these Wisemen do believe that this base child,
laid in this base manner is the King of heaven and earth. Hereupon it is that
Sara must believe being a dead woman, that is, spent by nature and ouergrowen
with years, that so many children must come from her as there be stars in
the firmament, Genesis 17.19. So Abraham ( Genesis 15.18.) must believe that he and
his posterity shall be inheritours of the land of Canaan, though they be not
to have actual possession of it four hundred years after. So David (1. Sam.
17.15.) coming from the sheep, must believe that he shall be a king, yet he
sees Saul so furious against him, (1. Sam. 19.1.) as he proclaims it, saying,
Let me see if I have any that will kill David. Here is open conspiracy, yea
he is driven into caves and holes; he is as a stone that every man refuses,
yet his faith may not fail him, but he must persuade himself he shall be
crowned though Saul be even at his heels to dispatch him, and it shall be
performed. Joseph he had a dream that the Sun and Moon and eleven stars
( Genesis 37.10.) should tall down and worship him: when he was in the pit ready
to be slain in the malice of some of his brethren, he believed this: yea
being sold into Egypt, and after by the false accusation of his mistres (
Genes. 39.20.) cast into prison, where he could see neither Sun nor Moon,
yet he faints not, but persuades himself of the truth of his dream, and it
fell out accordingly. So Ezechiel being brought into the field of the Lord,
Ezec. 37.4. must believe, that of a company of dead bones there shall rise up
armed men; for those dead bones were the house of Israel. Yea, faith must be so
quick sighted as to believe that in prison there is liberty, in persecution
comfort, in life death, in the Cross a Crown, and in a manger the Lord Jesus.

Here also learn by the example of these Wisemen, not to be offended at the
baseness of the Gospel: for if they had been offended at the baseness of
Christ in the flesh, they had not had the blessing of seeing the Messiah.
Therefore howsoever the devil in Christ's time broached this argument, to with
draw men from the Gospel: John 7.48.
see whether any of the Scribes or of the famous learned men follow Christ,
only a few rascal company flock unto him; yet we must not think that the
kingdom of Christ stands in any outward pomp or glory, for so much did
Simeon ( Luke 2.34) insinuate to his mother Mary, that she should not expect
any glorious acceptance of her son, no not in Israel, confirmed by the
Prophet Esaias, chap. 8.14.28.16. but that he should be as a white set up in a
but, whereat every man would shoot some bolt. Such therefore shall be blessed,
who (as himself speaks) shall not be offended at him; for we must observe,
Math. 11.6.
that as the proceeding of his kingdom is above nature, so the persuading of
us to his kingdom is most contrary to nature, and that either in a general
opposition of the world, which is carried away with the affectation of honor,
and an utter hatred of falling into the extremities of contempt, poverty, and
persecution, or else to every man's particular heart, which is forcible to
dissuade him from suffering in the flesh, or for casting the anchor of his
affections upon the baseness of Christ and of his Cross. True it is, if an
Orator should use an argument contrary to art, he could not prevail; but if
he should frame his argument of that the people were most in hatred of, it
were a fruitless labor and a vain hope to expect his purpose: so if a
Physician should apply a medicine contrary to the disease, he could never hope
to cure it; but if the medicine were also contrary to the complexion of the
party, then were it most unlikely to have success. But such is the miraculous
power of the Almighty, that as he can make something of nothing, so he can
also make of a thing contrary such as he would have it: as he has vanquished
the crowns of Monarks by the Cross, whose triumphant seats are most contrary
to the Cross: he has overcome the pride of the world by poverty, and the
wisdom of the flesh by the foolishness of the spirit: yea he has wrought
submission in the hearts of these heathen men, that though Christ lay in a
cratch void of all dignity, yet they take no offense at it, which thing is
only proper for the spirit of God to perform, who has both the tongue, the
heart, and the knee in his power.

In that these Wisemen offered gold and other gifts unto the babe: observe how
graciously the Lord provided for the poverty of Jesus parents, that even now
immediately before the persecution came, he sends them gold from the East for
their relief and comfort. And thus does the Lord deal with all that depend
upon him, never suffering them to fall into extremity, or to be too much
distressed with poverty: as David says, Psalm. 37.25.
he never saw the righteous begging their bread; but the Lord supported them by
his power, and will make the stones to yield bread, the rocks water, the
heavens Manna, rather than his children shall be unprovided. For if Eliah be
forced to hide himself from the knife of Iesabel, 1. King. 17.4. rather then
he shall want, the Ravens shall feed him: yea he will make the wicked an
instrument to provide for his chosen, as Zedekiah to command that Jeremy be fed
in the prison as long as there is any bread in the City, Ier. 37.21. which
ought to teach us not to compass any thing unlawfully, or to dig us cisternes
out of the policy of the flesh, but to rely upon the Lord, who can and will
send us relief from the uttermost parts of the earth, and when we least look
for it, and when it shall be most welcome, as he did here to the mother of
Jesus.

Psalm. 7.14.
that it falls out they are but concerued with vanity, and travel of iniquity,
and bring forth a lie. For when Herod meant to have glutted his bloody mind
upon the report of these Wisemen, then are they of the Lord sent another way.
And when ( Act. 23.12.) the Jews had bound themselves with a curse, that they
would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul; then the Lord sent
into the heart of the chief Captain, so to entrench him about with soldiers
as he was kept safe from their fury. So when Senaherib the King of Ashur had
thought to have swallowed up Jerusalem, Esaias 36.33. then the Lord said and
performed it, that he should not so much as shoot an arrow, nor cast a mount
against it. Thus does the Lord always prevent the dangers intended against
his children, Psalm. 91.5.6.
that neither the plague that flies by day, nor the pestilence that walks by
night, nor the snare of the hunter can once entrap them, but his ears are open
even to the prayers of Jonas, c. 2.2. to deliver him out of the Whales belly:
and his eyes are so bent upon Daniel, c. 6.22. as the Lions have no power to
hurt him: but he is as a shadow against the parching heat, and as a shield
against the blustering cold, which may inco^^age us still to lay hands upon him
as our succor, to behold him as our deliverer, to fly to him as our
comforter, to wait upon him as our guide, and to commit our souls unto him as
unto the best keeper.

Secondly, here learn by the not returning of these Wisemen to Herod
according as they were commanded, that an oath or a vow taken and made against
the bond of charity, and tending to the hurt of our brother, is not to be
performed; but being undertaken upon weakness, is to be discharged upon
conscience: and therefore rash was the vow of Iphtah, Judge. 11.31. to promise
to the Lord without limitation a sacrifice of that he should first meet when he
came home. For though the Apostle Heb. 11.32. commends him for his worthy
enterprise in delivering the people, yet by this rash vow and wicked
performance of the same, his victory was much defaced. For we must make no
haste with our mouths to pronounce any thing, but set a watch before our
lips, that they may hedge in our tongues from speaking evil of our brethren;
and yet if we hap to slip in this, we must keep in our hands from executing
what unadvisedly we uttered. For first, we are so far from being bound to
derect them when their lives or bodies are sought for, as we are to counsel
them to hide them, as Eliah (1. Kings 17.3.) was counseled of the Lord to hide
himself. So did Jonathan (1. Sam. 20.42.) make his fathers fury known to
David that he might hide himself, and therefore cursed be the Ziphims, 1. Sam.
23.20. that promised Saul to deliver David into his hands, and cursed be
Irrijah. Ier. 37.13. that staid Jeremy, and brought him to the Princes as a
fugitive when he was going to the land of Benjamin. Secondly, if they cannot
hide themselves, we must do it for them. So did Obadiah (1. Kin. 18.13.) in
the court of Ahab hide a hundred Prophets from the cruelty of Iesabel. So did
Rahab, Josh. 2.1. in great zeal to God and love to his servants, hide the
spies with the danger of her own life. So did the Disciples, Act. 9.21. let
down Paul in a basket, when his life was sought for by the Inquisition.
Thirdly, if they be apprehended we must be so far from accusing them, as we
must countenance and defend them to our powers. So did Ebedmelech, Ier. 38.9.
when he came to the King in the gate, and told him Jeremy had wrong to be
imprisoned: and so did Jonathan, 1. Sam, 20.32. defend David against his own
father, for it is not the commandment of a King that ought to make us give up
the sons of God into their hands: nay the Lord himself in this place
teaches us otherwise, that would not suffer these Wisemen to obey Herod,
whereby the babe might have been exposed to his butchery.

Lastly, in the departure of these Wisemen, observe that God both in the
beginning and in the end will bless all courses and actions enterprised and
done in his fear and in a holy obedience, as he did bless and prosper the
journey of these Wisemen, giving them both a direction which way to come to
Jerusalem, and which way to go from Bethlem: which must make us if we expect
any blessed success of that we undertake, not to begin but with the warrant of
a good conscience, nor to proceed but with a reverent and resolute obedience as
to the commandment of God, and as aiming at the advancement and promotion of
his glory, and the furtherance of his service.

MATH. chap. 2. verse. 13, 14, 15.






THE Evangelist as before he showed the glorious and blessed beginnings of our
Saviors birth, who though borne in baseness, had testimony given him of his
majesty by the star in heaven, and in earth by the Wisemen of Persia: so now
he sets down a matter of great discomfort, that this same babe, even from
his cradle, should begin to be crucified in himself and his members. Wherein
generally there be three points set down: first, the commandment of the
Angel: secondly, the obedience of Joseph: thirdly, the fulfilling of a
prophecy.

In the commandment consider, first the circumstance of the time, that it was
after the departure of the Wisemen: how long after is not certainly set
down: but it is probable and likely, that it was not till Mary had recovered
the weakness of her childbirth. Secondly, herein consider the substance of the
message, containing these four things: first, that Joseph must take the babe
and his mother, he does not say his wife, for the Angel had before satisfied
him for that matter. Secondly, the place whither he must go: to Egypt, the
worst of all other. Thirdly, the time he should stay there, set down
indefinitely, till he was called away. Fourthly, a reason of this
commandment, expressed to relieve the weakness of Joseph, though the
commandment it self had been sufficient, because Herod sought to destroy the
child.

Out of the first circumstance of the time: learn, that God gives and
allows no long time of peace and truce to his servants, whom he will make
mirrors of patience, but he sends one trouble in the neck of another, that
though the life of man be but as a tale told, yet the estate of a Christian
soul has many fractions and interruptions, before it can pass like the
weauers shuttle through the web: so as the breathing time which they have had,
is but to enable them to further strength for that which succedeth. Here being
in this place set down, how the Lord mingled the sweetness of the gifts
brought to this babe by the men of Persia, with the bitterness of an immediate
persecution by the hand of Herod the King, to teach Joseph, and in him all of
us, that when we have had honor, together with the profession of the Gospel,
we may not flatter and persuade our selves of the continuance of this, but be
armed to stand to the truth, and to the acknowledgement of the Lord Jesus, both
in honor and dishonor. For Mary as she had this comfort to see the babe her
son honored and worshipped of these Wisemen, so had she this sorrow and
discomfort mixed therewithal, in the night to trusse up her furniture and to
fly. Thus fared it with her son at another time, who ( Mat. 21.8.) coming
riding on the Sabbath to Jerusalem, had acclamations and cries of the people,
Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed be he that comes in the name of the
Lord: yea had the greatest glory that ever happened to any earthly Prince, to
have garments strawed in the way for him to tread on, thereby the more royally
to entertain him: yet after all this within five days he is exclaimed on, and
tumultuously they cry, Crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us and
our children. To teach us, that neither prosperity puff us up, nor adversity
cast us down: knowing that it is the Lords will and pleasure, that there
should be an interchangeable course of these things. As Simeon prophesied (
Luke 2.35.) that a sword should pierce Mary's soul, which even now was
fulfilled, being commanded to take her heels: to teach her, that she should
not expect any great state in this life, though she was the mother of the King
of glory, but that even she should be fashioned after her own Son, to come
to a crown by the cross. Here then is condemned the daintiness of those
professors, that will wait no longer at the Lords table, then they may be fed
from his trencher, and which do love the practice of the Gospel only for the
peace of the Gospel. For Joseph may not be discouraged; though he be driven
to fly with the Lord of life in his arms: but hereby may he be secured of
safety, having his Savior with him. And on this may we all rest, that (...)
we be driven to flight for the cause of Christ, our feet shall (...) lead us
to the wings of Christ, where we shall be cherished, even in Egypt, a place of
darkness, and disdain to the truth (...) God.

For the second circumstance, which is the place wither they must fly: it
cannot be thought, but Joseph was distracted and wearied with sundry
cogitations, yea and perplexed with deep sorrows, to see that this King of
glory must be forced to fly from the cruelty of Herod, and to such a place
as was alwares an enemy to the Church of God. Howbeit, herein we may observe,
how sometimes the Lord shows but a sparkle and portion of his power in the
delivery of his servants, though at other times he openly shows himself for
their protection in great glory and majesty: as in the case of Eliah (2. King.
1.9.) when the soldiers came to him and scoffed him, saying: Man of God come
down: presently the arm of God was made naked, and fire came down and
consumed them. So did the Lord deal with Elisha, (2. King. 6.18.) who having
discovered the secrets spoken in the King of Syriahs chamber, the King in
indignation sends forth against one man; having but Gehezi to wait on him, and
host of armed men to compass the place where he was, and when they came,
thinking to have caught him, they were smitten with sudden blindness, and
Elisha in a holy zeal of Gods glory, leads them to a city, where but for him
they had been all slain. So Daniel ( chap. 6.7.22.) he is put into the Lions
den, sealed with the Kings own signet, as escape out he could not: which
since it is so, the mouths of the Lions are shut that they cannot hurt him,
here is majesty: but now Jesus his own son he must fly, and shall not be
rescued by any immediate hand of his Father, here is a diverse dispensation.
The children in the fire ( Dan. 3.22.) though it consumed them that cast them
in, yet do not their clothes so much as smell of it: and shall we think that
the hand of the Lord was now shortened, or his power abated, that he could not
have wrought as mightily for the safety of his own son? God forbid. Peter we
see is cast into the jail ( Act. 12.8.) but the Angel of the Lord opens the
door, and bids him preach with confidence: and ^hen he was condemned the next
day to be executed, lying ^ound with two great chains, the Angel with one
blow vnloo^eth them both, brings him through the soldiers, and an iron gate
flies open to give him passage. So Paul ( Act. 16.26.) he is delivered by an
earthquake that shakes the prison, and the governors are feign to entreat him
to go forth. Thus can the prayers of Gods servants obtain the ministry of
Angels, to disarme the power of Satan, and to frustrate the malice of the
wicked. Howbeit on the other side, how the Lord suffers as it were his power
to be blasted under a wonderful kind of infirmity, we have equal examples
in the Scripture. We see Eliah (1. King. 19.3.) that before could command fire
from heaven, must now fly from the face of Iezabel, and is driven to such an
exigent, that he cries out unto the Lord even to take away his life. So the
spies that came to see Jericho, ( Josh. 2.4.) and were sent from Joshua the
Lieutenant of God, to take possession of the land of Canaan, so hardly escape
they with their lives, than harlot is feign to make a lie to save them, and to
cover them with the stalks of flax that they may not be found. Paul tha^ had
before an earthquake to vnshackle him, has at another time ( Act. 9.25.) no
other way to preserve himself, but by being let down in a basket. So Jeremy
to flesh and blood (...) most basely delivered; for being cast into the
dungeon, Ebelmelech ( Ier. 38.11.) obtains of the King to bring him ou^ and
then with a company of rags and old worn clouts boun^ together, as with a
cord he draws him forth, and is glad (...) send him away. So fared it with
David, (1. Sam. 19.12.13.) for Michol perceiving he could hardly escape the
fury of Saul, fir^^ she lets him down at a window, and then she puts an
image^^ the bed, as if some sick man had been there. And thus did th^^ Lord
provide for his son after the basest manner, that his parents must take their
heels to preserve his life: he could have se^^ a kind of madness on Herod, as
he did on Nebuchadnezzar, ( D^^ 4.29.) and have spoiled him of all his kingly
royalty, and seuer^ him from the company of men, and made him feed with beasts
he could have made his Angel have struck him, as he did (...) nephew, ( Act.
12.23.) or have raised up his sons to ha^^ slain him, Esa. 37.38.
as he did to Senaherib: or have caused him to ha^^ hanged himself in a
desperation of the kingdom: he could have astonished them when they had come
to kill him, as he did ( Ioh. 18.5.) when they came to take him, that they
sho^^ have killed another, as did the Madianites, Judge. 7.21. Psalm. 83.9.
But it was the will and pleasure of the Father, that he should begin his
life in misery, as he should end it in ignominy, and he works not by
miracles for the delivery of his Son. For first as yet there was no time for
the manifestation of miracles, for then he might have been thought not to have
been true man. Secondly, it was to fulfill a prophecy, that out of Egypt his
Son might be called, intending herein a proportion between the head and the
members: that as the Israelites were carried out of Egypt, ( Exodus 12.31.) so
also should Christ the head of his Church be. Thirdly, in this was praefigured
the casting away of the Jews, and the calling and carriage of the Gospel among
the Gentiles. Fourthly, that another prophecy might be fulfilled, that for his
sake should the children of Bethlem be slain. Fifthly, that the cruelty of
Herod by this means might be the more disappointed. Sixthly, to give warrant
to us, that in the time of danger and persecution, we may lawfully fly.
Seventhly, that we may not think the cross too base for us, since the Lord of
glory did thus bear it.

Further, it is wonderful to see, that the Lord will have his Son thrust out
of Judah, and from among the Jews, to whom specially he was promised, and whom
principally he should save, and to be entertained in Egypt, a place of all
abominations, and which hated God. But thus did the Lord advance Joseph in
Egypt, ( Genesis 41.40.) when his brethren would have killed him in Israel, and
thus did he provide for Daniel in Babylon, ( Dan. 6.3.) where devils were
worshipped, and advanced him to be the second person in the kingdom. Achis
King of the Philistims (1. Sam. 21.10.) received David when Saul persecuted
him. Eliah when he could not be fed in Israel, (1. King. 17.15.) is cherished
by a poor widow of Sarepta in Sydon an heachenish country. And Jeremy the
Prophet ( Ier. 39.12.) is better entertained by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel,
then by Zedechia the Priest. Thus can the Lord stir up the hearts of the
heathen, to be better to his servants then their own brethren, and that Saul
shall prophecy when he intends to persecute, (1. Sam. 19.24.) to comfort us,
that even our greatest enemies shall nourish us, if we be cast out of our
country for the profession of the Lord Jesus; yea Egypt shall be a resting
place^ for Joseph if the babe be with him, though it be grievous and tedious to
Joseph to want the sacrifices, and to lose the comfort (...) hearing the law of
God expounded. And when Paul can have (...) preaching place at Jerusalem the
City of God, then shall he preach two years without contradiction in Rome,
Act. 28.30. a place of all persecution.

Joseph is hereby assured he shall no^ stay ever, which does somewhat ease and
refresh his anguished soul: for when he considered the journey he was to take
was tedious, the place whither he was to fly barbarous, the tenderness of the
child he must take with him, that he must be absent from the public exercises
of religion, that his dispatch was so sudden, as he had no time to take his
leave of the godly of Jerusalem, no doubt his heart was much astonished, and
his spirits of life much appalled: therefore to comfort him, the Lord bids him
stay till he calls him: implying, that there shall be a time wherein he
shall be delivered. In which we learn, that affliction shall not always last,
and that the rod shall not ever rest upon the back of the godly, but we shall
have beauty for ashes, the oil of gladness for the garment of heaviness,
Psalm. 104.15.
and our captivity shall be like the Summer rivers, and they that go forth
with a little seed shall come home with full sheaues. Here also note, tha^ by
saying: he must not come, but abide there till the Lord do call him, that it
is as much as to have said: Come not of thy self no not upon any exigent or
sheights whatoeuer, though thou be never so villanously entreated: and by
setting down the time of his abode indefinitely, he does it to try his
obedience that he may with patience attend the Lords pleasure. Whereby we
learn, that we must not prefix any set time unto the Lord, how long he shall
exercise us under the cross: Joseph must stay in Egypt til he be called
forth: and let this be Iosphs hope, in Egypt he shall not always be, but he
shall return again to Jerusalem, and the scourge of the ungodly shall not
always claspe about the loins of the righteous.

Now for the fourth circumstance, which is the reason of the commandment.
Learn first, how the Lord releeueth our weakness, and tendreth our
infirmity, that though a bare commandment had been sufficient for Joseph to
have addressed himself for this journey: yet the Lord takes pity upon him,
and will not tempt hm above the measure of his faith, but fully satisfies him,
not only commanding by authority, but even persuading by reason, that he may
obey with the greater cheerfulness: For Herod (says he) goes about to
destroy him. Otherwise did the Lord deal with Abraham, Genesis 22.2. according to
his strong faith, commanding that which flesh and blood most abhors; and
gives no reason of it, namely, to be the butcher to his own son. But
herein shall our condemnation be the more just, because the Lord has given so
many calls, and yielded so many reasons why we should fly from sin, and why
we should turn to him; not for fear of any bodily destruction by the hand of
Herod, but for fear of that spiritual thraldom, wherein Satan labors to
keep our souls, the Lord having discovered unto us early and late that he is
an old and a subtle enemy, armed not only with darts, but even with fiery
darts to sting us unto damnation. Let us therefore with Joseph embrace the
sweet kindness of the Lord, who mildly exhorts us to haste as it were out of
Sodom; and let us with him resolve without any fleshly discourse with our
selves to be gone at the first call; for his word is truth, and the danger he
foretells will follow.

Secondly, herein observe, that the Lord knows the secrets of men's hearts:
for Herod pretended adoring, but intended the murdering of the Lord Jesus. And
his crafty and concealed purpose is here named by the Angel, that we may
fear to deal doubly with our own souls, and may abhor all hypocrisy,
because the Lord casts his eye not only upon our actions, but watches even
over our very thoughts, and will in time discover them to our great shame. This
is it David prays against, Psalm. 32.3. that the Lord would free him from
guile of spirit, not to deceive himself, nor to dissemble his sin: for his
dealing doubly with God and his soul, in that his sin with Barsheba, had so
distempered his conscience, that until he had fully mastered his hypocrisy,
he could find no rest in his bones. Yet such is the simplicity, or rather the
frowardness of our hearts, that though we know all things to be naked and
open before God, we still run on in hiding and cloaking of our sins, which
is as ancient as our first fathers fall; who after the eating of the fruit
forbidden, had his eyes opened indeed: that is, he then by experience
perceived, and by check of conscience saw what evil he came into, and what
good he had lost; being convinced of his own misery, he takes fig-leaues to
cover his shame, a small cover to hide it from the eyes of God. Beside, mark
his sottishness, he covers but his shame, whereas the principal instruments
of his wickedness were his eyes, his ears, and his taste, and these were more
filthy, for the other part actual had not sinned. Now when he heard the voice
of God, the wind carrying to his ear such a voice as he had not heard before,
then he flies among the trees, thinking if fig-leaues would not serve, yet
the shadow of trees would sufficiently hide him; always when the Lord summons
us, seeking shelter, that we may not come to reprehension. And when this voice
of the Lord could not bring him to a confession of his sin, nor pierce his
heart enough, the Lord calls him with his own mouth: Why does^ thou hide thy
self? Mark now his wonderful hypocrisy crept in so soon after his fall.
Adam assigns two causes of the hiding of himself, both false; and omitteth
the true cause, that is his sin: the one, because he heard God speak, which
is most false; for he had heard him speak often before, and that most
comfortably. The second cause, because he was naked: and yet this was no cause,
for it is said in the text, they were both naked and were not ashamed. And by
the malignity of his nature, in this he secretly charge God to be the cause
of his sin, who in his original creation had made him naked, whereas he
himself was the cause of the shame of his nakedness. God goes further with
him: Have thou not eaten of the fruit which I forb^^ thee? Now the Lord names
the sin: and in his answer mark his hypocrisy and guile of spirit worse
then before: The woman (says he) which thou gauest^^e, gave me of the tree,
and I did eat. As if he should say, it was thine own ordinance, so as he
impudently faceth out the matter, and la^es it upon his wife, whereas it was
his own ambition and not her suggestion only that provoked him to the sin:
and in the whole story ye shall not find one word of confession. So the woman
she transfers from her self to the devil the cause of her fall; the Serpent
indeed blew the coals, but the fire was in her own heart, and she would not
confess that she abused her self to be seduced by the Serpent: so as both
of them felt the punishment of their sin, but would not judge of the cause of
it in eating the forbidden fruit. By which examples, as by the naming of Herod's
sin conceived but in heart, and by the traducing forth of Adam for his sin
that brake forth into his hands, we must learn to hedge in our thoughts, that
they harbor not so much as an evil inclination: for sin is of a forward
brood and will soon be hatched, and though as it is Psalm. 50.21. the Lord
hold his peace, that is, forbear with patience for a time, whereby we think
him like our selves, that is as in the Hebrew, a good fellow like our selves,
yet (says the Lord) I will lay thy sin before thee, that is, as it
signifies in the Hebrew, either set them in order before thee like dishes on
the table, or write them in a role and make thee read them in despite.

Thirdly, in that it is said, Herod will seek to destroy him; it shows what
hearts the wicked bear toward the godly, and what purpose they have, but that
it shall be frustrate: for it is said, Herod would kill him, not, he shall
kill him. Thus though we be all sheep appointed to the slaughter in the malice
of the enemy, yet we are not so in the purpose of God. For the Dragon Reu. 12*
4. like a bloody midwife stands ready to devour the child, whereof the
Church should be delivered, but the Lord prospers her in her travel, and
assumeth the child into heaven, that he may be free from the cruelty of the
beast. Whereby we are taught every day to take up our cross: for if we will
live godly in Christ, there is a necessity of persecution, and we must all
suffer, either the sword of Esau, or the frumping of Ismael. Gen* 27.1. Genesis
2^.9. Act. 23.31.
And this may be our comfort, Herod may travel with mischief but he shall
never bring it forth: the Jews may vow and swear the death of Paul, 1. King.
17.5.
but they shall be prevented. Iesabel may make hue and cry after Eliah, but
the Lord himself shall hide him. What? did Herod think God to be an idol, or
to have cast off all care of his Son? he knew by the Prophets that God had
set him up to reign over his people, and yet he vainly thinks that he is able
by his power to disappoint the decree of God: which is the nature of all
Atheists to challenge absolute dominion upon the earth, thinking God to be shut
up in heaven: but he that sits there laugheth them to scorn: for Herod
thought to have had the life of the babe, but the babe had his when the measure
of his sins were fulfilled.

Joseph, learn how willingly he takes up his cross: he might have thought
himself a miserable man to have married such a wife as he might not accompany
with, and the babe which was borne to be the cause of these unseasonable
troubles; for these no doubt were the suggestions of flesh and blood: but he
lays aside consulting with the old man, and fixes his eye upon God, and
casts his care upon the highest, that as he had given the temptation, so he
knew he would likewise give the issue; like Abraham, Genesis 22.8. who answered
his son, saying, God will provide a sacrifice; and like this babe himself,
who afterward in his conflict of death, Mark. 14.36. though most tedious and
grievous to the flesh, did yet submit himself to his fathers will. So as the
obedience of Joseph is here commended by this, that he presently dispatcheth,
not standing reasoning with the Angel, nor waiting for the comfort of the day;
for cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. He knew this babe
was the Lord of glory, and that all the world could not murder him as yet,
because he had a work to do for the King of heaven; yet seeing there is at
this time no other door of escape but flying, he is neither negligent nor
careless, but he accounts all haste too little, and in the night trusseth up
all he had: whereby we may think he was exceeding poor, and makes no delay.
Where we learn, that though we be sure the Lord will defend us, yet if we be
in danger, and the Lord has opened a window for our deliverance, that we use
all possible dispatch. David was sure Saul could not surprise him, because the
Lord had promsed him the kingdom; yet 1. Sam. 24.1. he hides himself in
caves, and flies from one place to another to avoid his fury, because though
he had Gods oath that he should be king, yet he would not tempt God by exposing
himself to danger. So Joseph though he had the babe of life in his hands, yet
flies; which is a matter of no distrust but of singular obedience, because he
is willed so to do.

Osea, chapter 11.1. after he had set down the sins of the Israelites, and had
brought in God threatening them with his judgments, and with this judgment as
the greatest, that he would distinguish the light of Israel by taking away his
son which was their glory, then he is sent from God to comfort them again
after this sort, that although they had been rebellious whom the Lord had
chosen in his covenant, though they had not profited by his corrections, and
though it might agree with the Lords justice to deprive them utterly of his
son, yet forasmuch as Israel is his child, though he has sent his son
into Egypt, that thereby they might consider their own unworthiness, yet for
his mere mercy sake he will bring him forth again, and restore him unto them.
Where we learn first, that though we break our covenant with God, yet he is
faithful that has promised, and will never break his covenant with us; for
his thoughts be not like our thoughts, but he is the same for ever: howbeit if
the Lord do bear us in his arms as he did Ephraim, Osea 11.3. and lead us
with the bands of love, Iam. 1.17.
if he take the yoke from our jaws, and yet we will not acknowledge by whom
we are healed, and in whom we are eased, we shall wander in the desert of our
own lusts, and languish as it were in torment of conscience before the Lord
will unfold the brightness of his Sun, and discover the light of his
countenance unto us. For though Christ shall be called out of Egypt at the
last, yet many sorrows shall run over the hearts of the Israelites before
they shall see him.

Secondly, in this prophecy observe, that there was never any thing showed
should come to Christ which was base, but it was foretold before, that when it
came it might not seem strange, nor men might not be offended at it, as here
is foretol^ his flying into Egypt; and his baseness, that no man would
vouchsafe to look upon him, was foretold by Esaias, chap. 53.2. So was it
foretold, that not many mighty or noble should be called: for as S. Paul says,
1. Cor. 2.8. none of the Princes of the world have known the wisdom of God,
to the end we may not be offended with the base professors of the Gospel, but
may be as S. Paul calls them 1. Cor. 4.10. fools for Christ his sake. So was
it foretold, that in the latter days there should be scarce faith found upon
the earth, as S. Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 4.1. that we may not be discouraged
with the profaneness of the world, but that we may labor to be of the
number of those fools to whom the riches of the Gospel is revealed, and in
the company of those few whose lamps shall be found burning, and whose faith
shall be found grounded upon the persuasion of Gods love in his son.

MATH. chap. 2. verse. 16, 17, 18,






NOW follows the persecution it self; the persuasion of the Angel being
like a flash of lightning before a clap of thunder, wherein the Evangelist
delivers three general points: First, by what occasion Herod was so set on
fire and exasperate to beethinke himself of these murders, namely, because
he thought himself abused. Secondly, the execution of this massacre with the
circumstances; first of the place, it was in Bethlem and the towns adjoining
to it: secondly of the persons, they were children of two years old and under.
Thirdly, the Evangelist notes the fulfilling of a prophecy anciently
foretold, that this coming to pass they might know it was no small matter,
and withal, that the son of God was sent not to reign as a Monarch, but to
be persecuted unto blood.

For the first, Herod thought himself mocked, not that he was so, but only
deemed himself so. Where we learn, that Princes think them selves abused,
and that disparagement is done to the state royal, if men will not be
executioners of their bloody complots, and even sell their souls for the
effecting of their designs. Herod is mocked, because the Wisemen will not
relate the certainty of Christ's birth, that he may murder him: and Saul (1.
Sam. 22.17.) thinks himself contemned, because his footmen would not slay
the Priests of the Lord that had their hand with David.

Secondly, in that he terms it mockery: note that the wicked can father that
upon others whereof themselves are most guilty; for the Wisemen they meant
simply, but that they were interdicted of God, to return to the court: but
Herod he mocked with the Lord: for though he knew that this newborn King was
to be set up, and that he must reign in the hearts of men, yet in despite of
God he though either by policy to circumuent it, or by power to withstand the
ordinance of the Lord, scorning at the Oracles of the Prophets, and complaining
of cousinage, when himself would have cousined the almighty. like unto Fimbria
of Rome, who having dangerously wounded one, the next day entered an action
against the party grieved, because he had received but part of his blade into
his body, and not all. And is it not strange, when Pharaoh shall call Moses
hard hearted, when the Wolf shall accuse the Lamb, the Serpent say the Dove
is too subtle, and Herod exclaim upon the Wise men for mockery, when himself
nourished so foul a vice against the highest? No doubt he was wroth, but not
simply because the Wise men returned not, but for his own sottishness, that
he had not sent some man with them to have seen what had become of the babe.
But thus when Princes make league and band themselves against the Lord, and
contribute toward the affliction of his saints, he insnareth them in their
own inventions, and infatuateth their devises, and destroieth the counsel of
Achitophel, Psalm. 18.26.
2. Sam. 17.14. for as the Psalmist says, With the froward the Lord will deal
frowardly.

For the second point, which is the execution of this butchery, we see, to the
end that if it were possible he might have the blood of the babe among the
multitude, he spares none, and the stories report, in this massacre was killed
his own son; whereupon Augustus the Emperor said in detestation of his
cruelty, that he had rather be Herod's hog then his heir. By which we learn,
that the devil possessing the heart of a tyrant, makes him execute any thing
tending to the maintenance of his state, though the nature of man abhor it,
as the effusion of blood, or though they be checked and amated by their own
hearts: for Herod knew if Christ were borne he must reign, yet against his
own conscience he endeavors by counsel (if he be able) to deceive, or by
cruelty (if he be able) to supplant the decree of God. Thus did Pharaoh, Exodus
8.4. seek to cross the commandment and purpose of the Lord in the delivery
of his servants, though by many immediate testimonies and wonders from heaven
he saw it as it were written on the walls, that the Israelites must depart.
And thus did Saul seek the life of David, though he was told by Samuel, 1.
Sam. 15.28. that the Lord the strength of Israel that could not lie, had rent
the kingdom from him and given it to his neighbor.

Secondly observe hence, that when one way succeeds not to these Atheists,
then they strait attempt another. Pharaoh at the first does but exact further
and greater labor of the Israelites, but after he deals with the Midwiues,
Exodus: 1.15. to kill them that should be borne: and after his malice, breaks
forth more fiercely into an edict or proclamation, verse. 22. that the male
borne should be cast into the river. So Saul confessing that he knew the Lord
would establish the kingdom in the throne of David, yet first he sought to
ensnare him by his daughter, 1. Sam. 18.17. Only (says he) fight thou the
battles of the Lord: and thou shall have my daughter: but after his hypocrisy
is discovered, c. 19.1: making solemn proclamation, Who have I among all my
soldiers that will do thus much for me to kill David? So as he that could
spare Agag would pierce David. So Herod when he saw he was prevented of his
first purpose, by the not returning of the Wise men, he still trauelleth with
the same mischief: and whereas before he sought but the life of the babe
only, now he is so enraged, as he doubleth his cruelty, and will have the
life of many innocent babes: such a fire is sin, to double and increase the
heat by burning: and the deferring of their cursed attempts, which should be
as water to quench them, is as oil to inflame them: this being wrought by the
malice of the devil, who throws in fresh poison into our hearts, that if we
be prevented in our resolution of murdering the Lord Jesus, we will be like
the Dragon, Reu. 12.12.
to send forth whole floods of waters out of our mouths to drown and destroy
his members.

Thirdly observe, that there is no edict or proclamation so cruel or execrable
against Gods Saints, which some wicked men will not execute at their Princes
commandment. If Iesabel would have Naboths vineyard, and cannot obtain it
without his life, 1. King. 21.11. she shall have governors to serve her turn,
that will so one follow her cursed counsel. When no man will fall upon the
Priests at the words of Saul, 1. Sam. 22.17. then will Doeg take the sword and
do it: and Herod here can no sooner mention a murder, but his servants will
execute it. Where further consider, that if hell be prepared for the commander,
so is it likewise for the executioner, though his act be warranted by
authority. Is it in the power of the Prince to bring in a religion against God,
or may they do what they will? God forbid. If the Prince should command me to
burn the Bible, I ought not to do it; for a thing is not of God because she
commands it, but because it is of God therefore ought she to command it.
Cambises king of Persia inflamed with incest, consulteth with his Wisemen
whether he may lawfully mary his sister: they answer, they find no such law to
warrant it; but they find another law, that the King of Persia is without all
law. And thus do Princes counselors feed them in their humors, nodding at
whatsoever Augustus will have done. And even so miserable are these times, that
men do wait at their Princes mouths, and perform their decrees, not scanning
whether they be grounded upon the law of God, which ought to be the rule
whereat Princes should level their commandments, and by which subjects should
square their obedience. For it is not enough to slay Amnon (2. Sam. 13.29.) at
Absoloms commandment: neither shall Rabshaketh excuse himself ( Esaias 36.16.)
for railing on the living God, though he had the warrant of the King of Ashur
to do it; but in these and such like sins they hazard and adventure their
own souls: therefore let every of us keep the ground that Balaam at first
stood upon, Numb. 24.13. not for a house full of gold to pass the commandent
of the Lord; yet I do not say rebel, but obey not. Let Saul himself fall
upon the Priests if he will have them slain, and let not us assist him. Let
Iesabel her self sit in judgment upon Naboth, but let not us condemn him: we
are bound to do good to the saints of God, much less to persecute them. And it
is said in the Gospel, he that clotheth a poor prisoner, Mat. 35.36.
clotheth the Lord Jesus. Now what shall we say then of him that stands up
like Tertullus against Paul, Act. 24.5. to plead against him, and to reproach
him with the name of a pestilent and seditious fellow? For if they shall be
condemned that have not ministered to the necessity of the saints, Luke 16.25.
but have been ashamed of their bands: If Dives shall hang in hell for not
refreshing Lazarus at his gate, what shall become of them that take the bread
from Lazarus, and put Paul into bands, or else enforce crimes against him to
retain him in bands? Look Judge. 5.23. Cursed be Meroz, because they helped
not the Lord, nor stood in defense of his truth. A double curse then shall
light upon them that oppose themselves against the truth. Obediah against the
express edict of Iezabel, (1. King. 18.4.) hides the Prophets, and Rahab (
Josh. 2.3.) ventureth her life to preserve the spies. Exodus 17.12. Psalm. 106 23.
And what better spies can there be then Preachers, which stand in the gap
between God and us, as did Moses: which watch over the souls of the people,
and show us the way to heaven? Jonathan being often incited by his father to
kill David, (1. Sam. 20.2.) protests David's innocence, though Saul persuaded
him that David's glory could not be without Ionathans ruin, and would not be
drawn to do it. And if he would not compass such a mischief at the
commandment of Saul, which had a threefold force in it: first, as proceeding
from his Father: secondly, from his Sovereign: thirdly, being joined with the
temptation of a kingdom: much Iesse ought we to gratify the State with the
affliction of Gods Saints: for we must rather ( Act. 4.19.) obey God then man;
yet disobey not the Prince: for his commandment stands on these two feet,
either to do the thing, or to sustain the punishment for not doing it.

Fourthly observe, that as soon as Christ is borne there is trouble and
commotion, civil and foreign wars, yet is not Christ the cause of it, but the
wickedness and perverseness of Herod's heart: for righteousness must not
yield to iniquity, and Christ must be borne, and being borne must reign;
though the devil rage, and the world swell never so much. Certain it is, no
Gospel teaches so much peace as this of Christ's: for it teaches peace
between God and man, between man and man, yea between man and his inward
soul, and makes the wolves to become lambs, and the Lion to lodge with the
Bear. But Herod would have the Gospel abolished, and Christ murdered, which
cannot be. Shall Dagon (1. Sam. 5.3.) yield to the Arc, or the Arc to Dagon?
Shall the ten Tubes go to Judah, or Judah to them? Ishbosheth to David, (2. Sam.
2.16.) or David to him? Herod loves not Christ, therefore he murders the
children, and David especially being king, must not yield to Saul: house, nor
Judah go to the ten tribes, nor Christ give place (...) Herod: but if his
Crown cannot stand with the government of Christ, well may he harbor murder
in his thought against him, but judgment shall fall on his own head: for God
will wate^ over his own son, and fight for his own truth. So as whe^^
religion has been granted by Parliament, and suppressed by private
commandment, there may the subjects stand on the part defensive to ward the
blow, being smitten: but if it has not been established by public authority,
then may they not take up arms to set it up.

Out of the murder it self gather, that though there be many flaine, yet
Christ escapes: and that in the greatest persecution, yet Christ's religion
shall never be abolished. For here is great bloodshed, yet Christ lives;
great persecution, yet the Gospel flourishes. When Iezabel thought she had
had her hands full of blood, and that she had rooted out all the Lords
Prophets, you and when visibly there was no face at all to be seen, so as
Eli^^ thought himself only to be left, then the Lord (1. King. 19.18.)
reserved seven thousand to himself, that had not bowed the^^ knees to Baal.
And when by scattering the sheep and smiti^^ the shepherd, the devil thought
himself flush, and that (...) Christ sleep in the earth, he had utterly stung
him to destruction, then was his resurrection most glorious, and then did the
Churches of God increase daily. For such is the nature of the Gospel, that the
more it is trodden down, the higher it rises; the more it is maligned, the
broader it spreads; and wh^^^ seems to be dead, then is there most life in
it.

Jeremy ( chap. 13.15.) to declare the greatness of Gods mercy in the delivery
of the Jews, shows them, that they were like to the Be^^^mites or
Israelites, that is, utterly destroyed and carried away, insomuch, that if Rahel
the mother of Benjamin, could have ri^^^ again to seek for her children, she
might have wept (...) want of them, but she should have found none remaining.
Th^^ does the holy Ghost bring in here as a butchery foretold, (...) the end
that none might either wonder or be offended at it: for it might have been
said: Is this the consolation of Israel? nay, he is the discomfort and
destruction of Israel, his birth having kindled such a fire as never was the
like before, leaving so many sad hearts for their lost children. And how may we
hope he shall be our Savior, when his beginning is with this blood? And the
more to increase the cruelty of it, the holy Ghost speaks excessiuely,
bringing in Rachel dead many years before, howling and wringing her hands at
the rufull spectacle of this bloody tragedy, as if the calamity of the living,
might seem to touch and affect the dead. That therefore this might not seem
strange, the spirit of the Lord recorded it long before, that when it came to
pass they might digest it, as a thing foreseen in the wisdom of God
necessary to fall out.

MATH. chap. 2. verse. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.










NOW follows the return of Jesus out of Egypt, after the cruelty executed by
Herod upon the children, and the judgment of God manifested on Herod, striking
him with death. (...) which words there be four general points to be
considered; first, the commandment of the Lord by the message of an Angel
unto Joseph, as the foster-fathe^ of this babe, whereby he is advertised to
return, having security given him that he need not doubt, namely that Herod
and the rest were dead which sought the life of Christ. Secondly, the obedience
of Joseph, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left; but as he staid
till he was called, so he stayed not when he was called. Thirdly, in what
fear Joseph stood, finding suc^ troubles in Iudaea, and into what perturbation
of mind he^^ cast when he heard that Archilaus reigned, knowing him to be
Cockatrice, hatched out of a Serpents egg, and how the L^sent an Angel to
relieve him in this perplexity. Fourthly, (...) Joseph minding no such matter
by his turning into Galile, th^^ is an ancient Oracle fulfilled, that this babe
should be call^^ Nazarit.

Out of the first learn the faithfulness of Gods pro^^^ that he is a God of
his word: for in this is his first prom^^^ complished, as appears now by the
effect, that he wou^^ his son out of Egypt, and that the same Angel that
br^^^ the heavy tidings unto Joseph of his flight from Bethle^^ Egypt, the same
Angel brings him this glad tidings of (...) turn from thence into the land of
Israel. And thus m^^^ consider of all the promises of God; as of his couenan^
Noah, Genes. 9.11. that the world shall no more be dro^^ his promise to
Israel, that they shall be his chosen: for ho^ ever the Lord withdrawes his
favor from his saints for a^^ yet at the last he will release them, and in
compassion will (...) upon their afflictions. And well may the mountains fall,
the course of nature change, but Gods promise shall (...) fail: 1. These. 5.24.
for as David says, Psalm 32. though their ^^lations be many, yet the Lord
will deliver them out of And though this pregnant security of returning be not
expressly given to every prisoner as it was here to Joseph, yet all that fear
God have this to comfort them, that he has given his word he will make them
blessed ( Mat. 5.4.) and that as he has drawn them to the profession of his
name, so he will never leave them till he have brought them to the possession
of his glory: and that whether they die in Egypt under the furnace of
affliction, or come forth of Egypt, all shall work for their salvation. And
this his wisdom has not only disposed of the general end which is his
glory, but of the means also how he will bring every one of us to his
kingdom. And though it be through the rivers of waters, what skilleth it if
we have the crown at last? Job. 5.18.
The same hand that wounds shall bind up the wound again, and the same hand
that smites shall heal, and the same God that laid us before in the ashes
shall give us oil to make our faces cheerful, Psalm. 104.15. Act. 12.8.
and by a warrant from heaven discharge Peter of his chains, when in the eye of
his enemies he stands condemned, and make Joseph return out of that barbarous
nation Egypt wherein God was so much dishonored, to exercise himself in the
service of God in Galile. And though we have no certain promise of this, yet
let us be affected like David, who wandering (2. Sam. 15.25.) through the
mountains in great di^^^esse, his grief being increased because he was
banished by his own son, and supplanted by the subtilty of Achitophel his
^hiefe counselor, when he saw he could not have the Arc with ^im, bids it
should be carried again into Jerusalem, saying, If I ^aue found favor in Gods
sight he will bring me thither again, but if he have no delight in me, let
him do as seems best to ^im: for either in the time of our trouble we shall
be gathered to God in peace, Psalm. 56.13.
or else he will let us see his goodness in the light of the living.

Now the cause why it is safe for Joseph to return, is, because Herod is dead:
where we learn to our comfort, that tyrants shall ^ot live ever, and when they
perish and fall away, then is the Church delivered and comforted; for this
death of his was no doubt as cheerful to Anna and Simeon at Jerusalem, as to
Joseph and Mary in Egypt; and Rachel that before was brought in weeping over
the innocent blood of the poor children, as if the grave had felt such
barbarous and beastly cruelty, may now be thought to break forth into
exceeding joy, that such a rakehell was taken away as Herod was, that sought
the life of Christ. How we ought to be affected at the fall of the wicked,
appears Psalm. 52. where although Doeg had got great authority with Saul so
as he boasted in his power, and trusted in the strength of his malice, his
tongue being as the sharp razor always cutting, or as the coals of juniper,
always raising contention against the Saints, yet the Lord shall destroy him:
and though he thought to have built his neast in the heavens, yet shall the
Lord cast him down, and the righteous (says he) shall see it and rejoice,
(the wicked being blind, never beholding the judgment of God) and they shall
laugh, not in revenge, but to see God mercy in taking part with the godly. And
not only the righteous shall joy at this, but as Job. 20, 26. says, The
tongue of the ^^per shall slay them, that is, the very wicked shall curse them:
(...) Princes that want religion soon slip into tyranny, and want^^^
conscience to moderate their desires, and affection to look upon their
subjects, they will soon resemble Rehoboam, 1. King^ 12.10. in making the
yoke heavy, and correcting them (...) Scorpions.

Further from hence learn, that God does often so disappoint the plots and
purposes of cruel tyrants, that when they intend to execute others, they die
first themselves, and sometime Haman ( Ester 7.10.) is hanged on his own
gallows th^^ he prepared for Mordecai. Herod had thought to have kill^^
Christ, but he is feign to take the pains to die himself. If M^ses come any
more into Pharaohs sight he shall surely die, Ex^^ 10.28. Well, Moses will see
his face no more, but he shall be hold his destruction ( Exodus 14.28.) in the
red sea. How often (...) Saul think and how sore did he thirst for the life of
David, (...) he misseth of his purpose, and slaieth himself (1. Sam. 31.4.)
(...) make way for David to the kingdom. And such shall be the ^^cesse of all
that conspire against the Lord and his Christ, to fall (...) to the pit which
themselves have dug, and to make the w^^ked a ransom for the godly.

For the manner of Herod's death, though it be silenced by the Evangelist, yet
the Ecclesiastical stories make mention of it, as Josephus and Eusebius, which
though it command not the conscience to believe, yet the more to magnify the
Lord, it is not unfit to consider it. He had a great swelling in his legs,
wonderful rottenness in his whole flesh, his breath did so stink as he
could not be accompanied with, he had such a disease in his parts of shame, as
worms did crawle about them, he was greedy of meat, having the appetite of a
dog not to be satisfied: his whole race was accursed after him, and having
eight children, within an hundred years there was not any of their loins
lest. Archilaus here spoken of was banished to Vienna, and there died a
beggar. Antypas that beheaded John Baptist, and whom Christ called Fox Luke
13.32. was banished to Lions in France, and there died a most miserable abject.
Agrippa the son of Aristobulus the son of this Herod, an insolent and proud
man, was eaten up with lice most shamefully, Act. 12.23. The son of this
Agrippa that would have put Peter to death, living till the destruction of
Jerusalem, there had his end. Thus did the wrath of God rest upon the family
of this cruel persecutor of Gods Church, who was blasted in himself and his
posterity. And thus did the Lord (1. Kings 14.10.) sweep away the house of
Jeroboam as a man sweepeth away dung, till it be all gone: and (1. King.
21.21.) did cut off the posterity of Ahab, for their prouocations wherewith
they had provoked him; to teach us to fear and tremble before his face: and if
we will be blessed in our selves and in the fruit of our body, to look unto
our paths, that we lay not our hands to wickedness.

Note further, that we are not to fear what Princes can do unto us, for they
live no longer then they have some service to do for Gods glory, as it is
said Col. 1.16. All things are in Christ and for Christ. And Saul could not (
Acts 9.1.) breath out threatenings against the Church of God, had not the Lord
some special purpose in it, either for the exercising of his Saints, or the
waiting for his own repentance. Neither could Pharaoh so long ^^ie his rod
upon the Israelites, were it not (as S. Paul says, Romans 9.17.) that the Lord
stirred him up to show his power in him. For now when Herod had executed the
children, whereby God is glorified in their innocent death, and his own malice
fully manifested, then he dies himself: which may teach us patience against
the time of trouble, knowing that the wicked are but as the weapons of the
Lord, to set an edge on our affection^, which otherwise would creep upon the
earth, and make us forget our maker; whereas by this means we often times cast
our (...) on our deliverer which is in heaven.

Further learn, that though tyrants appoint us as sheep to the slaughter, and
in the malice of their hearts do purpose to fleece us, yet sometime the
butcher wants his knife, and the sheep in the shambles do escape; therefore
we need not to be afraid of them that have not so much power as to kill the
body, unless the Lord give us up into their hands, as David says, Psalm.
7.12. speaking of the wicked, he has bent his bow and spread his net, and
has conceived mischief, but shall bring forth vanity, and the evil
intended shall fall upon his own hairy scalpe. For the devil that is stronger
then man, yea that a^meth the malice of men, cannot stretch forth his hand
upon the goods of Job, Job. 1.12. much less touch his body, without the
permission of the Almighty. Herod shall die and Christ shall escape, if not,
the worst that flesh and blood can do, is but (...) send us with the children
of Bethlem into heaven: for the Lord is our shield, and we are as near and
dear unto him as the apple of his eye, yea he is our secret place, and under
his shadow we can not but be safe.

For the second point, containing the obedience of Iosep^ by his example we
learn not to run before Gods promises, but patiently to wait upon them: for
as he is always a sure deliverer of his people, so then especially when his
mouth ha^^ spoken it: and upon this Joseph relied, not stirring till he was
called. Moses was sure to bring the people of Israel out of Egypt Exodus 3.10.
yet he must stay for it forty years, as if the Lord had forgotten to what
purpose he had appointed him. Noab, (...) the Lords commandment enters into
the Arc, and comme^^ not forth till by the same commandment ( Genesis 8.16.) he
(...) called forth, though by the not returning of the Dove he kn^^ the waters
were abated from the earth. David was sure to be king after Saul, yet he waited
so long, as in his haste he said: Psalm. 116.11.
All men are liers, thinking that Samuel had abused him, to tell him he should
be King; which we must beware of: for the cause why the Lord staieth many
times, is, because his servants cry not out unto him, nor press him with
importunity, as ( Luke 18.5.) the widow did the Judge: or for that our cursed
hears will not come down, so as he is feign to use the wicked as rods to
chastise and humble us.

Here also learn, that as Christ comes out of Egypt, so the Lord draws
the Gospel out of the fire, and gives it some Sunshine out of the darkest
persecution, yea and that as it is said, Act. 12.24. in the time of the most
ambitious and Lordly tyrants, it shall grow and multiply exceedingly: for so it
has pleased God, that the hotest persecutors (as was S. Paul) have embraced
it, and that kings have submitted their scepters to the foolishness of
preaching. Which notes unto us, that the ignominy that lights upon the
cross, is not nor ought to be any occasion to dissuade us from it: for the
proceeding of Christ's kingdom is above nature, and the persuading to it is
cleave contrary to the custom of the world. For says Cyrus, if a
Lacedaemonian will serve me, if he be a footman, I will make him an
horseman; if a horseman, I will give him a Chariot; if he have a Chariot, I
will give him a Castle; if a Castle, a City; and he shall receive his gold not
by tale, but by wait. But now in the grows and age of a Christian it fares
otherwise: for this is the condition of the Lords followers: to be betrayed of
their own fathers, and to be entangled with sundry afflictions, to be
banished into Egypt, and if thou be called back again, yet never to have
but a step between thee and death, as David says, 1. Sam. 20.3. But for all
this, we may not be dismayed, for in all these we shall be more then
conquerours through Christ.

The third point is, in what state Joseph found all things in Indaea; not
quiet, but still troublesome: where we see how God exercises the faith and
patience of this his servant, showing herein as in a glass, the state and
condition of the godly, how one trouble succeeds another, as if they were
thorns folded one within the other. Joseph long expected his delivery out of
Egypt, and now in his return he is as much grieved at the reign of Archilaus,
as he was comforted at the death of Herod; which the Lord does not to press
him down, but to give him the greater occasion to praise his name in the
experience of his many deliverances. Job 5.19.
As Job says: Out of six troubles the Lord will free me, and the seventh shall
never come near me. And this is the use. which all Gods children ought to make
of the variety of their dangers, the more to strengthen and confirm their
hope, that Gods hands shall ever be stretched forth to send them deliverance
from his tabernacle, as they were to David, Psalm. 32.6. and as they be in this
place to Joseph, who riddeth him likewise out of this second fear.

Here also we learn, not to be negligent and secure, when the Lord has taken
away one enemy of his Church, (for though the principal Doeg be gone, that
through flattery abused Saul) and that none is like to succeed him that shall
have such grace with the king; yet still to keep us awake, after Herod's death
comes Archilaus, that bears the same heart and the same affection that Herod
did, though he has not the same power, and though this be some comfort, that
he shall never be crowned. And thus did the Lord subject his people still
under the hand of some succeeding Pharaoh, that they might cast up their hearts
to him, and bewail their wants, and power forth their souls unto the
Almighty. And thus shall the forest never be without some Bore or other that
would destroy the vine: but if we be rooted into Christ, and may bear him
about us as Joseph did, he will teach us to watch, or at least if we sleep he
will awake us, as he did his drowsy disciples ( Mat. 26.40.) when danger was
at hand.

For the fourth point: how in this perplexed fear an Angel was sent unto him:
we learn first, wholly to depend on Gods providence, seeing that in the
several extremities of Joseph, the Lord sent him several comforts. For first
in the suspicion and jealousy of his wife, an Angel was dispatched from the
heavenly palace to resolve him: then the same messenger warned him of the
imminent persecution, and now releeueth him in his distress. And thus will the
Lord deal with all his servants that walk aright, if they be not either too
forward through hope, or too backward through fear.

Secondly, as this was one cause of Joseph's turning into Galiley, namely, to be
succored in his fear, so in this the Lord had another end unknown to Joseph,
which was the fulfilling of a prophecy: that his son should be called a
Nazarite, that is, one set apart unto the Lord by special sanctification of
nature, which was praefigured by Sampson and others under the Law. Where we
learn, how the Lord executes his will both by his servants and his enemies,
when as they mean nothing less then to do it. Thus did not David's father
know when he set his son to keep sheep, that he should fight with a Lion,
1. Sam. 17.34. nor Saul's father know or once dream, that his son should be
anointed king, when he sent him to seek his Asses, 1. Sam. 9.16. nor Mary when
she went to Bethlem to be tasked, that therein the Prophecy of Michah should
be fulfilled: that out of Bethlem should come the governor of Israel: Michah.
5.2.
nor Herod in the cruel massacre, little thought of performing Ieremiahs
prophecy, A voice of lamentation, Rachel weeping for her children: Ier. 31.15.
nor the chief Priests, when with the 30. pieces of silver, which Judas
brought, they bought a potters field, never dreamed of the prophecy of
Zachariah, ( chap. 11.13.) that for so much should Christ be valued, and
therewith should such a field be brought. But such strength has the Lord, and
such power over the hearts of men, as he can secretly move them to be
executioners of that himself has appointed shall come to pass.

MATH. chap. 3. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4,








NOW the Evangelist goes forward, and passes from the infancy of Christ unto
his manifestation to the world, when he was to be invested into the office of
his Priesthood, before whom as before a mighty Monarch, was to go a harbinger
to the up lodging for his Lord in the hearts and consciences of men, which was
this Io^^ Baptist.

In the words consider, first, the time when this fore runne^ did preach, which
being by this Evangelist set down indefinitely, is precisely declared by Saint
Luke, chap. 3.1. Secondly, the place where he exercised his ministry, in the
wilderness. Thirdly, the sum and effect of his Sermons: Repent and change
your minds, and amend your lives, for the great King that shall open the door
of salvation unto all, is now at hand Fourthly, by what commission he was
warranted and authorized to do this, namely, by Esaias, chap. 40.3. who had
prophesied this long before. Fifthly, is described the wonderful preciseness
and strictness of his life, by his garments and diet, when by all the people
cast their eyes upon him, admiring his austeritie.

For the first circumstance, which is the time, we must not understand an
immediate successiuenesse, that John began to preach as soon as Christ was
brought to Nazareth, but that it was while Christ lived there, which was some
25. years after: for this John was stirred up, that he as the day star
might go before the Son of righteousness. Saint Luke sets it down to be
in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, and Christ was borne in the fifteenth year
of Augustus: so as Christ was about thirty years of age when he began to
preach. Out of which learn generally, that we must be satisfied, and rest in
so much as is revealed: so as we are not curiously to enquire what Christ did
while he lived a private man in Nazareth: for since the holy Ghost has not
disclosed it, we must be wise according to sobriety, Romans 11.3.
as Saint Paul speaks, and not seek to learn where the Lord has not
taught, or to open where he has shut. Only Saint Luke ( chap. 2.46.) reports,
that about twelve years of age, he disputed with the Doctors in the temple and
confounded them, and astonished such as heard him. And this is enough to comfort
us, that so much is recorded of him, as has ransomed us from the indignation
of his Father.

Secondly, in that it is said: John came and preached, note, that the first
ministry of the new Testament was a preaching ministry: so as whether we
speak of men sent mediatly or immediately; from God alone, or from God by men,
we shall never find any ministry commanded or practiced, nor any messenger
sent, that was not qualified with gifts and graces from above to divide the
word: and this is impregnable not to be resisted, that no man ordinarily can
hope or look for the power of salvation without preaching: which is evident (
Romans 10.17.) Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word preached; and
this preaching cannot be (as some would have it) bare reading: as appears 2.
Tim. 4.2. Preach the word, be instant, improve, rebuke, exhort: which imports
some further matter then literal reading. Besides, if reading should be
preaching, and sufficient to beget faith, then has not the Lord forsaken the
Jews nor the Turks, but they remain still the Church of God: for they have
the Bible and do read it, howbeit none will say, but these are out of the
Church. Again, when Esaias and the rest of the Prophets cried out against blind
guides, did they mean they could not read? And Paul when he says: Woe t^ me
if I preach not the Gospel: 1. Cor. 9.16.
does he mean, that this woe shall light upon him if he read not? No: for
there be many weak Christians that must be fed with milk, others with strong
meat: but the word read is of the same sound to all, and as bread set before
the hungry, but they want strength in their teeth to break it: for it is
fruitless to read if we understand not; and the Eunuch ( Act. 8.31.) could
liberally and religiously confess he could not do it without a guide:
whereupon, as the text says, ( verse. 35.) Philip preached unto him Jesus. So
as it is a most determinate truth, that there is no man lawfully and rightly
called to the ministry, that is not enabled with the grace of preaching and
expounding the Scripture: and every place must labor to recover if they have
lost, or to obtain if they want, such a man as may go before them in this
wilderness both in life and doctrine, and divide the word aright unto them,
that they may be able to spy out the armor of their adversary, Heb. 4.12.
and to prevent his assaults: not but that the Lord extraordinarily may save by
bare reading, yea and without reading, for he can knock when he list, and
open when he list; he can make corn to grow without sowing, as he did in
Hezechtahs time, 2. King. 19.29.

For the second circumstance, which is the place where he preached, namely, in
the wilderness, we learn, that where the holy Ghost places a man, there he
is to abide and to content himself, not excepting against the rudeness of the
people, as to be too gross and base for their excellencies to instruct, or
against the place, as to be too private or too unwholesome, and that their
Pulpit must only stand at Jerusalem, and their anditorie must be great men.
John Baptist we see how he was content to exercise his message in a most
solitary place, the Wilderness: for this was by the assignation and
appointment of the Lord. True it is, Jerusalem had been more fit for state and
celebritie, and this might have seemed more plausible to John, as a means
whereby he might sooner have been more famous: but because the Lord had tied
him to this place, he obediently keeps it. Much more are they then to be
reprehended, that purchase livings like farms, one for Summer another for
Winter; and not content with this, put over their people to milchlesse nurses,
(which as the Pope says) is like a harlot that puts forth her child, that she
may the sooner return to her lust. Howbeit, by the wilderness he must not
understand a place not to be inhabited, but only a place not so well
frequented as the fruitful valleis of Iudaea.

Here the Jesuits, because (wilderness) in the Greek is (...), note John
Baptist to be the father of the Hermites, men whom they feign to be devoted to
religion, to be familiar with the Gods, and to have the contemplation of
heavenly things, having their souls freed from passions, and their bodies
humbled in divine service. To which we answer: First, if John preached in a
wilderness, and in a bare solitary place, as they imagine, how is it that
their hermitages are built near great cities? Secondly, the calling of John
was extraordinary, being immediate from God, and his office extraordinary,
being to denounce the coming of Christ. Admit he were an Hermit, yet when he
had run his race, his office did cease. Thirdly, of all lives, there is none so
contrary to the society of man, and to the communion of Saints, as this of
Hermites: for first God in Adams integrity, saw ( Genesis 2.22.) he could not be
without a companion: much less can we now. And to this is answerable that of
the Preacher: Woe to him that is alone: Eccles. 4.10.
and amongst the Philosophers, he that abandoned company, was esteemed either a
god or a beast. Secondly, if any be qualified and beautified with any special
good grace and virtue, then ought he to supply the wants of others; and being
such a candle as they would have him, he ought not to be hid under a bushel:
and if there be defect in him, then ought his want to be supplied by the
fullness of others. Thirdly, if neither he need others, nor others want him,
which cannot be in this life; yet if there were nothing else then the beholding
of the beauty of the house of God, and the comfort of the participation of the
Sacraments: Psalm. 84.3.
as David says; and wished rather to be a sparrow that built her nest in the
temple, then to be banished from the congregation of the Saints, saying, (
Psalm. 42.1.) That as the Heart braied for water, so did he for the contemplation
of the Arc wherein the Lord did sit. This were sufficiently forcible to
dissuade from this unsociable life: besides, that John lived not always here,
but stayed till he was called to the Court of Herod, where he lost his head for
his boldness, Mat. 14.10.

Repent and change your minds: Secondly, the reason persuading to embrace this
exhortation: For the Kingdom of heaven is a hand. For the first, the word
Repent, it signifies an alteration both of judgment and of affection, not
only by a displeasance with ones self, and a check of conscience for the
evil he commits, which cannot be stayed, no more then the panting of the
heart, or the bearing of the pulse, but also an utter loathing and detestation
of all manner of sin: so as all repentance though it be proper to the mind,
and the fountain of it be in the heart, yet it is both inward and outward: the
visible show of amendment being a declaration of the invisible thought of
sorrow: for a thorn cannot grow upon a figge-leafe: and if any man will judge
of his repentance, let him manifest the fruits of it. What can a cursed mouth
show, but that the heart is virule^^ and full of poison? or garish attire, but
that the mind is not humbled? for where there is no reformation of action,
there is no alteration of affection. Secondly, repentance is noted to be either
general for all men, for all sins, for all times: or special, for some men,
for some sins, and for some times. For special^ men: that every man repent
him according to his disposition and place, as Saint John shows, Luke. 3.11.
exhorting the rich men, if they have two coats to give one to the poor, the
customers to require but their due, the soldiers to be counte^ with their
wages. For as every man has a several calling so has he special sins
attending and waiting on his call^^^ which must be repented of. Now for our
infirmities wh^^ hourly break forth of us, general repentance is required:
but if we be stained with any peculiar sin, that must have a repentance by it
self. ( David Psalm. 32.3.) cannot be healed of his adultery by a general
confession, but he must peculiarly task his soul for that sin: and so much
Paul expresses, 2. Cor. 12.21. I fear (says he) lest when I come I shall
bewail many of them which have sinned, and have not repented of the
uncleanness, fornication and wantonness which they have committed: for, for
such sins it is not sufficient to find a remorse of conscience, but for
adultery, profaning of the Sabbath, oppression of the poor, and such like,
he must have a special humiliation; and may not think to obtain the comfort
of Gods countenance by blurting out a short prayer, that passes out of the
mouth like gunshot, as, Lord I have sinned; which though the words be good,
avails not, because the heart is naught, fraught with hypocrisy.

Such then as will be true repentants, must be of the number of them Christ
speaks of Mat. 11.28. that are inwardly weary of the burden of sin; which
excludes three sorts of people: first, such as be not weary of their own
righteousness, but desire to apply the plaster of their own works to cure
their wound: secondly, such as be not weary of the pleasure of this life,
which profane-sensuall men will never be, such as Paul speaks of Philip.
3.19. that make their belly their God, and with Esan, Genesis 25.30. will for a
mess of pottage sell their birthright: thirdly, such as be only cast down
with some hard exigents in the world, for many be weary of the world that are
not weary of themselves, or of themselves that are not weary of their sins,
wishing to be delivered from the burden of their distress, but not with Paul,
Phil. 3. from the body of sin, Romans 7.2^.
for none of these sorts can thrive in the course of repentance, but such only
as be ^amed from their natural rebellions by the afflictions of this life,
that have their spirits broken to dust, and even brought to confusion, that
will confess no good thing dwells in their flesh, but are cast as it were
into a burning fever of desperation, and do feel in a manner hell in their
souls; such will the Lord ^^^fort, such does he call and enable to repent. For
to whom is the commission given ( Esaias 61.1.2) to preach good tidings, but to
the poor; deliverance, but to the captives? so as he opens no prison except
thou confess thy self to be chained in the irons of Satan; neither can
thou repent except thou think thou have been a runnagate from the Lord Jesus:
and what need he to give thee the water of life except thou feel a drowth in
thy soul like the drowth of Summer? True it is, the Lord comforts none but the
abject, seeks none but the lost, makes wise none but fools, iustifies none
but sinners; so as unless we find these wants in our selves, the Gospel was
never preached to our comfort, and this exhortation is vainly delivered, that
we should repent. Howbeit since repentance and weariness is of such necessity
for Christians, we must enter into a threefold examination of our selves:
first, of the knowledge of our sins: secondly, of the sorrow for our sins:
thirdly, of the amendment of our sins. First, for the knowing of thy sin,
thou must not examine it according to the law of thine own heart, that will
glory in hanging up the Lord Jesus, and in getting letters to Damasc^s Acts
9.2. to persecute the Church of God: for thine heart will make things lawful
by thy abuse unlawful, and things unlawful by the flattering of thy self in
too much liberty lawful: but it must be done according to the commandment of
God, raising up his tribunal in thy soul, and setting before thee the curse
that rests on thee for thy sin. Neither must this be a general
acknowledgement, that thou art sinful, but thou must walk in the steps of
David, in the bitterness of the soul to say, O Lord they are so many as they
run over my head, and so hea^y as they press me down: and in the 2: Sam.
24.10. I have not only sinned in numbering the people, but sinned exceedingly;
O Lord take away the trespass of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly:
so as for particular sins thou must keep the circumstance of time and place,
and aggrauate the degrees of it (...) thy soul. And because thou art not able
to remember the whol^ catalogue of thy sins, and perhaps flatterest thy self
in some (...) as Naaman did, 2. King. 5.18. who protested he would serve the
Lord, and yet bowed himself in the house of Rimmon: thou must crave pardon for
thy secret sins, and those which thou ha^^ passed over as no sins, and never
rest thinking of them till they have forced thee to Christ, which is ever
accompanied with a persuasion that the sin is pardonable, which is no small
comfort. Then when thou art come to a sight of thy sin, the second point is
sorrow for thy sin, such as is expressed Zach. 12.10. as that when we
consider how we have pierced God with our sins, and that even my sins were
the nails that fastened Christ to the Cross, we must weep and cry as one
mourns for his only son and first borne, and there must be such a
compunction of the spirit, as to cry with the hearers of Peter, Act. 2.37.
What shall we do! and with David, Psalm. 6.6. to wash our bed with tears; and
so to mourn as if we heard the Lord summoning us to judgment: for our sins
are not lighter then David's, that our sorrow should be less then his. And when
we have attained to this, to be pierced to the soul with sorrow, not for any
discomforts in this life, but for that we have offended God, and have exercised
our selves in this, not as in a pang that shall perplex us for the time, but
that we have daily ripped and laid our hearts naked before the Lord: then
from hence springs forth the third fruit, amendment of our sins, and
repentance for them, which stands in two parts: first, in the forsaking of
the old sin secondly, in inclining to the contrary virtue; for the repentance
of an vlurer is not restitution only, but with Zaccheus Luke 19.8. to restore,
and to be merciful to the poor, as before he was unmerciful: for drunkards
not only to leave the combat of their cups, but to forsake that company, and
to observe all kind of abstinence, whereby he may be more fit for his calling,
and in judgment to condemn it, and in affection to abhor it both in himself
and others: so as briefly, to repent, is not to be as thou have been, but to be
in Christian duties that thou have not been.

For the second point, which is the reason of the exhortation: by the word
Kingdom of heaven, understand the manifestation of the Messiah, which as a
^^ately monarch shall rule in the hearts of men, such as shall be gathered by
the Gospel with a wonderful spiritual majesty by his word and graces, first
leading them by the Gospel to have their conversation in heaven while they
live here: whereupon gather there is a double kingdom: first of
administratory providence, which is that whereby the Lord rules over all, even
the devils: secondly, of royal pre-eminence in his church, which is threefold:
first, in their beginning by imperfect sanctification, when men translated and
drawn from the power of sin are brought to the obedience of the Lord Jesus:
the second confirmed by perfect sanctification in the souls of the saints
already departed: the third fully to be accomplished when we shall be crowned
of the Lord both in soul and body with perfect and perpetual glory, when God
shall reign in his Son, his Son in his Church, and his Church triumph in
them both for ever. Now this spiritual majesty of Christ, settling and
inthronizing himself in the hearts of men, is far more magnificent then any
earthly throne, prescribing us laws, within which we are to bound our selves;
for in a kingdom there are four things requisite: first, a King to govern:
secondly, subjects to obey: thirdly, laws to keep in awe: fourthly, authority
to execute them. Now in this kingdom of light, Christ is the King, the
faithful be the subjects, the word of God the laws, the power of the spirit
the authority to execute them: so that if by our subjection to the word the
little flock of Christ be increased, the works of the devil be destroyed,
the enemies of God be subverted, and sin be subdued in the strength thereof,
then (...) being gathered into this first kingdom, which consists in the
regeneration of the spirit, may assuredly wait for the expectation of the
other kingdom, which stands in the perfection (...) all glory. And we may
the better understand this, by weighing the diversity of Kingdoms which the
devil has, these being double: first, on earth: secondly, in hell. On earth
the reprobate being his subjects, their corrupt affections their laws, (...)
their being given over of God to follow those wicked ways being the power to
execute them. So as in all those places, b^^ they never so well polished to the
eye, which have not suffici^^^ power of the Gospel to save them* ^or which
have it notat^^^ or which have it in a counterfeit manner and measure, or wh^^^
having it sincerely, Mat. 7.6.
do fly like dogs to rend them in pieces th^^ bring it; in these is the
kingdom of darkness set up, and saving for the elects sake which shall be
taken out of them by the manifestation of Gods grace, it were but a cage of
filthy birds, and the Synagogue of Satan. For the second, which is in hell, it
is that wherein unmerciful Dives now lies, Luke 16.24. and cannot have so
much refreshing as to cool his tongue: and wherein after this life the wicked
and impenitent shall be tormented with endless pain. The consideration
whereof may drive us to the meditation of the Lords bounty, that has prepared
another place for us if we follow the counsel of John Baptist, to amend our
lives and to reform our ways, even such a place wherein we shall behold and
enjoy the beauty of his glory for ever.

Further observe, though John Baptist wills them to repent and amend, yet it
proves no ability or natural inclination in a man to do this, no more then
when Christ says, Mat. 11.28.29. Come unto me, and take up my yoke: it
argues no power of our selves to come: for so much himself sets down in
another place, where he says, No man can come unless my Father draw him.
But the end of this is, John 6.44.
not that the commandment is given to meet with our power to perform it, but
(as Romans 3.20.) that thereby might come the knowledge of sin; for when we
see our weakness that we cannot do it, and our wretchedness that we have
done the contrary: as that where we should have repented of our sins we have
rather increased them, it leads us to seek grace in Christ, pardon for the
sin, and power of his spirit to forsake it. So as in the commandment know,
thou ought to do it, in the correction of the Lord know, thou have not done
it, in not doing it know thy condemnation, in prayer and faith thou know
where to have it, in thy conversion thou know where thou have received it,
and in thy perseverance know by whom thou do retain it. And albeit all
commandments are of three sorts: first, such as command our first conversion:
secondly, that command our obedience to the Lord after our conversion: thirdly,
that command our perseverance after we have begun obedience; yet we shall see
the strength of all these comes from the Lord. For the first, Zach. 1.3.
there is a commandment given to turn to the Lord, and Joel 2.12. this is more
particularly set down, that it must be a turning with all the heart. But how
shall this be wrought? Observe Ephraims speech to the Lord, Ier. 31.18. Convert
thou me and I shall be converted: So ( Deuteronomy. 10.16.) Moses commands that the
people should circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, that is, that they
should change their vile affections; but how this must be done, appears,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart: so Deuteronomy. 39.19. there
is a commandment to choose life, That thou and thy seed may live: the
performance whereof is, Ezech. 36.26. A new heart (says the Lord) I will give
you, and a new spirit I will put into you, and I will take away the stony heart
out of thy body, and I will give you a heart of flesh: which place does fully
answer all suppositions of our own ability; for if there be any pliablenesse
in a stone, then is there so in man. For the second, we are commanded to live
well and to work, but whence this proceeds, appears, Philip. 2.13. It is
God that works in you both the will and the deed: so 2. Cor. 7.1. there is a
commandment given by S. Paul, that we should cleanse our selves; and 1. John
3.5. Every man that has hope purges himself: and 2. Tim. 2.21. He that is a
vessel of honor purges himself: but how this is done, is set down Ezech.
36.25. I (says the Lord) will powr^ clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: and as the Apostle says, Hebr. 9.14. The blood of Christ purges the
conscience from dead works. For the third, we are commanded to stand fast, and
to hold fast our profession: so Acts 14.22. Barnabas exhorts to continue in
the faith; but from whence this comes, Paul teaches us Ephesians. 4.30. The Lord
make you strong, for it is ^ee that has sealed you to the day of redemption:
and 2. Thessal. 1.11. The Lord make you worthy of this calling, and fulfill
all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power: and
1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it. By
which we may perceive, that this exhortation to Repent, and other such like
inserted in the Scripture, are but to when us on, and to set an edge upon our
prayers and desires, that we may fetch these graces out of the closet and
bosom of our Savior Christ, who is as ready to give as we to ask.

Further learn hence, that forasmuch as the most vehement and pithy
exhortation to obedience is taken from the manifestation of Christ, that the
Gospel even as it is the Gospel requires reformation of life, howsoever it
be charged either to give too much occasion to sin, as that being cleansed
in the bath of Christ's blood we may abandon our selves to uncleanness, or to
make too much restraint as it were from sin, as that we must abstain from
all appearance of evil: for says the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 5.2^.
1. John 3.8. He that does not labor to purge himself in every thing, is of
the devil. Wherein we must consider, that there is a double covenant: first,
of works by the law, which being observed gives life, but being broken but in
cogitation only, does damn a man: secondly, of grace, that all that believe
shall be saved. Now in every covenant there is a restipulation or mutual
agreement of both parties: ours in the law was, that we would do what was
commanded; in grace, that we will believe that we may be saved: for as no man
can be saved by the law but by absolute obedience, so no man shall be saved by
the Gospel but by faith and repentance; for this is that God requires of us,
to believe and amend.

Again observe, that when we preach repentance, we preach not the law but the
Gospel, for the law admits of no repentance: for though we could now observe
all that is written in the law, yet should we be damned, unless we could
satisfy for that was broken in our first conception, we being borne in the
filthiness of nature. Now there is no way of salvation for circumcised or
uncircumcised, for Jew nor Gentile, before the law nor after, either before our
conversion in the time of our infidelity, or after our conversion in the time
of repentance, but only in the blood of Christ, whom by the power of the holy
Ghost by the instrument of the word, as the second cause, we do by faith
apprehend unto our everlasting peace. Thus much is set forth by Saint Paul
Romans 8.1. that there is nothing but condemnation to them that are without
Christ, and none are in Christ but they that have received the spirit of
Christ, and none has this spirit ^ut he that has received the gift of faith,
which does ingraft us ^^to Christ, and none has faith but he that has
repentance, and none has repentance but he whose soul is changed, cleansed in
his conscience, reformed in his affections; so that howsoever he slippeth
through infirmity, yet his full endeavor is always to please the Lord: and no
man's soul is changed whose life is not already amended. For this must declare
a purified conscience, and none has amended his life who does deliberately
persist in any gross sin, so that whatsoever purposelie grieueth the spirit,
and smites God by his sin, he is not in Christ, but consequently in the
state of condemnation, except he repent: for this that is spoken of, 1. John
5.3. He that is borne of God, keeps his commandments, and they be not
burdensome to him. For this is the new covenant (says the Lord, Ier. 31.31.) I
will make with you, I will pardon your sins and write my Law in your hearts:
that is, whomsoever I will pardon I will reform their hearts, both inward and
outward mortification, that they shall be obedient to my Law. So that whosoever
has not received power to amend his life, he never felt the power of God to
the pardoning of his sin, for he never gives says alone, but it is ever
joined with an ability from the same spirit (...) amend the life; so as unless
outwardly thou be amended, that thy light do shine before men, both in thy
conversation and in thy actions, for any peace the Gospel can preach unto
thee, thou may fear thou art in the state of condemnation* And if thou
hardenest thy heart against this sweet sound of the Lords voice, he will at
the length scorn thee, and thou may cry and not be heard, for Esau may
weep too late, Genesis 27.38. for we are therefore to repent because by grace we
are sure to be saved, as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.17. if ye call God
Father, that is, if ye will be his children, pass your time in fear, because
he has redeemed you by his blood. Luke 1.75. Leuit 11.44.
So says the Gospel: It ye holy as your heavenly Father is holy, for
children must be of li^^ disposition to their father, and he that works evil
is of the d^^^ as Christ speaks John 8.44. So Paul Romans 12.1. does besee^
them by the merits of Christ (a forcible argument to persuade) that they offer
up their bodies a holy sacrifice unto God, she^ing that the greatest matter to
enforce us to reformation is taken from mercy. And 1. Cor. 6.15. Your bodies
are the temples (...) the holy Ghost, and ye are bought with a price,
therefore do not prostitute them to uncleanness, but let the love of God
constrain us to love him again. Yet may we not hereupon imagine that we
make the law of God of no effect through faith, nay as S. Paul says, Romans
3.31. by this we rather establish the Law, and that two ways: first, in the
absolute obedience of Christ inherent in himself, and imputed unto us:
secondly, by the spirit of sanctification abiding in us: for the same
righteousness the law commands, the very same does faith apprehend, for we do
challenge the promise of God to save us, by this, that Christ in our person
has absolutely performed it; so as there is no difference in respect of the
substance, but only in the manner of conueiance, whereby we apply it unto our
souls. So does the Gospel command the same works that the law exacteth, though
there be a threefold difference between them: for first, the law commands works
to gain salvation by them; the Gospel, because salvation is already gained by
the blood of Christ; for as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.2^.
we are bought with a price, therefore we are debtors: secondly, the law gives
no power to work that it commands, for Moses that was the giver of it, could
not frame his own heart to do it, therefore it is called a dead letter, written
in stones, 2. Cor. 3.6^.
which prefigured the hearts of men; but the Gospel in the elect never
commands but first gives grace and power to perform, as the Lord never
pardons any man's sin, but he first writes his law in his heart, as S. John
says, 1. Ioh. 3.8. God sent his son to destroy the works of the devil in us:
and this is the argument of S. Paul, Romans 6.14. Let not (says he) sin reign
in your mortal bodies, that is, have dominion over you, for ye are not under
the law but under grace, that gives power to amend. Thirdly, the law commands
works absolutely, and admits of no repentance, but the Gospel never excludes
repentance, the father ever waiting for the return of his lost son: so as it
is true, no whoremonger shall be saved continuing such a one; but always
understand, repentance coming between staieth the judgment: for though our
sins be of a purple or skarlet die, yet if we turn to God, the blood of Christ
has this virtue, 1. Ioh. 5.6.
that it can make them white as snow, so as the sum of all this is, blood and
water, Ioh. 13.8. must go together, faith in Jesus and the spirit of the Lord
Jesus, remission of sins and reformation of life must never be disioined. Now
for that the Papists say, the expectation of a reward would make us work, and
that in vain should the work be, if there were no merit: We answer, that if
a man freely shall gratify his bondsman with liberty, and he shall after
preserve his masters life: by this he has not deserved his freedom, for if
he had remained still bond, he had been bound to have done it, and all he can
do after is not to recompense his freedom, but to testify his thankfulness.
So whatsoever we can do or deserve, we are bound to it by a double bond: first,
of our creation: secondly, and much more by our redemption: and after our
salvation promised and purchased, to do well is nothing but duty, for we were
bound to do it before we were saved. So as this is the order of exhortation in
the Scripture: All that have hope (2. Cor. 7.1.) must cleanse themselves; not
to cleanse themselves that they may hope, but they have hope, therefore they must
do it. Mat. 25.34.
And not because we relieve the poor, therefore we shall be saved: but
because in mercy a kingdom is prepared for us, therefore as members of one
body we relieve the poor. And Abraham did not therefore offer up his son
that he might be justified, Genesis 22.8.
but because he was justified before, Genesis 15.6.
therefore he thought nothing too dear to gratify the Lord with, though it
were with the son of the promise. So here we do not therefore repent, that
the kingdom of heaven may come, but we must amend our lives, and change our
minds, because the Messiah is already come that will save our souls.

Again observe, he says, it is at hand, noting a near manifestation of him,
which was more then any of the Prophets could say: whereupon Christ says, that
there was never any Prophet so great as John Baptist, Mat. 11.11.
yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater then he: not comparing
their persons, for there were diverse of the Prophets as excellently qualified
as John; nor that a Minister of the Gospel now should be greater then he, but
that the ministry of John was plainer then that of the Prophets, they but
foretelling indefinitely that Christ should come, John pointing at him with his
finger, that he was now coming: and the ministry now being more excellent
then John's, because he preached but of the Messiah at hand, whereas we have
seen the fingers of this hand, Christ to have come with power, to have died
with triumph, and to have ascended with glory: therefore let him that has an
ear hear, and he that has hope let him arise, for the kingdom is now come,
not at hand, John 14.12.

Again, note the excellent Harmony between John the forerunner, and Christ
the after-commer: for Matt. 4.17. Christ uses the very same words to persuade
to amendment of life, because the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Which
shows, the agreement ought to be among Ministers, and how we may discern
whether they be of God or no: for then as they all work upon one foundation,
so shall they all speak by one spirit, and the voice of the herbinger agree
with Christ, and Christ with him, pressing no other doctrine then that John
preached before.

John was authorized to preach, we note, that all callings in the Church of
God must be warranted expressly in the book of God. For if any were to be
exempted, it was this of John's being extraordinary, but he is enforced to
prove it, as if he should say: Though I am not Christ, nor Elias in person,
howbeit in power of spirit I am, yet look in Esaias, 40.3. my authority
recorded: for the place of a Minister is not like the power of the Magistrate,
which though it be Gods ordinance in general, yet is it not in particular, as
that there should be this or that Magistrate, as an Emperor, Duke, Chancellor,
and such like: for this is humane, and God has given man this freedom, by the
remnant and portion of reason abiding in him, to devise what may be safest for
the state. And these offices as they be by man erected, so may they be by him
abolished. But for the officers of the Church and the ministry, it is not
only ordained of God in general, but every particular place and every kind of
office is set down, the Church being his own house, which he meant to
beautify with all necessary furniture, and none of this can be put down,
neither may others be added, 1. Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. For the Pastor may
be put down by the Prince, but not the Pastorship without maiming the body
of Christ: for then were it an humane constitution as is the other of
Magistrates: And therefore most gross is it, that women should be licenced to
baptize, which pertains only to the office of a Minister; and it is an idle
answer to say: Quod fieri non debet, factum valet: that which should not be
done, is yet effectual when it is done: for this is a seal put into a wrong
hand. And if Vzziah (2. Sam. 6.7) being no Leuite, was stricken with sudden
death for but touching the Ark of God which was ready to fall, though his
intent was good: and if Vzziah (2. Chro. 26.20.) was smitten with leprosy,
which he could never claw off to his death, for burning incense to the Lord,
which only pertained to the Priests to do, then may these intruders upon the
Lords possessions, fear some plague to light on them for intermedling with
these holy things: and as well may they administer the Supper, as Baptism; for
they be seals of equal dignity. Howbeit, if thou will be John Baptist, show
me these two things: first, a commission of thy calling: secondly, besides that
thou must prove thy calling warranted, show me that thou come rightly by it,
and that thou can lawfully convey it unto thy self, as ( Luke 3.1.) the
spirit of the Lord came upon John. For to have this security is good in two
respects: first, for the sasety of thine own conscience in the day of
affliction: for thou know the judgment of Christ, concerning such as creep
in at the window, they have neither love nor care of the flock. Ioh. 10.1.
Therefore Jeremy ( chap. 1.6.) cried: O Lord, I never thrust my self into
this unthankful office, but thou sentest me, and thy wordwas as afire shut up
in my bones. Secondly, it is good to retain the people in obedience, when they
shall see the Patent of thy calling, whereas otherwise they will esteem thee
but as offering thy self uncalled, and then thou may labor among them
vnthanked.

For that Esaias spoke, saying, The voice of a crier: in these words is set down
the execution of his office. Where we learn, that there are no names given to
Ministers, but they are words of emploiment and of labor. For Preaching comes
of Praeco, to be a proclaimer in the market place; so are they called
trumpeters, for that they must blow the silver Trumpet of the Lords word, that
it may sound and ring in the ears of the people. Criers, Esa. 4.11. Ezec.
34.10. 1. Pet. 5.4.
so as they must be no toong-tied fellows, for they are no fitter for this
office, then is a blind man to be a Pilot. They must be shepherds, which in
Judah were feign to watch all night to preserve their flocks from Wolves:
Watchmen, who must take heed, lest through their sloth the fort be surprised:
Ambassadors, having a great message to deliver from the king of heaven: Angels,
as Christ is called the Angel of the great covenant: and Revel. 3. Write unto
the Augell: that is, 2. Tim. 2.1^. 1. Cor. 3.1^.
the Minister of such a Church: Workmen, because they be builders of men's
consciences: Stewards, to provide meat for the Lords inheritance. And as John
was to cry in his time, so is there as great necessity laid upon us to cry
in this time, according to the proportion of that grace we have received. In
Paul's time, 1. Cor. 9.16.
it was a curse of damnation not to preach: which cannot be appropriated to
Paul himself, it being a duty specially required of all that labor in this
vineyard. And (2. Tim. 4.2.) he adinreth Timothy to preach instantly: so that
as John as the forerunner, and Timothy as an Evangelist, were to preach with
vehemency, so are we as Pastors, to cry the same cry: for it never yet
pierced deep enough, nor entered far enough to make men watchful over their
lives. Now some are unworthy the name of celers, being scarce able to speak;
others are able, but not willing to be criers, bringing others a sleep with
their sloth, upon whom without repentance rests a woe into lerable to bear,
and impossible to avoid.

Secondly, observe here the agreement between the Prophet Esaias and John
Baptist: John making that plain was spoken obscurely by the Prophet: Prepare
ye the ways: What is that? Repent: Let the high mountains be brought low.
that is, let pride of life be abated. Let the low velleis be filled, that is,
let despair be rejected: Let crocked things be made straight: that is, let the
judgment be rectified: Let the rough ways be made smooth that is, let thy
swelling affections be changed. Now this Allegory used by the Prophet, is
borrowed from entertaining of Princes at their first coronation: at which time
all ordures be cleansed, bridges repaired, the streets pau^^l, herbingers go
before to take up lodging, the trumpets sound, the volley of shot goes off,
and every man is arraied in his best robes: not that the Lord of glory
expects such a transitory triumph: for he requires but this, amend thy
life, and a clean heart is his best harbor, a spiritual entertainment being
fittest for a spiritual king.

Lastly, in this cry of John's, observe his faithfulness: he prepares a way
for the Lord, not for himself: he might have lived far better in respect of
the world, then in this base office, and in this base place: for his priestly
birth being the son of Zachary, ( Luke 1.13.) would have affoorded him a
richer portion; yea he was offered to be Christ, Ioh. 3.28.
but he would none of it, contenting himself with that share the Lord had
allotted him, and attending on that duty the Lord had enioined him. And thus
ought all the Ministers of the word to do, not to preach for reward, nor to
cry for ambition, though the herbinger must not lie without doors: but they
must look for a recompense from the highest, for the world is unthankful. And
it is not enough to preach, but they must preach to the consciences of men,
that the Lord Jesus may enter in; and not to gratify the affections of men
with the eloquence of the flesh, and in swelling words, that themselves may
enter in. For if they cry to get a name or renown, or preach in contention,
they may cry long enough, they have all they shall have, having that they
sought for, to be carried in the mouths, and to be had in admitation of the
people.

Eliah did wear, 2. King. 1.8. the wild honey was such as Jonathan found in
the wood, 1. Sam. 14.25. The meaning whereof is, that his apparel was very
base, and his diet such as grew of themselves. Where observe, that this was no
fancy of self-conceit in John, to bind and banish himself from the comforts
of this life, but it was the appointment of the Lord, that he might be
conformable to Eliah, whom as he was to succeed in his spirit, so likewise in
his apparel. Again, he did it by the Lords will formerly revealed: for it was
prophesied, Number. 6.2.
( Luke 1.15.) that he should be a Nazacite, and foretold his parents he should
drink no strong drink wherein was implied, that his fare should be of the
meanest; so as this must not be tied and prescribed to the Ministers of these
days, as if their cup might never ouerflow, but that their houses and
provision must b^as the heath and barren ground: for (1. Tim. 5.23.) Timothy
may drink wine for his stomachs sake, as Paul bids him. And if after the
example of the Apostles the world will have men preach for nothing, then must
they do as it was then, call such as never studied; and then must they
likewise have both assurance of Gods providence to sustain, and of his graces
to enable them, as the Apostles had. Look how the Levites were provided for, (
Numb. 18.21.) the tenth in Israel was given them for an inher itance, yea even
John Baptists father had liberally whereon to live: for they that serve at the
altar must live of the altar; not as of alms, but of duty: 1. Cor. 9.11.
as Gal. 6.5. them that teach you in the word, make them partakers of all your
goods: and Romans 15.27. if the Gentiles be made partakers of their spiritual
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things: and 1.
Tim. 5.17. The Elder that rules well, is worthy of double honor: but now they
give them double reverence and but single maintenance, which shows how
lightly men esteem of the gain of godliness, when the Ephod seems so vile
and base in their eyes. For Balaam shall never be called, unless the King (
Numb. 22.6.) have some special work for him to do, and if he follow not his
humor when he comes, he may go home again without his charges. And few there
be can boast at this day of the benevolence of their people, as Paul did of
the Corinths, 2. Cor. 9.2. who according to their power abounded in rich
liberality toward him, and would even have pulled out their eyes to have done
him good. Howbeit as Ministers may not go in sacke-cloth like beggarly Friars,
so must they not be arraied in silks and fine linen, like pompous prelates as
many be, which win more credit for their garments, then for their graces: but
there must be a moderation and so briety observed, and Baruch must be humbled
more in his persecution, then otherwise, Ier. 45.3.

Lastly, by this apparel and diet of John learn, that the meaning of the Lord
was not, only to drive and send John to austeritie and strictness by this
kind of life, but his special end was to convince the Jews of their malice
and frowardness of their hearts. For John he is precise and austere, there is
no pleasure in his looks, but he shakes as it were the rod continually.
Christ he comes after a clean contrary man^, he eats and drinks with them,
and is glad and willing to come to any, even as the Physician to the patient.
Whereupon the Jews are tried, whether by any usage they might be reclaimed
and drawn to repentance: but they take exceptions against both; John for his
ansteritie is a devil, (for the world ever hated preciseness:) Christ for his
familiarity is a drunkard and too good a fellow: Matt. 11.16. Luke 7.31.
so as though John wept the solemn and dumpish note of repentance, they would
not mourn: and though Christ preached and piped the melody of mercy, they
would not dance. What more then could the Lord do to this vineyard which he
did not, laying soil as it were to the root to keep the sap warm, and
pruning and cropping the branches, that they might have spread to have been as
it were the Lords shadow and his delight? But they stopped their ears, and
prospered not by their labor, bringing forth bloody and vnfauorie fruit,
killing the Prophets, and at length crucifying the heir of the vineyard the
Lord Jesus: for which the Lord did meet them in judgment, so as to this day
they remain rooted out of his garden. And how c^ we think the like judgment
should leap over and escape us, that have continued so long so untamed, and as
if we had ne^^ seen the yoke, do start and hang back from humbling out
selves before the king of Israel, who has come to us by strong winds, and
strange earthquakes, by the fire of many plagues, which have burnt up whole
families, and by his still and soft voice of the Gospel entreating us, while we
have time to be at peace, and to agree with him, and yet we will not.

MATH. chap. 3. verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.












HERE follows a sixth circumstance, wherein is set down the frequent
concourse of the auditory and people that came to hear this extraordinary
Priest John Baptist, who was of the tribe of Aaron: and how he entertained
them, first, receiving so many as would subscribe in judgment, to believe
their salvation in the blood of the Messiah. Secondly, for them that came as
led with emulation, hearing his fame, and were induced to come by reason of the
strange report went of him, and not for zeal and conscience to profit by his
ministry, the spirit revealing to John their hypocrisy, swelling with their
own righteousness, and bragging that they were of the natural seed of
Abraham, as men not yet fit to be baptized, he takes them up roughly as evil
eggs of evil birds, coming of them that persecuted the Gospel, that he
might the deeper pierce into their consciences, so as they might see their own
vileness: as if he should say, is it possible that you can come to hear the
word of God with a right heart, when there lurketh so much poison in your
breasts, when all your devotion stands in open ostentation? Even as Peter
challenged Simon Magus Acts 8.23.24. saying, Thou art in the gall of
bitterness, repent if it be possible, and pray, that the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee. John denouncing also their fearful estate, as
that the axe was now laid to the root of the tree, that faith in Christ and
not the glory of coming of Abraham's race, should save them from hell fire.

In the words observe two parts: first, how great the auditory was: Secondly,
how he applied himself diversely according to the diverse sorts of hearers which
he had, baptizing some confessing their sins; and for the other, first he
sets down a bitter reprehension, calling them a brood of Serpents, full of
poison against the truth, and frames his speech as wondering how they durst
come: the Sadduces believing no wrath to come, the Pharisees thinking by their
merits to avoid it. Secondly follows, a grave exhortation, removing away
many blocks and hindrances wherewith they were blinded that they could not see
the truth in Christ. Thirdly, he concludes with a commination and threatening,
that they were to be cut down: first, because they were wicked in themselves:
secondly, that there should double damnation fall upon them if they refused
Christ, as the Prophet Malachy had foretold.

For the first, observe three causes of their concourse and frequent coming to
John's ministry: first, because there had been a long surceasing of Prophecy,
Malachy being the last that spoke by that extraordinary spirit; and hearing
this great news and fame of John, they thought some great Prophet had been
raised up, and so were desirous to hear him. Secondly, they were moved to
frequent him by the strangeness of his teaching, not teaching coldely and
without power, as the Pharisees did, but in vehemence of spirit, and great
feruency and earnestness to persuade to amendment of life. Thirdly, they
resorted the rather unto him as pricked forward by the extraordinary austerity
of his life and diet. Where learn, that when God furnishes a man with a
commission, and seals him a warrant of his calling, and gives him a book,
as he did to Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.2.3.
which he must eat: when the word of the Lord is as fire in the heart of
Jeremy, and when the purpose of the Lord is that it shall prevail, it cannot
be crossed by any wit or policy of man. For great exceptions might have been
taken against John: first, preaching there was a Kingdom at hand, it might
have come near to treason, sounding in the ears of Herod to the dispossessing
of him: and Princes are easily jealous of their greatness, and will not have
any of their privileges called into question. Secondly, the Pharisees knew they
should be controuled and called into question for misleading and abusing the
people, so as no doubt they suggested to the King, that it was dangerous for
the State and touched the Crown, that he should whisper into the peoples ears
of the coming of a new King, laboring hereby to have their flocking stayed
by Proclamation or other sharp commandment; as that also, if this man were
tolerated and winked at, the great Fathers of the Church might be exposed to
great shame and obloquy, Math. 23.13.
as keeping the keys of heaven, and neither entering themselves nor suffering
others to enter. And again, it might be thought fantastical, that the people
would leave their trades to go so far to hear John. And for the Pharisees
themselves, they (as Luke 7.30.) despised the counsel of God, and were not
baptized of him: and Mat. 21.27. Christ tells them, they would never believe
that John came from heaven, but labored by all means to supplant him; yet
observe, that before he had executed and finished his message, neither the
power of Herod, nor the craft of the Pharisees could suppress him. Howbeit as
we hear in this place of great flocking so Ioh. 5.35. it is said that he was
at first as a burning lamp, and the people for a season rejoiced in this light,
but after they grew secure and careless. Where further note, that in deposing
^dolatry and in the restitution of the Gospel how earnest men ^aue been; and
the kingdom of God has even suffered violence for a time, the people running
in great multitudes to welcome it; but after it is once established, they grow
to a Laodicean luke-warmth, Revel. 3. neither hot nor cold, as if it were honey
that could cloy the stomach: therefore we must suspect the pregnancy and eager
fits of them that run so speedily at first to the Gospel, for John soon
loses many of his hearers, some coming only to behold him, some to entrap
him, some to see what was in him that was so much renowned, and some to shake
off the yoke of the law, thinking to get greater liberty by the Gospel, and
few (as Christ says) came of a good purpose and with honest hearts.

Further learn, that this baptizing here spoken of, was of such as were of
age; for they were not received before they confessed their sins. For this
Sacrament being a seal of sins pardoned, there must first be a confession of
sins committed, here being a double covenant: first, God sealing us a Charter
of forgiveness in the blood of Christ through the sanctification of his
spirit: secondly, God requiring of us, first a confession, for who has hope to
have his debt released before it be acknowledged, or to be infranchised before
he thinks himself bond, or to be washed before he sees himself unclean?
secondly, a belee^^ that the blood of Christ is of force and able to purge us
of all (...) sins: and thirdly, a dedication of our selves to serve the Lord
in newness of life, as testifying our thankfulness for so g^^ous a pardon.

Here the Jesuits like Spiders that suck up poison, gather upon this
confession of the people, a confession of shrift, that every one should whisper
his sins into the ears of the Priest before he can be pardoned, which is
most absurd: for first, the wo^^ here used bears not any secret confession,
being answerable (...) that, Leu. 16.21: where the Priest was to confess all
the people sins, and to put them upon the escape Goat, which praefigu^^ Christ:
secondly, this of John's was a public action, and so (...) place for private
whispering: thirdly, the sacrament of Bap^^^^ which he ministered required this
confession: for the profess^^^ of faith is requisite in them that are of years
and baptized, (...) we are not then first ingrafted into Christ when we are
bapti^^^^ but being already ingrafted we are then confirmed, and therefore Act.
8.37. the Eunuch first confessed is faith, and then was baptized by Philip. And
Mar. 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved: So as it was
John's duty as the minister of God, that such as received this seal, should
give testimony of their faith. Fourthly, John's giving of general plasters
argues, that they confessed not each one their particular private slippes and
infirmities, for then he would have given them special remedies: whereas (
Luke 3.13.14.) he laboreth to prevent only the abuses in their general
calling; as for soldiers to ask no more then their due, and to offer no
violence, nor to accuse any falsely, and such like as follows in that place.
Fifthly, if John should have troubled himself with such a particular
confession as they dream of, seven years would not have sufficed him.

Now when he saw the Pharisees, etc.

Here learn first, that it is in the wisdom of the Minister to discern of
the auditory, and there is nothing more unsavory then always to use one kind
of teaching: for according to the inordinate walking of some, they may and
ought to be charged and reproved openly: for Herod though he be a king, ( Mat.
14.4.) must be told openly of his incest: and though Bethel be the kings
chapel, Amos must tell Jeroboam that he shall die by the sword, Amos 7.11.
Yea the Lord has so clothed his Ministers with wisdom and with
righteousness, as they are able to appropriate the judgments of God to
particular sins, as to say, that the men of Bershemi (1. Sam. 6.19. were
slain for looking into the Arc: that the Corinths were some sick and some
dead, (1. Cor. 11.30.) for abusing the Sacrament: that Vzzah (2. Sam. 6.7.) was
stricken with death, for laying but his hand to the Arc to sustain it: and in
this place, that the Pharisees are but vipers, that would ear up and devour
their mother: this being a particular reprehension to them, wherewith the
multitude were not blemished, for the hypocrisy of the Pharisees touched not
them. Secondly, observe here, as John's wisdom ^^de to discern between the
chafe and the corn, so his godly resolution whereby he durst challenge these
great men which were reputed most holy, and the special leaders and governors
of the people: for this he was enjoined to do of the Lord, as (...) was said
to Jeremy: Spare them not: and to Ezechiel: I will make thy face as brass,
that thou shall not be afraid. And as it is said (...) Esaias: Speak what ever
it cost thee, be not ashamed to tell them, the be shameless of their faults.
Whereupon Esaias 50.6. says: I h^^^ given my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to the nippers, and have not hid my face as being afraid of theirs. And
this appears by John in this place by his sharp reproof, not mildely
peswading them, but eagerly and bitterly rebuking them, giving them their most
just titles, as, brood of vipers, not fathers of the Church, or leaders of the
people; knowing Elihu his speech (...) Job to be most true, Job 32.22.
that man could man give to titles, that is, ought not to call a fool a
wiseman, nor a Sadduce other then a Se^pent. Thirdly note, he reproves them,
because it was pro^^^ble for the people, to understand what gross abusers they
were of Moses chair, carrying a great and goodly show of external sanctimony
and holiness among the people: so as it was good and necessary to discover
their pestilent hypocrisy. Hereupon Christ was enforced to do the like, (
Mat. 23.) calling then painted tombs, fair to sight, but their hearts were
full of extortion: so that unless they were disgraced among the people, the
people could not turne-their hearts and affections from them; therefore that
they might not any longer bleare their eyes, he (...) feign to use these words
of disgrace and disparagement of them.

Again, in that he calls them generation of vipers, obse^^^^ that he
excepteth not only against these that came to he^^^ him, but against the whole
order of them: and of those two orders here named, though they disagree in
judgment, the Pharisees holding that there is a resurrection; the Sadduces,
that after this life there is an utter extinguishment of the soul: Math.
22.23. Acts 23.8.
yet both agree in this, to be viperously minded against the Gospel, eu^^^ as
the Atheists and Papists in these days have the same pois^^ of their hearts
common against the true professors, howsoever they be diversely distracted in
factions. And such has always been the condition of the Gospel, that even
the Princes of the earth, though otherwise divided among themselves, will y^^^
join hands against the Lord. Which may not discourage us both because the Lord
(as he did here) will by his wisdom discover their poison before they cast
it: and likewise as Asa says, (2. Chron. 14.11.) It is nothing with the Lord
to help with many or with no power, if we rest on him, for his truth shall
prevail.

Again, in that John Baptist so sharply takes them up, learn, that there is
nothing so senseless as hypocrisy: for it was hard to persuade a Pharisee he
was not as good a man as lived, for thus they lied to their own souls: They
made fair monuments of the Patriarchs, as pretending to reverence their
remembrance: but Christ ( Matthew. 23.33.) tells them they were only monuments of
their fathers cruelty, in putting them to death. So fearful a thing is it to
accustom our selves to an outward show of religion without sincerity,
thinking that Gods thoughts be like ours, as to be pleased with that possesses
and dazeleth the bodily eye: whereas he pondereth the steps of the heart, that
only makes the actions pure or unclean. Therefore Saint John knowing it to
be so difficult to sound the vast bottom of their filthy fowls, they were
so hardened and ouergrowne in hypocrisy, he breaks out into admiration,
that their hearts being fraught with such uncleanness, they should think it
possible to fly from the vengeance that would at the last pursue them. Let us
therefore keep the conscience tender, and apply our hearts to entertain the
service and worship of God in purity and simplicity, assuring our selves it
is not our outward pretense of holiness, nor cutting of the flesh with the
Priests of Baal, 1. Kin 18.28.
that shall go for current with the Lord, and protect us from the wrath to
come: but it is the plainness of the heart, and the singleness of the eye in
the true service of that one God, Ioh. 4.24.
that shall be accepted.

Further learn hence, what an abominable thing sin is, and among the rest
hypocrisy, that it is able to transform men into beasts, as resembling them
in their qualities. And thus Da^id ( Ps. 32.) to make the sin of rebellion
more odious, he compares men to horses and mules: the mule if he be not well
watched, will take his rider in his teeth and lay him in the manger: and the
horse if he can cast his rider, will give him a kind farewell with his heel.
And if ever there might be just complaint of this it is now, when men be so
full of iadish qualities that hardly can the Minister sit in his saddle.
Sometimes men are compared to Lions, as the proud enemies of the Church:
sometimes (as Psalm. 22.16.) to dogs, Psalm. 58.6.
and Psalm. 59.6. So Paul calls false teachers dogs, snarling against the
preaching of the truth: sometime they are called swine, to disgrace the
filthiness of man's nature: sometime for their cruelty to Bears robbed of
their whelps: sometimes for their boldness to Wolves, as ( Mat. 10.) Christ
says: I send you as sheep among Wolves, which ( verse. 16.) he expounds to be
among men: sometime to Bulls, Psalm. 22. The fat Bulls of Basan seek to devour
me: sometime to wild Boares, as David prays: O Lord set a hedge before thy
vineyard for fear of wild Boares, Psalm. 80.13.
they are so full of rage: sometime for the subtilty they are termed Foxes, as
Christ says: Gord that Fox (speaking of Herod) that I will preach to day and
to morrow: Luke 13.32.
sometime to horse-leaches, ( Prou. 30.15.) which have two daughters that cry
bring, bring, they are so full of cruelty: so Psalm. 22. those that persecute
and afflict the Church are called Unicorns: and here the Pharisees are named
Vipers, that would eat and devour the Church, and yet they would come to
hear; which made their sin so much the heavier, that they would come to so
holy a place with so unholy hearts. Thus do^^ sin strangely change us, and
thus are men when the Lord h^^^ given them over, that they have not the
property of one beak, but of all beasts: for they are as malicious as Apes, as
envious as Serpents, and as venomous as Adders, and yet they dare come and
state the Lord in the face in his congregation, having never communed with
their hearts before. This is that the Lord complains of, Ier. 7.9. Will you
steal, and commit adultery, auburne incense unto Baal, and come and stand
before me in this house where my name is called upon? Nay, the Lord abhors
all such manner of worship and sacrifice, as himself protests, Esa. 66. The
sacrifice of a sheep in this sort I esteem as the blood of a m^^ For though
the means to avoid the wrath to come, be by conming to Gods ordinance of
preaching; yet to come with a pharisaicall heart, does but increase the
vengeance, and hasten thy destruction.

Now for the instruction: Bring forth therefore fruits, etc. Mark how plainly
and precisely John does stand upon an open declaration of repentance by
amendment of life: for every one may say he means well, which if he do, he
will not be ashamed to bring it forth. So as if we will be trees of
righteousness engrafted into Christ, we must show forth the fruits and not
the leaves of righteousness by the operation of his spirit: for thou can not
be one flesh with a harlot, and one spirit with the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 6. and
charity ought not to make me believe him to be Christ's sheep that hears
not his voice. So as mark that the Lord measures the flower of our hearts by
the fruit of our lips; for Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks, and men may see our hearts through our hands. Since then the Lord
requires, that we should approve our faith to men, and manifest our
reconciliation with God in heaven by the works of love showed to men on earth,
let us weigh our steps that they may be straight, watch over our words that
they may be gracious, pass nothing through our fingers that shall be entangled
with the hurt of our neighbor, but measure out our actions by the rule and
square of religious love.

And say not with your selves, etc.

John made unto these false hearted Pharisees and Sadduces, containing two
parts: first, what they should do, Amend their lives: Secondly, what they
should not do; that they should not presume upon the external privilege they
had, of being circumcised as the children of Abraham. For this was the error of
their judgment, that the whole seed of Abraham by generation of the flesh,
were within the covenant of grace to be saved. And this is the objection
implied and answered by S. Paul, Romans 9.6.7. namely, that if the Jews were
cast away, then the word of the Lord was fallen away, because it is said; I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed for ever, which is confuted there by
the Apostle, by a distinction of a double seed: There is an Israel in the
covenant, and an Israel out of the covenant. So as there is a double election
in the house of Israel, first general, that all that came of the loins of
Abraham should have this dignity, to be accounted within the covenant, to
partake of the word and seal of circumcision. The second is a special
election out of the former, that out of the seed of Abraham, one seed only
should be saved: as it is Malach. 1.2. Is not Esau Jacobs brother? yet have I
hated Esau and loved Jacob. Whereby appears there is a special election out
of the general, so as the grace of the covenant was offered to all Israel, and
all Israel differed from the uncircumcised nations, yet the promise was
effectual only in the elect. Whereupon gather, that if these Pharisees had
not been blinded and bereaved of the spirit of truth, they would never have
stood upon any external privilege: for the promise being made indefinitely,
had been fulfilled if ten only had been saved: for the Scripture goes only
thus far: I will be the God of thy seed, not of all thy seed. And this the
Apostle proves in the place before, thus: If all the Jews were within the
compass of the promise, and the covenant of grace by virtue of the outward
seal of cutting the foreskin of the flesh, then it was necessary the first
borne should be, and that he might challenge this as soon as any, to be saved.
But this was not so: for in Ismael the eldest was not the promise, but in Isaac
shall thy seed be called: so as God declared his purpose by distinguishing them
at first, when the covenant was but new made, while Abraham himself lived, and
when he had but two sons. And lest this particular example might be excepted
against, by reason of the disparagement in their birth, Israel being borne of
the bondwoman: Take (says the Apostle) Esau borne of the same womb, begot of
the same father, yea borne at the same time almost, and if there were any
prerogative it was Esaus, for he was eldest, both of them circumcised, yet did
not the promise pertain to Esau, as is proved by two testimonies of Scripture,
Genesis 25, 23. The elder shall serve the younger: and Mal. 1.2. I have loved Jacob
and hated Esau, his servitude in the flesh being joined with the hatred of God
upon his soul. So as the difference between the children of Abraham according
to the flesh only, and according to the flesh and spirit also, stands in
these two things: first, in Gods secret purpose, whom to glorify and whom to
reject: secondly, in the effects of faith and sanctification, for he is a true
child of Abraham, that walks in the faith and steps of Abraham, Roman.
4.12. and they that do otherwise, (as Christ says, Ioh. 8.44.) are the
children of their father. To which the Pharisees in great indignation
excepting, What (say they) do thou account us bastards? Abraham is our
father: No, says Christ, so as truth and meekness it self spoke it, ye
are the children of the devil. For under this pretense of issuing from
Abraham's loins, they would despise that son, and abandon that Messiah in
whom Abraham and the rest of the fathers looked and trusted to be saved.
Howbeit, if we come to this, why does Ismael persecute the profession of Isaac,
and Esau sell his birthright, and Jacob embrace it as a pledge of the
inheritance of heaven? This comes from the election of God, who had purposed
to give this grace to the one, and to deny it to the other, the cause of his
infidelity resting in his own soul. And it was not an universal promise
plight to Abraham, that he would be the God of every particular singular man
that should come from his line, but it was given indefinitely without
limitation (to thy seed) as of one: which is that Paul proves, Gal. 3.16.
namely, that there could be no reconciliation between the Jews and the
Gentiles, but by that one seed which was Christ.

Now the cause Saint John gives: and the reason he alleges why they should
not thus flatter and deceive themselves in the name of Abraham's seed, is,
because God is able even of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And at
the first Abraham indeed was dead in respect of that strength of nature to
beget a child, Genesis 18.12. and it was as easy to make a stone a man, as to
make a dead man get a man. Out of which we learn, that God is omnipotent, not
only to do what he will, but also to do more then ever yet he has purposed to
do: as here he is able of stones to raise up men, but he never did it.
Answerable to that speech of Christ in the Gospel: If I would I could command
( Mat. 26.53.) twelve legions of Angels to rescue me, yet he did it not. Now
three things there be which God cannot do, and yet shows no impotencie, nor
derogateth any thing from his omnipotency: as first, he cannot do contrary
to the property of his person, as God cannot be begotten, nor the Son of God
cannot beget: secondly, that is contrary to the essential properties of his
Godhead, Ier. 1.17.
as he cannot repent, nor change, nor lie, nor be finite, for all these are
signs of weakness and imperfection: thirdly, he cannot do that which implies
a contradiction, as that a stone being a stone should be a man; but of a stone
he can make a man, and of a man a stone: as Lots wife was turned ( Genesis 19.26.)
into a pillar of salt, but when she ceased to be a woman. So against the
Lutherans, that hold, they eat the very flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, we
acknowledge that God is able to turn bread into flesh, but then he must change
the substance: for I will never believe, that that which I see and taste, and
touch as bread, can being bread be flesh also. So for the humanity of Christ,
as it is his body it cannot be every where, for a body must have his
dimensities, as height, breadth, and length, and must be limited and
circumscribed in a place certain. And it abridgeth nothing from his
all-sufficiencie: for it is contrary to the nature of a substance to be every
where, remaining a substance. True it is, the Lord can make the sea to stand up
as walls, ( Exodus 14.21.) on both sides, for the passage of the Israelites, but
it was a sea still: so he can make the Sun against the course of nature (
Josh. 10.12) to stand still and stay his course, but it was the Sun still;
but he cannot make a body to be every where, for that does abolish the nature
of it.

Now is the Axelaied to the root, etc.

John used, mixing and interlacing his sermon with the judgments of God,
wherein he threatens them with eternal damnation, except they repent and
become new men. The whole speech is allegorical and a continued borrowed
speech, which may be thus resolved: God is compared to a husbandman, for he had
planted a vineyard in Judah, namely, his church: the people are compared to
trees, the ministry of John to an axe, that will cut quickly, either to
hasten to damnation or to salvation. As elsewhere it is compared to a Fan
that separates the chafe from the wheat, and in Jeremy to a hammer, either to
bruise a broken heart, or to beat it down to hell. The roots of the trees are
compared to the souls of men, the form of the speech prefigureth the final
sentence that shall be given at the latter day, the hewing down signifies
the separation of the bastardly Jews from the communion and fellowship of the
true Israelites; and casting into the fire sets forth their eternal
damnation in hell: so as it is thus much in effect: You Pharisees presume not
any longer upon Gods patience, for ye cannot now pretend ignorance as ye
might have done; and for that time (as Acts 17.30.) God will not call you to
any heavy reckoning, he has been careful to dress his garden, he has
suffered you to abuse the people by your government in the Church, but now
look unto your selves, for now shall my ministry cut into your souls, and
shall show whether ye be bastards or no, and now shall it appear who is the
child of Abraham by receiving Christ that comes.

In that it is said now, and that the axe is laid not to lop but to cut down:
learn, that when the Gospel is preached, then the Lord comes to make a
separation between the elect and the reprobate, which could not before be
discerned, as it is in the Gospel; there shall be two in one bed, one shall be
received and the other rejected: for when this rain falls, then the Lord
means to try who is truly planted and has taken root in his son, Luke
17.34.
and if (as Heb. 6.7.) it brings forth herbs meet for the dresser, then
receives it a blessing; but if the heart bring ^oorth thorns, then is mere
unto cursing: so as if any obstinately persist in the earth, drinking in the
moisture and yet increases not, his damnation shall be the more just, because
there is now no place for excuse left. And to apply this more nearly to our
selves, if the Sodomites ( Genesis 19.28.) were wasted with fire for abusing but
one Lot: If the Ninevites had been destroyed ( Jonah 4.11.) for not repenting
at the preaching of one Jonah: If they were put to death that despised but one
Moses, and the old world ( Genesis 6.13.) swept away for contemning the preaching
of one Noah: If they were given up ( Romans 1.24.) to serve their own lusts,
that profited not by that one light of nature, whereby they were constrained to
acknowledge a superior power, that made that excellent frame of heaven and
earth. If the Pharisees were thus sharply charged and reproved for not
amending their lives at these few sermons of one John Baptist, much more may
we fear lest we be swallowed up of present destruction, that have had so
many sounds of the Lords trumpets and yet have not retired from our own ways,
that after so much dressing, and pruning, and lopping, have brought forth
nothing but briers, that have devoured so many full years of peace and years
of preaching and plenty, and yet continue lean and ill-favored in the course
of our lives; for now at the time of the Gospel (as we see here) begins
judgment.

Secondly, learn how faithfully John executed and performed his ministry,
which stood in two parts, as was foretold by Malachy, chap. 4. to preach mercy
and judgment, both which he performed in this one sermon. Here the Jesuits
take occasion to say, that we should dehort men from evil for fear of hell,
and exhort them to do well in hope of heaven. We say with Paul, who is our
pattern and forerunner, that we have weapons for all those that shall despair
after the obedience of Gods Saints fulfilled, but we preach not only to work
well in hope of heaven, for as we are servants we deserve nothing, but as
children we are received to an inheritance bought for us before we were: so we
strive not that men should keep themselves from sin only for fear of hell;
for the Lord will never account of such a soul as will do nothing but for
fear of the whip, for he loves a free giver, and hates constrained
subjection: and it is not the horror of damnation but the commemoration of the
Lords mercy showed toward us in giving his own Son to so ignominious a
death, to ransom us from that curse we had incurred. This is that contains
us within the bounds of obedience: for if the heart blood of the Lord Jesus
will not make thy heart to relent, and thy hands to tremble to put them forth
to wickedness, then art thou in a desperate case. Shall the fear of the
gibber, or the ghastly show of death, make one that was a traitor, and now
pardoned and advanced unto high place by the mere mercy of his Sovereign,
shall this make him afraid to commit treason again, and nothing else? nay the
grace of his Prince shall rest always before his eyes, and shall most forcibly
persuade him to persevere in his loialtie. For this is the most effectual of
all others, to move us in the bowels of the mercies of Christ, to keep our
selves clean and washed, because we are already purified in his blood, and
not for fear of falling into the pit again.

Thirdly note, that if any man will escape and avoid damnation, he must of
necessity live well, for he must be a tree bringing forth good fruit. Where
first consider what is good fruit, which is implied in the text; it cannot be
good except the tree be good: as Christ says, If the casting out of a devil
be a good work, why am not I a good man? Matt. 12.28. Ioh. 7.21.
So as first the person must be accepted before the work be accepted, and no
person can please without faith that purifieth the heart, and there is no such
heart where religion depends not upon the true worship of the law of God; and
by consequent there is no good faith where the heart is not cleansed by the
spirit of God. Since then a man must first be good before he can do good, it
is impossible that any man erroneous in religion should produce a good work.
External righteousness and the moral virtues of the Papists is a vizard that
bleares many men's eyes, and we say that they are honest; as well may we say
it of them that hanged up the Lord Jesus, thinking he had spoken blasphemy,
because being but a poor wretch to see to, he challenged himself to be the
Son of God, and in this doing they thought they had done God an excellent
piece of service. And for Paul before his conversion who could except against
his life? nay as he testifies of himself, Philip. 3.^.
he walked according to all the ordinances the law prescribed; yet after he
was called, he accounted all his moral righteousness but as the excrement of
a dog. And if religion do not distinguish between men, the heathen shall
condemn both us and them, who by the mere instinct of nature lived in the
hatred of gross sins, and walked soberly without exception, and yet are they
already damned. For first, we must be good by grace, and being adopted into
Christ then we do good: and of all the trees of the forest (as Ezec. 15.3.)
there is none but is better then the vine if it bear not grapes, for the oak
is good for timber, and every tree may serve for some good use, but the
farments of the vine if it be not clustered is fit for nothing but for the
fire. The Papists are good as oaks to build monasteries and to set up houses
and places of religion; but an unfaithful and unfruitful Protestant and
Professor is good for nothing, (being but a rotten bough or branch of a
fruitless and barren vine) but to be burned. So that to judge a work to be
good, it must be good both quo ad fontem and quo ad finem, proceeding from an
honest heart, and driving to a right end, the glory of God, to whom I owe
honor. Further, to come to the true knowledge of good fruit, let us know what
bad fruit is, which is double, first, sins in substance, such as are
contrary to the express commandment of God, as adultery is absolutely a
sin in David as well as in any other: secondly, sins by circumstance, as
giving of alms, Matt. 23.5.
only when the trumpet sounds, to be seen of men; or to come into the
sanctuary with a purpose to pray, and presently to return to his vomit
again: for the Lord abhors what himself commands ( Esaias 66.) if it be
not do^^ with that heart he commands. The sacrifice of a sheep is (...) his
sight as the blood of a man, not that he hates the action, but the hypocrisy
in the action which staineth the whole: a Hagg. 2.13. if an unclean person
touch the holy flesh, the flesh it self is unclean; but holy flesh makes
not other flesh holy which was not so before.

Further observe, where it is said, Every tree that brings (...) forth good
fruit shall be hewne down: that it is not enough not to do evil, but it is
damnable not to do good; for he does not say, the tree that brings forth no
fruit, but that brings not forth good fruit. For it is not enough for Zacheus (
Luke 19) after his conversion to be no poller or robber of the poor, but his
conscience cannot be assured of his pardon before he has satisfied the poor
for that he had got amiss: secondly, he must bring forth another fruit of
repentance, not only to restore, but to give liberally, and to be
compassionate toward the afflicted Saints; not by this to satisfy the Lord,
but to assure his own soul that the Lord is satisfied in the death of Christ.
And it is not said, Come ye blessed, because ye have not persecuted the
truth, Matt. 15.34.
nor scorned the professors thereof; for not the (...) they have not done, but
the good they have done, as releeuing the poor, visiting the sick, and such
like, shall come to judgment. And for the damned, it is not said to them, Go
and depart, for ye have put to death, and by all unjust ways vexed and abused
my children; for these are so gross as their own souls cry out against
them: but the form of the sentence is, Ye have despised me, and would not be
of my livery, but disdamed to be found in the company of professors: for cursed
be Meroz, Judge. 5.23. that helped not in the day of battle, not that ever she
sought against the Lords cause, or once drew weapon against Christ, but because
she came not forth armed to assist the Lords cause. So this must be the fruit
of Peter's repentance, not only not to deny his master any more, but ( Math.
26.35.) to stand to him to the death: neither is it enough for persecutors of
the Gospel to leave off to persecute, but they must with Paul learn to be
persecuted for the Gospel: and so for parents to take heed to their children
not to be garish in their youth, lest by this their hearts may be adjudged to
be proud in their age.

Now if that tree be near unto burning that brings not forth good fruit, what
shall we say of those trees that from the root of a filthy and fleshly heart
bring forth unsavory and stinking fruit? If Dives be damned Luke 16.22. that
gave not bread and refreshing to Lazarus, what shall become of them that take
away bread, and do grind the faces of the poor? If he were bound hand and
foot ( Mat. 18.33.) that prosecuted his right so extremely against his fellow
servant, whither shall they be cast that labor the unjust vexation of men,
pretending title to that coat they never bought? If Obadiah shall hardly answer
it, 1. Kin. 18.4. before God that hid the Prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed
them with bread and water, because he durst not profess his religious heart
openly, being in the time of Iezabel a Queen and a queen; how shall they be
able to excuse themselves which in the time of this gracious and good hearted
Prince libel against them by false suggestions, and labor the utter undoing of
them, themselves professing nothing for fear of succession? And if they that
did but build, and plant, and mary, and give in marriage, all which in
themselves were lawful, were swept and carried away ( Genesis 7.) with the
universal flood, whither shall the tempest of the Lords fury carry them that
blaspheme against his name, snarle against his messengers, and like swine do
wallow in their own filthiness, all which are simply abominable in
themselves? If the Pharisees that were careful to hear John with some good
mind, were so sharply reproved as to be termed vipers, what title may be
given to them that refuse altogether to come? If they that hear not the voice
of Christ be not his sheep, John 10.3. Mat. 7.6.
what be they that turn against him to rend him? Or that come to the Temple to
no other end then to entrap him? If of three sorts of seeds and hearers,
whereof the one takes the feed, the second receives it with some good heart,
Mark. 4.4.
the third cherishes it so well as it grow to a blade, and yet all of them be
damned: where shall they rest that never vouchsafed with any religious ears to
hear the message of salvation brought them? If many be shut out that preached
the Gospel, and many that strive to enter in shall not, what place shall be
prepared for them that think themselves too fine to bind up the wounds of the
broken hearted, and that have every step since their first birth directly
sailed toward hell, disanowing all means whereby they might be reduced to the
right way? If the fig tree was accursed because it had no fruit, though ( Mark
11.13.) it was full of leaves, what curse shall light upon those trees that are
full of poisoned and corrupt fruit* Note also Saint John says every tree, not
excepting any, but what ever he be, Jew or Gentile, from the Prince to the
basest of the people, they must be fruitful: for being all equally corrupted,
we ought all equally to be cleansed, and the Princes soul needs as much
washing as the subjects.

Again, observe a consequence of great comfort, that every tree that brings
forth good fruit must needs be saved, and this is a wonderful consolation to
all Gods children; for all that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. are out of
condemnation, and he has Christ that has his spirit; he has his spirit that
strives against his corruptions, he does this that crucifieth his flesh, and
he crucifieth his flesh that cease from sin, and he does this, that
amendeth his life and repents.

Lastly, learn hence that the tree and the fruit must go together; for though
faith alone does justify, yet faith that is alone does never justify, but is
dead without works: like that charity James 2.16. which only bids a man warm
him, but does not give him wherewithal to refresh him. The eye alone of all
the parts of the body does see, but the eye that is alone separate from the
body does not see; so the feet alone do carry the body, but if they be cut off
and severed from the body they do not stir. True it is, no tree shall escape
the cutting unless it be good, but none shall therefore escape it because it is
good: for none shall be saved without mortification, but none for their
mortification shall be saved: therefore let us beware lest we disioyne that in
our lives which is always conjoined in doctrine, the faith of Paul and the
works of James.

MATH. chap. 3. verse. 11.


NOW because among the multitude, as more plainly appears Luke 3.15. they
strongly held and esteemed John to be Christ and the Messiah that should come,
he knowing this by revelation, or otherwise by the speech of some particular
person among them, labou^eth to resolve them, and to pluck up this opinion by
the ^^ooes, making protestation, that there was great disparagement and
inequality between him and Christ, his baptism and Christ's, his person being
but the herbinger, and the person of Christ, whose coming he proclaimed; yea
so great, as he was not worthy to do him the basest service, so much as to pull
off his shoes, this being a prouer be taken from those countries, where
trauelle^s going in the heat all day, did accustom at their iourneies end to
have a servant attendant, to pluck off their shoes and to wash their feet.

In the speech there are two parts to be observed: first, the abasing of
himself and his office: secondly, the magnifying of the ministry of the
Messiah.

Here first note, that John does not compare the baptism he administered, with
that the Apostles should afterward minister, nor his outward sign of water
with theirs, as being any difference between them; but he compares his own
person with the person of Christ, and that which he works visibly with water,
with that which Christ works supernaturally cleansing the conscience. They
therefore are deceived, that think (...) baptism less effectual then this
of ours drawn from the (...) postles, for in the substance there is no
difference, but onely^ the manifestation and perspicuity of it, that as John
was pla^^ then the Prophets, so were the Apostles and after Minister more
plain then he: which was signified by that speech a Christ, Mat. 11.11.
He that is least in the kingdom of God is greater then John Baptist: this
being meant of their ministeries; for the Sun is the same both in the morning
in his weakness, and at noo^^ day in his strength: and there is the same
humane nature is a child as in a man, and no other baptism in substance now
then this of John's, being both instituted by the same Lord. But the Jesuits
challenge the Caluinists for making John's baptism comparable with the
Apostles; for John's (say they) did not remit sins, but he only baptized them
unto amendment of life. We answer, first, in neither of their baptismes there
is any remission of sins, this only being in the power of Christ the
institutor: as in circumcision, the cutting of the flesh in it self a^^led:
nothing; but the effieacy was in sealing to the conscience the belief in the
Messiah to come, for many had outwardly that sign whom the Lord abhorred: and
if that did but secure the soul upon an inward belief, much more is baptism
now but a seal of righteousness unto us. Again, if their baptism under the
cloud was the same with John's, so was that of the Apostles: and could any of
them give any more then the external ministry? But John (say they) baptized
only to amendment of life. We answer, as it is Mark 4. John baptized to
repentance and remission of sins; and can there be any repentance without
remission? No: for being promised both together, they are received of the
person both together. Again, if this baptism of ours and that of John's be not
the same in substance, then did not Christ sanctify our baptism in his flesh;
which is false: for man can give but the outward element, and Christ alone does
purge the soul.

Secondly, learn what power there is in the outward ministry of men, and in
the outward seals: for howsoever the Scripture does magnify outward means,
and the men as instruments; as that Paul is said to save souls, and to have
begot Onesimus in the faith, Philemon, 2. Cor. 3.6.
chap. 1. and our ministry is called the ministry of the spirit: yet when
the scripture will show what either the men or the means separately and apart
can do in their own nature, and that all is the work of God only, then
either the means are not at all mentioned, or else they are woonderfully
debased: as, Paul can but plant, Apollo can but water, but it is God that
gives the increase. Here Paul is nothing, 1. Cor. 3.6.
for the blessing is only from the Lord, the internal being opposed to the
external: for whenever these be either opposed by comparing, or compared by
opposing, then all is in God; for God deals otherwise in disposing of things
that nourish to eternal life, then of those that help to the conservation of
this present life. As there is some power and as it were an inherent virtue in
bread to nourish in it own nature, and there is power of generation in man to
beget; but to awake the conscience and to cleanse the heart, there is no power
that remains in the Ministers person, or in the seals of Baptism and the
Lords Supper: the Minister separately he speaks, and it is but a perishable
breath, as the voice of another man, though they be the words of God: Act.
16.14.
for otherwise, why should Lydiaes heart be opened more then any of the rest
of the hearers? there was the same voice of man sounding into the same ears of
men by nature, And in Baptism for himself the Minister can do nothing but
powreon water, and the water is but natural, which can but wet the body, and
there is no power appropriate to it that of it self it is able to convey any
security to the conscience. But do not the words of institution work
something, and be they not operatorious to work some change? As the words be
pronounced with the organ and instrument of the mouth, it cannot make the bread
to alter the substance; but the words have this power to declare what the Lord
will work, first for our selves that we must break bread; for the people that
they must eat it: This is my body, showing what the Lord will do, that we
must not be amazed in beholding the signs, but lift up our eyes unto the Lord
that gives Christ's blood to the heart of every believer: for there is no flesh
in the bread, nor under the bread, nor with the bread. These therefore have no
power to conney any grace to the soul, for if they had, then were all
regenerate that receive them: and sometime regeneration preceeds and goes
before baptism, as in Cornelius, Acts 10. sometime it follows baptism, as
in children. And again if there were any power in water of it self, or by the
words of institution, then after the sacrament the water should ever remain
sanctified, which we see contrary, for it does putrify like common water. And
no more does the Sacrament depend upon the intention of the giver and
consecratour, then it does upon the intention of the receiver: for it was as
true a sacrament and as effectually offered to Simon Magus and to Judas as to
the other of the Disciples: for the same Sun shneth to all, though some do
shut their eyes.

Further, observe and beware that we do not make duos totos baptismos, two
whole baptismes, one of John's another of Christ's, but only of one whole
baptism two parts, as of one whole man we make two parts, body and soul: one
is as in the law, a circumcision with the hand cutting the flesh, the other
cleansing the conscience by faith in Christ. Neither do we make them two the
God separates, for it is the same word of life in it self, but not to them
that eat it not: to the elect it is effectually conveyed; to the reprobate it
is truly offered by God, but separate by their unbelief. Therefore let us
consider the analogy and natural relation in baptism: the external thing is
water, such as is common: the thing inward is the very blood of Christ answered
by the sign. The application of water to the clensing of the body, is answered
by the applying of the holy Ghost: the effect of water is to purify from
filth, so is it of the blood of Christ to purge from sin: and this two ways,
by killing and renewing, by nortifying and quickening: by the dipping in the
water is represented the death of Christ, and his resurrection signified by
pulling out of the water, that as we are buried with him in Baptism, so we
shall rise with him by his spirit.

Why, but has John no power but to put on water? every man may do so: and how
is it then that (2. Cor. 3.6.) Paul says, God has made us ministers of the
spirit and not of the letter; for there he compares the Law to the Gospel,
Moses to the Apostles? Moses gave unto the people the two tables, which was
only a commandment external, for he could not change his own heart, nor
apply his own soul to the performance of the law; but it was only as if a
man should write to a blind man to bid him read, or to a deaf man to bid him
hear. And can Paul do any more to convert the Corinths? No: but this is the
difference; the preaching of the Gospel which is the ministry of the spirit,
does not only require faith, but gives faith to be saved: for of it self it
is as easy to keep the law as to believe. Why, but Paul says to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 4.6. Attend on the work of preaching to save thy self and others: and
Paul of himself says, I begat you: and Mal. 4.6. it was prophesied of this
John, that he should convert the hearts of men. This is most true when the
external and internal do join and iumpe together and when they are not
compared by opposition, but are comprehensiuely taken together, then we can
bind and loose sins: and as Leuit. 16.16. then the Priest shall make thy
soul clean. But as it was said that there was in paradise ( Genes. 3.22.) the
tree of life, not that it had any life in it, but that they that should eat of
it should live for ever; and so of the tree of knowledge, which was so called
by the effect it wrought, making us to know what good we lost, and what
nakedness we fell into: so it is said, that we forgive sins, John 20.23.
because the word of reconciliation is put into our mouths, not that we do it
by any absolute authority, but necessarily, because our commission extends to
it by God. And so all moral matters under the law were but a mere pageant,
saving that they sealed to them the inward, which was the blood of Christ: and
where such efficacy was given to the sacrifices, there the inward thing was
attributed to the outward, so as we must still hold that all power and
sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3.5.

Further observe, that John of necessity must give water, or else Christ can
give no blood; and except there be planting and watering nothing can grow. So
as we must learn to submit our selves to the ministry, else can we not
ordinarily expect for any grace at Gods hands, for he gives but increase and
blessing to his worke-mens labor, and though the voice of the Preacher be but
a vanishing voice, wanting power to affect the conscience, and virtue to
illuminate the eyes, for the voice cannot pierce the soul, yet we must humble
our selves to John's ministry: for by this voice does the Lord give life, and
as he cannot hope for fruit that never sowed, nor expect for wine that never
planted, no more can he look for life that never heard, for faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. and without faith there is no salvation. So as unless we
do embrace this ordinance of God, to follow them whom he has made his arms
to reach forth unto us the bread of life we can never believe; and except we
desire to be sealed with the great seal of heaven committed unto them, we
shall never be saved: for as it is said Genesis 17.14. every soul contemptuously
refusing circumcision shall be cut off: and he that despises the bread, does
betray and crucify the Lord Jesus as the Jews did, that bad away with him.
John must be regarded because he puts on water, for who is not glad to receive
his pardon by the person of any? and why should their feet be contemptible
that bring us such news from the mouth of God? And if we dare not in pain of
damnation but think reverently of the seals, that is, of water and bread in
the Sacraments, how much more must we reu^^^ce the doctrine, that is of far
greater majesty? for the Sacraments are but blankes without the word.

Further consider here in John's baptizing to amendment of life: that as all
Sacraments are covenants, and in covenants there is always something agreed on
between both parties: so in Baptism God promises to receive, Christ to
redeem, the holy Ghost to sanctify: and on the other side, we promise to
believe this, and to repent us of our transgressions. For as Baptism seals
unto us remission of sin, so also does it seal as it were from us amendment
of life: and to whom soever the Lord seals this assurance that he will save
him, to him also he seals regeneration and newness of life. And as Paul
says, Romans 2.26. if uncircumcision believe well, it shall be saved rather
then circumcision: that is, if the outward sign be separated from the inward,
and not accompanied with cleanness of heart, and obedience to the
commandment, he that wants the outward seal, and yet is circumcised in
heart, is more to be accounted of then the other. Therefore let us look and
take heed we perform the vow we made before God and his Angels in our
baptism, namely, as to believe the promises, so to repent and reform our
lives: for he that will assure himself of the benefit of Baptism, must see
what power he has to subdue his corruptions.

He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire.

That is, by the holy Ghost Christ will seal the pardon of their sins, who
has the same power that fire has, as first, to burn up all trash and
stubble: secondly, to purify things that are to be purged: thirdly, to give
light in darkness: fourthly, to quicken things that are benumbed and stiff
with cold. So as let us examine our selves whether we have felt these effects
of this spirit: for if he filthiness and fr^^^dnesse of our nature be burnt up
and consumed: if our hearts be swept and cleansed from vile and loose
affections: if our understandings be illuminated and lightened with the lamp
of the Gospel: if we be inflamed and set on fire with the zeal of Gods glory,
and well hearted toward his children, then may we hope to have been baptized
truly: for the holy Ghost works these things in believers. But he that is
drossie or lukewarm in his profession, that is hard hearted to the Saints,
that follows the sent of his affections, and that is weary of the candle of
truth, has cause to suspect that he is not yet baptized with the holy Ghost.
In Ioh. 3.5. this spirit is compared to water cleansing the soul inwardly,
which has three properties: first, to wash away filthiness: secondly, to
moisten that which is dry, and to quench thirst, and allay the scorching
heat: thirdly, to fructify: as Psalm. 1. willowes are said to be fruitful
planted by the water side: even so the holy Ghost does purify and wash the
soul, refreshes the conscience scorched with the fear of Gods vengeance, and
gives power to make our dry and barren hearts to prosper in every good work.

MATH. chap. 3. verse. 12.


BEcause it falls out in great auditories and assemblies, that there be many
wilful and perverse persons, which do not esteem of the Lords rich bounty,
but do scorn and tread under foot t^^ mercy offered: John Baptis^ does here
denounce peremptory vengeance and intolerable torment against all ^^ose that
shall not submit themselves to the ministry of the Messiah, and that they
which will not be baptized with the fire of the holy Ghost and of Christ, that
is, with his blood and with his spirit, shall be baptized with the fire of hell.

The words do contain an Allegory or continued borrowed speech, which may be
thus resolved. First, by the Fan understand the ministry of the Gospel,
which should begin at the preaching of Jesus, and should winnow the people to
make a separation between the bastardly brood of Abraham, and the true
Nathaniels, Ioh. 1. chap. 47. Israelites in whom is no guile, between them
that had only the mark of circumcision in the flesh, and them whose hearts
and vile affections were inwardly circumcised. By that it is said, In his hand,
is meant, that it is presently to be manifested. By floor, understand all
places where a Church may be gathered, or more specially for a visible Church
already gathered, John addressing his speech here to the Jews, which were at
this time the Church of God. By wheat, is meant all that should believe, either
Jews or Gentiles. By the Garner, is meant the kingdom of heaven. By chafe, is
meant hypocrites and unbelievers, mis-liuers, or the children of perdition, that
refuse to be fanned by the Lords voice. By cleansing, is meant that separation
the Gospel should make between the apostate Jew, and the believing Jew. By
unquenchable fire, is meant the torment of hell provided for unbelievers.

Out of this first generally observe, that where the Gospel comes and is
preached with power, and with a good conscience, and not huckstered nor
merchandized as men do their wares: but that they so labor as not to be
ashamed of that they do, preaching their doctrine not to the ear, but to the
door of the conscience, that there it makes a manifest difference between
true and false children, whereas before all was shuffled together: for though
before this time the Pharisees and all others were as one, bearing the same
title of Abraham's seed, yet says John, afterward shall come the venting of the
Gospel, which with the powerful blast thereof, shall scatter the hypocrites,
and make known the faithfulness of them that with honest hearts embrace and
cherish it. After this manner is the word in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb.
4.12.
compared to a sword with two edges, that cutteth two ways, either to
conversion if it be believed, or to confusion if it be despised. Hereupon it
is, that Simeon did prophecy to Mary ( Luke 2.34.) to prevent any conceit
might rise in her mind of her dignity and glory, being the mother of the
eternal Lord, hereby thinking that all the world should applaud her for her
Son, telling her, that this child should be set up for the rising and ruin
of many; a mark that every man should shoot at, and by his coming should the
hearts of many be discovered: For the sound of his mouth ( Heb. 4.12.) deuides
between the joints and the sinews, and the marrow and the bones: anatomizing
the hearts of men, to see whether they be sound or rotten. And they that before
seemed to be all one, shall when the fan comes differ: then the poison that
before lurked, shall be laid forth, and the hidden gall shall be displaied.
Hereupon also the word is compared to fire, which has a double effect, to
wast stubble and dross, and to purify that is refinable, as silver and gold.
For the Gospel has this virtue, to inflame some men's hearts with a zealous
love of God and his glory: setting others on fire to persecute it, to quench
and to impugn it. This effect had it in John's time, some saying, that he was
an honest man; some, that he was Christ; others, that he was a Galilean, Luke
3.16. Mat. 11.16.
whence could come no good thing; and others more plainly, that he was a
devil, all before being as they thought well circumcised and the children of
Abraham. So when Christ spoke in his own person, the chafe flew away, and
then was easily known who was an hypocrite, he coming to some place where
they had rather have their hogs ( Mark. 5.17.) then their souls saved; Luke
4.29.
and to others where they brought him to the side of a hill of purpose to have
thrown him down: and to Iairus house, where some ( Mark. 5.40.) laugh him to
scorn for his speech. This fan by Christ was committed to his Apostles, that
they likewise should make a separation where they came. Paul Preaching at
Antioch, the Jews railed against him, when the Gentiles desired him to preach
the same sermon the next Sabbath. And by the power of this Fan ( Act. 22.23.)
the Jews cast up dust in the air, and cry, that Paul is unworthy to live.
And Act. 23.12. certain do bind themselves by oath not to eat nor drink
till they had killed him: when as others in Iudaea did submit themselves and
became the true disciples of Christ. Yea ( Luke 12.53.) it appears that there
is no bond so straight nor so well knit, but religion will violate, and cause
the father with the son, the mother with the daughter, to impugn the Gospel
with hostility: not that it is the property of the Gospel to breed dissension,
but it is the malice of Satan to enrage men's hearts, that they should not
receive it, that his barnes might be full. And then must Ahab (1. King. 21.19.)
yield to Eliah, and not Eliah to Ahab. There is execrable cruelty committed on
the infants of Bethlem: who is the cause of it? not Christ, but Herod; and
Christ may not give place to Herod, though it cost never so much blood.

Secondly, observe where it is said, he will make his floor clean, that all
that refuse the Gospel, whatsoever they pretend, they are but chafe. For the
Pharisees here which had the chiefest places in the Church, they pretend to
have the Oracles and the temple, to be descended from the Patriarks, and to
live after the law of Moses,: yet they are but chafe which fill the floor,
being only puffed up with pride, and having no sound grain in them: for when
Christ is offered they persecute him, and cry: Hang him, as an enemy to the
law of Moses, Mat. 27.22.
so as their intention was good, yet was that no excuse: for then they that
persecuted the Prophets, and crucified the Lord of glory should be blameless;
for they had a zeal, but not according to knowledge. Now if they that stand
only in defense of that God himself ordained, and like not that any of that
should be abrogated by the Gospel, are but chafe, what shall they be that
seek to maintain their own traditions against both law and Gospel, and stand
in defense of many corruptions in the Church of God, and yet persuade the
Prince that all is well, what can they be but chafe of the worst sort?

And will purge his floor, etc.

Here may be demanded, what the cause is, why there is so much chafe in our
Church, and so little good grain: for it is strange to see with what
belli-gods it is stuffed, how disguised men be in pride, and how excessive in
usury: which be not as S. Peter calls them spots, 2. Pet. 2.13.
but as the biles and ulcers of Egypt: yea so much biting gain reigns among
us, as has made no more friendship between man and man, then between Cain
and Abel: such whoredom as the Sun cannot hide it, nor the earth bear it,
but does cry for vengeance, and their children baptized that are worse then
Sodomites, which (as Saint Jude says) be now in hell. To this we answer, that
the cause is, first, the want of fanning in many places of the land, the people
having only a man set over them, that can give no one word to separate, but
only read bare Service and stinted prayer, which can make no manifest
separation, but of open recusants: so as the people may well be quiet, because
the word never blows among them; and till the wind come, the chafe and the
wheat are mixed together: for can the wild ass bray if he has grass? or the
ox low if he has fodder? or an hypocrite show himself till his heart be
discovered, Job 6.5.
and his vizard taken off? All the plagues of Egypt which made Pharaohs heart
to relent somewhat, and yet in the end so hardened it as he utterly contemned
the Lords hand, are not like to this fan of the word, which searches every
part of a man, and blows him away, unless he be substantially rooted in
religion. A second cause of this is, that where there is fanning, yet it has
no power, they huckstering and tempering of it for their own fame and for
Balac^s offer of preferment, and not preaching to the conscience the crucified
word of the Lord: they preach of contention to add affliction to others, and
not in sincerity and meekness to bring consolation to others: and also when
they speak it is but verbal, for their lives do really confute the words of
their mouth. A third cause why there is such a mixture in this floor, is,
because although it be truly preached, yet men may do what they list, and the
majesty of the word is not hedged in with discipline: for if men live
wickedly, unless the law of man take them by the heel and restrain them, the
word of God cannot determine: so as except there be some special good
inclination in some few, for the multitude preaching does no good. For he must
be a good scholar that will learn without discipling, and he a sound
christian that will refrain from sin by bare preaching. The Word indeed is
the special farm for this floor, but then is it most powerful, if it have
discipline to strengthen it, and authority to countenance it. What? do you
mean the floor must be purged in this life, and that there must be nothing
but wheat in the Church of God? Why this cannot be till that great day of
separation, when every thing shall be put in his peculiar place: To this we
answer, that there is a double purging, the one in this life, the other after
this life; the one particular, the other universal. That purging that may and
ought to be, is, first the separating of all such as do not offer themselves.
Secondly, of them that offer themselves, but are unworthy; as if a man can make
no conscience to profit by the word, or can render no found account of his
faith, when he has been long taught, but like an idle and slothful
professor, is still to be trained up in the rudiments of religion, it is no
reason to let him be in this floor without feeling some smart for his
negligence: neither is it fit to give the holy things of the Lords Supper unto
him, for he deserves not the crummes that fall from his table. If a man be
obstinate and will not promise reformation, his child ought not to be received
to Baptism, unless he confess his sin, or give witness to the Church by
others which must do it: and then they ought to take the child from his
father, and not to return him to his parents again, where his education shall
be corrupt. For others that do profess, if after they break out into any
enormous sin, such chafe must be separate: for no unclean liver must be in
the Church, but either he must submit himself, and then he is none such; or
he must be cut off, if he continue senseless in his sin: for it is the house
of God which harbors none but such as hear his voice. And such as these
ought not to be admitted to the Sacrament, though they present and offer
themselves never so much: for he that permits them sins three ways, first,
in respect of Gods, giving the bread of children unto dogs, and making the
house of God as a common Inn, where he may buy any thing for money: but he must
do as Iehoiada the Priest did, 2. Chron. 23.19. not suffer any unclean man to
enter, or to set his foot within the Temple. Secondly, as he must not do it
in respect of God and his own conscience, so neither in respect of the party
himself: for seeing himself debarred and disfranchised from the city of God,
he would be ashamed, and this his abdication would bring him to humility, 1.
Cor. 5.2. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
whereby his soul might be saved: and he would stand abashed, that he that
should be a Christian should be separate from Christians, and thrust out of
the Church, out of which there is no salvation: whereas now seeing that his
sin does not separate him from the communion of the Saints, it brings him a
sleep in it, and hardly he comes to repentance. Thirdly, he sins against
the Church in admitting such a one, for who would suffer a leprous man to lie
with a child? and this animateth and emboldeneth others to sin by the sight
of his impunity, and many are infected by the scab of such a one. Did God in
the law abhor lepers, and must no man that touched a dead carkase partake of
the Passover a month after? and shall not whoredom and such like
uncleanness, be a cause to bar men from the Supper of the Lord? Paul said
plainly, (1. Cor. 5.7.) Purge out the old leaven, speaking of him that had
committed incest, comparing the Paschall lamb to the Gospel; the seven days
wherein it was eaten, to the whole course of our lives: the house where it was
eaten, to the Church; the lump, to the multitude; the leaven, to
maliciousness and filthiness; the unleavened, to the children of God: so as
they must separate all that are leauened in malice or wickedness, that not
only every peculiar man may be blameless, but all the Church may be clean
coming to so holy a place. For since we are all partakers of that immaculate
Lamb that is slain Christ Jesus, we must cast both out of our selves, and out
of our houses and congregations all impurity. Wherefore let not thy hand be in
sacrilege to permit such a one: it is in thy power to give, and answer the
church at thy peril thou must: (whatsoever the law of the Magistrate is) for
no man may command thee to sin, but according to the rule given to Timothy,
speaking of unable men to go before the people in life and doctrine, 1. Tim.
5.22. Lay not thou (says Paul) thy hands on him.

It will be said, this was an easy matter in the Apostles time, when they had
the keys of the Church, and the power in their hands, to cut off the
incestuous person, and when the Gospel was but newly entered, and but stepped as
it were within the threshould: but now men are not so easily corrigible as they
were then, being now more grown and sturdy in sin then before. We answer,
that if the censures of the church were so duly executed when there was no
Christian magistrate to countenance and protect them, much more might they be
so now when they might have the sword also to assist them. And if they had
fewer offenses when they had less means to purge them, for they could but
separate from the congregation only, and then if they would they might have
returned again to the infidels, far greater beuty might be looked for now, if
the governors of the church had not some great mist before them. And if the
churches of Iudaea and Galile (as we may see Acts 2. and 3.) did multiply
exceedingly, having the magistrate not against them, though not with them; much
more might they flourish now, having the Christian law of the Magistrate
binding their bodies whose consciences should be bound by the censures of the
Church. But is it no true Church where this exact cleansing is not? And is it
not the table of the Lord because some strangers besides children are received?
and is the whole lump infected by a little leaven? God forbid: only we say
the leaven ought to be separate, and the incestuous man ought to be cast out;
for they tha^ eat the Passover must have none come to it that has eaten
leaven: and if we ought not to eat with him, that is, have no familiatity
with him, much less ought he to be admitted by the Minister; but if he be,
yet to thy conscience that art a worthy receiver it is a sacrament. If Saul be
in the Tabernacle, I little doubt but David will with all his heart wish to
pray with him. And was Zachary any whit polluted by praying and scrificing
with the filthy Pharisees: or Annaes prayers less auailable, because many swine
entered into the Temple? The church (says Paul) has no such custom to be
contentious, 1. Cor. 11.16. but if it be, yet it remains a Church still. And to
resolve this point, to whom spoke John in this place but to the Church of God,
for as yet there was no separation of the wheat from the chafe, but afterward
they proved sworn enemies to Christ, and it was Moses chair though they sat
in it, and the people were commanded to hear them. Was not the church of Judah
the floor of the Lord, though the Pharisees taught false and corrupt doctrine,
that Gods name was not taken in vain unless men were openly forsworn, Mat.
5.33.
and though the high Priests were advanced by simony? Christ himself says it
was, and laboreth only to remove these errors, and to reduce every thing to
the purity of his Fathers institution. But now with us since this long venting
of the word of God has been with so little profit, and that the Pharisees stand
so close about the Princes mouth, as that she can hardly breath in the wholesome
air of the truth, what hope is there of a better separation but the fan of
fiery trial, that if wind will not do it, persecution may do it: for the
dross that cannot be scattered by blasts, must be consumed with burning.

Now when the floor is clean and swept within the Church, then is there
another cleansing out of the Church, which is either particular or universal:
particular, when good or bad men die, and such as they die such they shall
continue, for the tree that is fallen there it lies. Universal at the last
day, when all things shall be complete and perfect; when not only the chafe
shall be blown away, but even the tares, that is, secret hypocrites shall be
cut up by the Angels; for open offenders should be cut off here by the word
and discipline.

Further, in that it is said, Some shall be gathered into the Lords garner:
observe, that it is a most detestable opinion, to think that all shall be
saved, and that damnation is preached but for fashion to contain men in some
obedience. For let the scripture be burnt if this be true, and let Beelzebub be
saved if all shall be saved, and let Judas come forth of hell if none shall
go thither. Nay our own consciences do adiorne and summon us to think of a
general judgment, and Judas own heart condemning him caused him to hang
himself, Mat. 27.5. The Lords house must be fully furnished, and in all such
houses (as S. Paul speaks) there must be vessels of honor and dishonor, 2.
Tim. 2.20.
some prepared to glory, some to destruction: for in that he is willing to
show his wrath, Romans 9.23. appears that it is his will some should be
damned. Neither is this contrary to that, God wills not the death of a
sinner: for the difference is this, God wills not the confusion simply of any
man, as a thing wherein he delights, but he wills it as it is his justice;
and what greater or better justice can there be, then to be glorified in the
condemnation of some that have deserved it? and he must be no more unwillingly
just then unwillingly merciful.

Further learn, that even in this life the godly are gathered to heaven: and
so of the wicked, that though they live yet they are in hell. So S. John says,
he that believes is already passed to life: John 5.24.
and Heb. 12.22. we are gathered already to the Patriarks and to the souls of
just and perfect men through hope, and we are as sure to have that we hope
for, as we are of this we have already, namely the pledge of Gods spirit: and
Ephesians. 2. us he has gathered to the celesticall places under hope, speaking as
if it were already done, though the real gathering shall be at the latter day.
On the other side, of the wicked it is said by the same spirit, He that
believes not is already damned: the words are fearful, but it is so set down
to express the certainty of it: not but that he that is not beloved ( Ose.
2.23.) may be beloved: and he that is not under mercy (1. Pet. 2.10.) may
obtain mercy. But look in what state a man is in the Church, in the same
shall he be after this life: for whatsoever is bound on earth, is bound in
heaven, and they that be not bound here being privy hypocrites, are
notwithstanding bound in heaven, and shall be so in hell also.

For the last, which is unquenchable fire; thereby is meant the condemnation
prepared for the reprobate, not that we must imagine there is any natural
fire there: for first this fire can not pierce the souls of men nor the
spirits of devils, and the pain must extend both to soul and body. Secondly,
it is no more natural fire then it is a bodily worm spoken of in the Gospel,
which shall gnaw the hearts and consciences of the damned. Mark. 9.44.
Thirdly, in Esaias 30.33. it is said, there was a great lake prepared for Kings
with fire of much wood, and it is absurd to think there is any wood there; and
a river of brimstone burning by the breath of the Lord, which is not to be
intended of material brimstone, but it is set out by such terms to express
the unspeakable torment of it, not to be comprehended, much less to be
endured; for the torment of fire and brimstone, even to flesh and blood are
strange and terrible, therefore these speeches are used to convey to our
understanding what we could not before conceive. So it is said in the Gospel,
that they shall be bound hand and foot, not that there be any bonds or chains
there; Mat. 22.13.
but the meaning only is, that they are the prisoners of the Lord for ever,
never to be released, but to be restrained from all liberty, whereby they might
in any sort be eased. Again, hell fire is called Gehenna or Topheth, which was
a little place where the Israelites did sacrifice their children in fire to the
Devils; this being taken for the torment of the reprobate.

Now this torment is expressed two ways: first, in the extremity of it:
secondly, in the permanencie of it. The first two ways. First, by that they
shall feel both in soul and body: secondly, by that they shall lose; both of
them expressed 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. they shall be separated from the power of his
presence, and bound in chains in everlasting darkness. The greatness of this
torment is expressed two ways: first it shall be universal, in all parts; and
it is most fearful in this life, to be pained in every part of the body at one
time. Secondly, the particular torment the every one in hell shall feel, as
that Princes shall be tormented like Princes, every one according to the sins
that he wrought in his body, Mat. 10.15.
as it is said in the Gospel, It shall be easier for Sodom then for them,
and yet they be in hell already: for the damnation of Beelzebub shall be the
greatest, and then of them that sinned against the holy Ghost, and none of
these shall have so much as a drop of water to cool their toongues, but they
shall continually be blaspheming of God, for the which they shall continually
be tormented. And though this shall be great and grievous, such as they cannot
yet they must abide, yet shall it be a far greater hell unto them, to think
they have lost heaven, seeing Gods children to rejoice that their persecutors
be now plagued, and that God is so avenged of them for their sakes For the
second, which is the endlesnesse of this torment, it is a fire that shall never
go out, nor the flames whereof can never be^bated. If there were but as many
years to endure it as there be grass piles on earth or stars in heaven, the
conscience might somewhat through hope be eased, because at length it should
cease; but the end thereof cannot be imagined, and this word never is
fearful. Let this therefore teach us rightly to embrace the Gospel, that we
may be wheat in this earthly floor of the Lord, to the end we may be gathered
into his heavenly garner.

MATH. Chap. 3. verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.










NOW the Evangelist proceeds to show now John exercised part of his Ministry
even toward the Messiah himself, and sets down how after Christ had lived
long in Nazareth containing himself in Joseph's house, till his heavenly father
should consecrate him and call him forth to the great work of the Ministry
and of majesty, he being now of thirty years of age comes to John, and
requires to be baptized, in as much as he appearing in the flesh of man was to
join himself to them that confessed their sins. John by revelation
perceiving that he was the Lord, for they never met before, (this being in wise
dome provided of the Lord, lest it might have seemed a compact between them
two to cosen the world) refuses to do it, and put him back earnestly
acknowledging Christ's excellency and his own unworthiness. In this, bewraying
the error of his judgment, that he knew not all that pertained to his calling
and ministry, yet adds a reason why he did this; I can give but water, but
thou can give the spirit to purge the conscience. Christ seeing his modesty,
bids him leave off to entreat of his excellency and his own baseness; that
he was as the Son, and John but as the day star: Let this go, says
Christ, for thou and I both must labor to do that God has appoi^ted, it is
thy calling to baptize, and mine to require it, professing himself to be in
the number of repentants. John seeing that Christ showed this actio^ to be a
part of that righteousness should be fulfilled, did receive him: whereupon
after Christ had been^ drenched in the water, a miracle was seen, the heavens
to open, the holy Ghost to descend, a voice from his Father, that this Son
was principally beloved, and for his sake all others should be beloved. So as
the Savior of the world was first baptized, and then miraculously consecrated
to be that great monarch of heaven and earth.

In the words there are two general parts to be considered: first, that
Christ was baptized, from verse. 13. to the latter end of verse. 15. secondly,
what-testimony was given from heaven for his consecration to the Mediatorship.
In the first there be these circumstances set down: first, that Christ took
pains himself to come: secondly, that John at first refused him, giving a
reason why he did so: thirdly, Christ replying upon him with a reason added why
he required it, and why John may not deny it. For the first of these consider
two circumstances: first, at what time Christ came: secondly, whence he came,
(then) the word shows a continuance of the story, (then) when John had
prepared a people by his ministry to receive Christ, and when the fullness of
time was come, and the time of his present prinate life expired.

Here generally consider, that God determines the times and seasons of men's
private and public callings. Moses was forty years of age before God told him
he should be the delinerer of his people, and after he had discontinued and
walked privately forty years more, then he was called of God to that office,
Act. 7.23. Exo. 3.10. So John was thirty years old before he began to execute
his ministry. So for Christ it might seem tedious to his parents, that he
should so long contain himself in their private house; and albeit he was
destinated and ordained from the womb to this great office and work, yet he
must expect his fathers pleasure before he offer himself to go forth of
Galile. It is true of all men which Jeremy speaks of himself, chapter 1.5. God
called me (says he) and sanctified me to be a Prophet from the womb, yea
before I was fashoined: So Paul Gal. 1.15. says, he was separate from his
mothers womb to preach the gospel; yet they must both wait and attend for a
real calling. The use that is hence to be gathered, is, that as Christ
contented and satisfied himself with a private life, when by coming abroad
he might have come to great renown in the world, so much more are we to
satisfy our selves with that place we have, and leave it to Gods wisdom,
who in fullness of time will call if he have any imploiment for us: so as no
man may beg or buy a calling, or think all his graces buried if he enter not
presently into the broad way of worldly fame; for God will in time if he have
set him apart for his husbandry, provide him a place and means for his lawful
entrance, and such an admittance as may secure his conscience.

For the second, whence he came, from Galile: where may be demanded, why John
went not to him, he being but the seruant^ the reason is, first because John's
ministry was appointed to be exercised in the wilderness: secondly, it was to
set forth the majesty, and to preserve the dignity and worthiness of the
ministry: for in as much as Christ was to be baptized, he was to come thither
as one that was to partake of some fruit of his office. Which example and
prefident shows, that no man ought to think himself too good to come to
John, that is, to the Minister of God, in whose mouths heehath put the words
of reconciliation, and in whose hands are the distribution of his seals. And
this condemns all those that seek to bring the Temple into their house, or
wait that the Arc should come to them. David we see, though a King of high
glory and renown, Psalm. 84, 2.3. complains and mourns that he could not
have access to the church of God, and thought the birds happier the^ he that
sat and sung within the Temple. And if the King of heaven the Lord Jesus did
humble himself to go to John, much more ought flesh and blood to strive to
join themselves to the public place where the ministry is exercised.

John's forbidding of Christ to come to his baptism. Out of which place
appears, that John acknowledged him to be the Messiah, though he was clothed
with sinful flesh; for he says, he had need to receive the holy Ghost of him,
which none can give but Christ. Now how knew he this? for by the wisdom of
God it was wrought, that they never saw nor met before, therefore he must
needs know it miraculously; even as miraculously ( Luke 1.41.) he leapt in his
mothers womb when she first heard of Christ's conception. And if the sign to
know him be the Dove, as some would have it, how knew he him before? It must be
answered, that God gave him a secret revelation to himself, to discern that
this was the person in whom dwelt the Godhead bodily; Coloss. 2.9.
and after for further confirmation, which was a sign a posteriori, there was
this exhibition of that token, a Dove descending on him. According as ( Exodus
3.12.) Moses was told he should be a deliverer of the people of Israel; and
this was his sign, that when he had done it he should sacrifice to God in the
mount, that is, it should further confirm him, for he knew it before when he
went forth of Egypt with the people. Where we may learn, that if we walk
simply as in the sight of God, and make a conscience of our calling, we shall
have (if need require) an extraordinary presence and help of God to instruct
us, and we shall be taught of him the secrets and wonders of the Lord.

Further learn in this refusal of John to baptize Christ, that although a man
may be an excellent Minister, yet he may err concerning some chief point of
his office, and this to be no disparagement to him, even as John failed in
this duty. So as we draw out of this particular example this general
instruction, against such as except against Ministers being of another
judgment then others be: for if he be faithful in the greatest duty of his
calling, and his end be to serve the people, not for ambition, but of
conscience, if he be sound in the principal, and hold the foundation, though
perhaps he be in some error otherwise, yet it is no reason to call his
ministry into question. For we must qualify and correct our selves, from
judging hardly of them that differ from other Ministers in some points, using
the moderation of S. Paul to the Philippians, like brethren supporting their
infirmities. Not but that Paul may withstand Peter to his face, Phil. 2.3.
( Gal. 2.11.) in that wherein he is justly to be condemned: as if for a few
Jews sakes he will separate himself from the Gentiles, with whom he had
before conuersed: for this was offensive to the Church of God; otherwise Paul
and Barnabas ought not ( Act. 15.39.) to part asunder and break company about
small matters, but one should appease the other in meekness of spirit.

Now for the answer of Christ, it stands on two parts: first, requiring him
to do it: secondly, a reason. Let alone for this time. Where learn, there is a
kind of modesty unseasonable, (though all are to think humbly of themselves)
which is that that hinders a man from the execution of his calling: and it is
as if Christ should say: Whatsoever I be, stand thou upon thy commission from
God. And if John by this his calling was thought worthy to baptize the natural
Son of God, much more may we think our selves meet to preach to flesh and
blood what ever they be* for though they have not all vestem communem, yet they
have cutem communem; they differ not in birth, though there be some difference
in apparel. Neither are we to abase our selves too much in the apprehension
of our own wants: for as Paul says, who is worthy or sufficient to be the
Lords Ambassador, to have the keys of heaven to shut it, that not repenting
men are damned; and to have, Mat. 16.^9.
that they bid on earth to be sealed in heaven? Who is sufficient to be the
Chancelour of that great king the Lord Iehoua, or to save a soul? Who is
worthy to be received as God himself, as Christ says: He that receineth you,
receives me; and he that hears you, hears me? Of himself no man. But when
the Lord has once sanctified out polluted lips, and that we have a book
given us to eat, and that our lips be touched with the coal from the altar,
whereby we may not be worthy, but vouchsafed to be worthy; then though we be
subject to the same infirmities others be, we must notstand amazed or abashed
at them, so as we be hindered in our duties. For if God will have Moses go to
Egypt, ( Exodus 3.12.) he may not say: Who am I, that I should stand before
Pharao? Neither must Jeremy say: ( Ier. 1.7.) I am a child, when the Lord has
once touched his mouth: for be he never so slow of speech, the Lord ( Exodus
4.12.) will teach him what to say. And John must not be so nice, but he must
baptize Christ, since God has given him that honor.

Further here learn, that if it so fall out, a man in some congregation be
more learned, better exercised in the Scriptures, then are those lips which
ordinarily do preserve more knowledge, though he have profited more in
mortification then his teacher, as David had in his time by his continual
study in the Law of God; yet he is not to despise the ministry, wherein
ordinarily there is that sufficiency, that it is able to instruct the best
learned, and to guide the most circumspect: and what ever he be, he must range
himself in the common order of professors. For Christ though he have in him
the riches of all wisdom, and the fullness of all grace, must and does
himself vrg^ to receive baptism at John's hands, because it is Gods
appointment: for here run the silver streams that can quench our spiritual
thurst; why then should others make themselves better then Christ, who had need
of John's ministry? David had most heavenly meditations, and was wonderful
conversant in the Scripture; and as himself says, the law of God had made him
wiser then his teachers, yet he vouchsafed to submit himself to the hearing of
them, and thought his life forlorn, when he was exiled from the Temple: Psalm.
84.1. and that the birds that bred there were happier then he. Much more are
they faulty now, that being far short of that measure of religious knowledge
was in David, do exempt and banish themselves from the public congregation.
And if it be intolerable to despise the sacramental bread, though thou have as
good at home, much more punishable is it to despise the administration of the
doctrine, thinking thou can profit as much at home: for the greater blessing
is knit to the public ordinance and institution of God, where every man may
buy wisdom without money.

John baptize, that is his righteousness; and Christ be baptized, for that is
his righteousness And thus was Christ baptized, a sign of remission of sin,
yet had he no sin in him; he was circumcised, ( Luke 2.21.22.) yet had he no
unclean flesh, his mother was purified, yet was she not polluted by his birth:
but the reason is, I have (says Christ) taken upon me the form of a servant,
and they (speaking of the elect) must be made righteous in me.

In the general learn this, that what God has commanded must be done, and it
is convenient to accomplish all righteousness. So as no exception must be
taken to any thing God prescribes: if Christ were bound to it in the office of
a Mediator, much more are we to strive to come to this mark, to perform
every task that God sets down. If thou say, or suffices to embrace
those things that are necessary for salvation, I ask then what that is? If
thou do account it that without which none can be saved, then put away the
Word and Sacraments, for many are saved without these. Indeed some things are
more necessary then others, as the Word begets and begins faith, the Sacraments
do but confirm it, 3^^^. (...). M
and these are more necessary then the censures of the Church. Some points
destroy the foundation, as to deny Christ to be the Son of God, others are
not fundamental, about which there may be great errors in judgment: but yet
let us consider as near as we can, that we fulfill whatsoever is commanded,
and the least being commanded with singular wisdom of the Lord must be
obeyed. So Timothy is commanded by Paul (1. Tim. 5.21.) to keep all things,
not preferring one before another. 8. ^1. d^^
We must not make a conscience of the least and neglect the greatest, of stand
amazed with the excellency of the highest, so as we look not down to things
inferior commanded by the same God. It is the commission ( Mat. 28.19.) to
preach and baptize, as that the word in the ordinance of God should go before
the seal; and in this respect it is necessary: yet is it a Sacrament, though
there be no preaching, and the want of the word does not abolish the nature of
the action. So we must labor, that all thing that savor of corruption, may be
removed; yet not to sever our selves from the Church by reason of some abuses.
And here those are confuted, that will submit themselves to some
commandments, and not to others. We think no man can be saved without
Baptism if he contemn it, and why do th^^ not as well labor to have thy
child nurtured up in faith and religion? No man will come to the Sacrament
without examination; for if he do we account it damnable: or who is he that
taking the bread in the Supper, would be found asleep? yet we thrust our
selves into the temple to hear the Lord speak unto us, not communing with our
hearts before we come, and suffering o^^ selves to be caught with sleep when
we are come. And whence proceeds this, but that we do not esteem it as
righteous as ordinance of God to come to the doctrine with preparation, as to
the Sacrament? Certain it is, many may be saved without Bptisme: but being
baptized and despising preaching if he may have it, he is sure to be damned:
for what is the seal unless there be a grant precedent? But we are almost
like unto the Pharisees, that thought it no sin to swear by the altar, but
to swear by the oblation on the altar was an heinous matter: so to swear by
the Temple it was nothing, Math. 23.18
but otherwise to swear by the gold in the Temple: which is most strange,
since the gold is nothing unless it be sanctified by the Temple. So the Word
does separate and sanctify the water and the bread, and not they the Word; for
it has life without them, and who taught them to distinguish thus? For if we
will all go to John to be baptized of him, so must we also to hear him
preach. Let us beware therefore how we leap at a Gnat and swallow a Camel.
Ioh. 13.8.
Peter would as feign be cleansed as the rest of the Apostles, then must he not
be so nice as to deny this mercy to himself, to have Christ wash his feet. But
as we must measure every thing by the commandment, so must we likewise esteem
them according to the dignity and order that God has commanded, for this shall
be the best fulfilling of righteousness.

And Jesus when he was baptized, etc.

Here the Evangelist sets down what followed immediately after Christ's
baptising, namely, the ordaining of him by an heavenly Oracle, to be the great
Doctor of the Church. There were many glorious sights and apparitions, whereby
was testified to John and the people, that this was an extraordinary man. By
opening the heavens must be understood, that they were as it were cut asunder:
that thereby they might know, that this man was not to be considered as in the
infirmity of man, but as one come from heaven. Further, John and the people
saw with their bodily eyes the bodily shape of a dove, by which was represented
Sacramentally an extraordinary presence of the holy Ghost; which though it be
every where, and so cannot be lim^ted any where, yet was it never so much
present any where as in this place: whereby was signified the perfusing and
pouring of all gifts and graces upon the humane nature of the Lord Jesus. And
after their sight had been thus confirmed, yet was there a more excellent
sign; a voice from the living God, that this man and this person that stood
before them, aggreuating and gathering himself among the company of sinners,
this poor man appearing but in the baseness of this flesh, was the very
natural Son of God, begot by an incomprehensible generation, in whom his
soul delighted. So as the sum is this: There are testimonies given from
heaven to John and the people, by sight and by hearing, that this man that was
but newly baptized was the only and alone peacemaker of the Church. The
testimonies be three: first, the opening of the heavens: secondly, the
descending of the dove: thirdly, the voice from heaven, and the matter of the
voice.

For the first understand, that albeit Christ had the heavens opened, in part
for the confirmation of his own soul, that he was appointed to be the great
ruler of the Church, who in his humanity had need of such a confirmation, and
that in part they were opened to give him security to undergo this great
office: yet it was done especially for the confirming of John and the people,
as Ioh. 12. A voice came from heaven saying, I have glorified him, which came
(says Christ verse. 30.) not for me, but for your sakes. So as hereby
generally observe, in that the heavens are opened to authorize him to be the
great Teacher, that our duty is to hear him, and the greater shall our
condemnation be, if we do it not. For though others speak by commission from
God, as John and the Prophets, yet this is true spoken of in the Hebrews: that
if they went not unpunished that despised them that spoke from the earth, that
is, being but men, much less shall they escape that despise him who speaks
from heaven. And since the Prophets, ( Luke 16.29.) are to be heard, and John
speaking in the authority of God, much more are we to take heed, that we
neglect not the words of this great Teacher, that speaks from heaven, being
God in flesh.

(now) to light on him? Colos. 2 9.
It is certain, (as the Apostle teaches) that the God head dwelt bodily in
his flesh, and never any creature had so much as he, from the first moment of
his conception. And in that it seems now to descend upon him, understand, that
before he led a private life, and the time of his manifestation was not come,
at this time he abstained from showing any work of his mediatorship, and in
this private course of life he had such a portion of the spirit as was meet:
but now when he was to exercise his office, he has his soul endued with a
more excellent measure of grace. Hereupon it is said, Esa. 61.1. The spirit of
the Lord came upon me to preach good tidings, etc. coming then in a special
manner upon him: where we learn, that as Christ in the lineaments and
proportion of his body grew and increased, so did he also in the graces of his
soul and inward virtues, as ( Luke 2.52.) he increased in wisdom, and in
stature, and in favor both with God and men. And howsoever he had by right
appertaining to him all grace, yet it was powered down by degrees: and the
greatest measure of all, was at the time of his ascension. The grace he has
received is far above that of Angels, even that which he had in his humane
soul, yet were they created and finite: and it is no vicious or blameworthy
ignorance, not to know that as a man, which comes not within the compass of
his humanity, as the certainty of the latter day is not revealed (as himself
says) to the son of man. Mark. 13.32.


Further, in that the spirit does now anoint him, learn, that whosoever shall
challenge any calling from God, must show himself to be qualified in some sort
more then he was in his private life: for that which is true in Christ as the
head, is also in the inferior members. And as it is intolerable in a man to
usurp any place in the Church without authority from men, so is i^ high
presumption to take it upon him, except with the outward calling he can show
the inward seal of the holy Ghost: for without this, the approbation of men is
but as a seal set upon water; and if he pretend the allowance of the holy
Ghost, let him show some competent sufficiency to discharge it. Secondly, is to
be considered, why he descended in the shape of a dove. Where note first, that
we understand not the shape spoken of as if the done appeared but as in a
shape: for it had a real and a bodily being and substance, and the word
(shape) is to be referred to the holy Ghost, which is in all places as God,
and so not visible in himself; but truly represented in the dove, all signs
being (as they must be) proportionable to the representing of that is to be
signified. In Acts 2.2. the spirit appears like the rushing wind, to show
the power and feruency of the Gospel: secondly, like a cloven tongue, which
should speak, and be as it were divided to all: thirdly, like a fiery tongue,
to purge us, and to wast men's filthiness. And here like a dove, to testify
Christ's kingdom to be in all lowliness and harmlesnesse, to be a preacher of
peace, of such a dove like simplicity, Esa. 42.2. Mat. 12.20.
that as is spoken by the Prophet, he should not lift up his voice in the
streets, and of so compassionate a heart, as not to break the bruised reed.

Here further consider the difference between the manifestation of the Law and
of the Gospel: in the delivery of the Law blows the sound of a trumper,
appears fearful lightning a^^ dreadful thundering, Exodus 19.16. so as the
people could not abide to hear it, and Moses himself being astonished, and
said: I fear and quake, Heb. 12.21. But when the Gospel is given, there is
nothing comes forth that is fearful, to testify that Christ would not
terrify with thundering threats, but by a mild, and a still, and a familiar
voice would call men, how long soever they have continued in their sins, and
how many soever they be: yea if they be distressed in their hearts, and
anguished in their souls, as a mild dove he allureth them, and promises to
save them. Whereupon if any man do bleed, that he has wounded the Lord by his
offenses, and do groan with sighs unspeakable, and be confounded with his own
sin, and ashamed of himself, let him not fear to go to Christ, who is yet
even to this day a dove. The least groan of a repentant heart the Lord will not
refuse: for it is his nature to be merciful, and his glory and joy to save,
and if there be but a little work begun in us, the Lord Jesus will quicken and
cherish it; which may comfort us to power forth our souls before him: for he
lies in wait for our return with the lost Son, Luke 15.20. and has not
deposed not laid aside his compassion. Now if neither the voice of Moses (...)
terrify, Luke 1.32.
nor the voice of Christ allure us, if piping will not make us dance, nor
weeping will make us repent, then this is our condemnation, that this meek
dove is not embraced, and that we believe not the Gospel, whereby we may have
access to Christ, and so be saved.

Thirdly, here is to be considered, how John could call the dove the holy
Ghost, since the essence of this spirit is not discernable, nor the power
infused into Christ to be seen. Again, he that is every where, and in no
place circumscribed, cannot be discerned: how is it said then, that John saw
him? We most understand they are both figurative and borrowed speeches, he
saw not the Essence of the holy Ghost, nor the power infused into Christ is not
to be discerned: for this was to be seen only with the eye of the soul: but
the sight of the dove persuaded him the spirit was there after a special
manner, singualr and extraordinary. Again, he saw not the spirit descend, but
the dove, which did really signify, that as verily and truly the spirit was
light upon him. But is the holy Ghost that Dove, as Ioh. 1.32. I beheld that
spirit come down from heaven like a Dove, and it abode on him. This is to be
understood, not that the holy Ghost was enclosed in the Dove, or personally
united to the Dove, but it is a sacramental speech, whereby that which is
proper to the sign is given and attributed to the thing signified; as we say,
the bread is the body of Christ: but if substantially the holy Ghost be present
in the Dove, then so is the body of Christ in the Supper. Not like: for the
holy Ghost is every where, because he is a spirit, but the body of Christ is
circumscribed and bounded in a place certain, and so they be not of the same
nature. Again, we do not say the Dove was a type of the substantial presence
of the holy Ghost, for it was then every where; and it was not there present as
in essence, but it was a type to signify that he was so there as in no place
so much: and it must be intended of a sacramental and of no essential
presence, as if he were no where else, but of the presence of his essence in a
special manner.

Again, it is absurd to ask how there can be a true giving of the thing
unless the thing be there; as that Christ cannot be given by the bread,
unless he be in, or with, or under the bread: for it is not the local
presence or absence that makes the truth of giving it, but if the verity of the
thing be there, it is enough: for God can give man leave to eat his flesh
being in heaven. The fathers did eat it, otherwise they could not have been
saved, John 6.31. and then Christ was not only not present, but not at all as
touching his humanity: so as Christ began not only to be flesh when he was
manifested, but they did eat Manna, and in that by faith they did eat Christ.
So in the water the conscience is washed, and yet is there no blood transfused
with the water, but it is as truly there, as this Dove did testify Christ to
be filled with all graces: and so truly is it sealed unto our souls that we
eat Christ, though not corporally. By the word we eat the flesh of Christ
continually by faith, and in the Sacrament it is only more plain that we eat
it, because two senses are satisfied by it; the ear hearing the word, and the
eye seeing the bread.

by the former miracles the Lord only provided for the witness of the eye,
but now he prouides for the ear also. Where we learn, the wonderful
wisdom and love of God to exercise all our senses, that thereby we might be
brought to a certain persuasion of these mysteries. Among the Philosophers is
a great question, whether the sense of sight or of hearing be better in it
self. True it is, that sight in nature is more excellent, as for celerity and
quickenesse, so for perspicuity and sharpness: but if the doubt be made of
the profit of these two, then hearing excels; for we can see nothing but
that is visible, but many more things are to be heard of, which thereby may be
conveyed to the heart to judge of: so the largeness of hearing is greater in
the profit. Besides, no man profits by sight, unless he understand it by
hearing; for which cause it pleased God to apply both in the mystery of
salvation, that thereby we might be sure of it, we never doubting of that we
both see and hear. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. and the holy Ghost
bores the care, Psalm. 40. and leads the eye to satisfy it, setting before it
in Baptism water, and in the Supper bread and wine, so as it is provided that
the hearing might have the word, and the eye the sacraments.

Now in the voice consider what it does express, namely the that flesh which
stood there before them was the natural son of God; and this he is two
ways: first, as he is the son of God by nature, of the eternal substance of
his Father; howbeit let no man think fleshly of the matter, for he departed
with no substance, nor had any manner of change: secondly, as he was the son
of Mary, not by nature or adoption, for then there had been a time when he was
not the Son of God, but by personal union, the man Christ being never a
person by it self until it was personally united to the Godhead; so as he was
borne the son of God not by nature, for he was of the nature of his mother:
and so Mary is said to be the mother of God, not that she brought forth God,
but brought forth that man that was God, and this in respect only of the
personal union.

In that it is said, my well-beloved Son; understand that all lo^^ comes from
him that comes to us, and we are beloved only for Christ's sake: as Ch^^^ (...)
prays, John 17. I beseech thee good Father, that as (...) ^^^d me, so thou will love them, and give them the same glory thou guest me. This is God
required to do by his own Son, who can a^ke nothing shall be denied him:
With the same love love thou them: as I am in them, so are they in me. And this
ministers singular consolation, that when we consider Christ to be beloved; we
may withal remember, that with the same love the Lord loves his natural son,
with the same does he love us that are adopted: so as when he beholds the
beauty of his son, in whose forehead as in a golden plate are written all
our names, he turns from our filthiness, and embraces us as his own
son, and the Father and son are all one in desire? The Lord grant we may be
able to comprehend it, and be willing to entertain it, that this love may
constrain us to love him again, otherwise it brings forth no effectual
fruit in us.

Again, since the Father took all delight in this Son Christ Jesus, and
that the whole Trinity was here at his baptizing, and that the father says in
another place, Son I will glorify thee still: John 12.28.
let us learn to magnify the Lord Jesus, let him be our joy, for who is
there in heaven or earth in whom we can set our delight, better then on him
which thus pleases the father? Let us love him that God loves, he is the only
Priest to sacrifice for us, the only Advocate to plead for us, the only
Prophet to instruct us, the only King to govern us, the only shield to defend
us: we shall be made rich through his grace only, righteous through his
obedience only, safe through his protection only, and saved through his
mediation only. He that glorifies the Son glorifies God, and he that rests
under the wings of the Son, shroudeth himself under the shadow of the most
high: then accursed be that man, or that religion, that holds Christ but as the
chief Savior, and would have other helps joined to him: for we must only have
Christ, and wholly Christ, and assure ourselves to be ^aued only in him, our
prayers to be heard only through him, and our wounds to be healed only by
the sight of him; and to what end should we join others with him, since all
are beloved only for him?

That there is a Trinity, appe^^ (...) ^^er in this place; a^ namely the
fathers voice, (...) ^esence in the Done, and Christ manifested and (...)
flesh: and these be several, yet but on^^e ho^^^, and all and every of them
is le^^^uah. It is a mystery only to be adored, yet in some measure i^ to be
kno^en, that they should be three persons yet but one God: as for example, take
three men, Paul, James and John, here be three persons and three men, but it
is not so in God: for in things that be created, we must consider they are
only limited, therefore the same nature in John is not the same natu^^^
singular and in specie that is in Paul, because they be not only two persons,
but divided in quantity; and that particular nature in particular that is in
John cannot be in Paul. So for Angels, take Raphael, Gabriel, and Michael,
supposing him to be a created Angel, the same particular angelical nature
that is (...) one is not in another; for they be not only two persons of
Angels, but two natures, not distinct but separate. Now in God (...) make a
common essence, which is Jehovah, wherein does cons^^^ three Elohims, yet are
they not three Iehouahs, because his nature is simple, and the self same is in
them all, and the same being is in God the Father that is in the Son, and is
tota to (...) in every one and the same in Unity. And if we will have th^^
Gods, then must we make a substance divided, which cannot be but there is only
a distinction. Angels are separate one from another, and are one without
another, but in the Trinity it is otherwise. The Son is in the Father, the
holy Ghost in the^^ both, and they are all one. The Sun begets beams, from
th^^ Sun and the beams proceeds light: the beams cannot be^^ without the
Sun, nor the light without them both. So from the spring rises the well
head, yet is not the spring without th^^ well head, and the stream proceeds
from them both. These (...) steps and traces as it were to conceive somewhat of
this myste^^ of mysteries.

Lastly observe, as the whole Trinity was present at C^^^^ baptism, the Father
to justify his Son, the Spirit to sa^^ him, and Christ to be sanctified: so
are they also present (...) baptism, God the Father to receive us, Christ to
purcha^en for us, and the holy Ghost to purge our consciences, yea and the
heavens are open, that is, we are as sure to come thither as we are sure Christ
is there. Therefore is the whole congregation bound to stay the setting on of
this seal, and to see the child received into the church, since there is such
a glorious presence at it, and it ought to be meditated upon, when it is
applied to others.

MATH. chap. 4. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.






















NOW the Evangelist further shows, that because the time was near when our
Savior Christ was to enter into his office, to which he was before
consecrated, that it was ordained by God and the holy Ghost immediately before,
that he should submit himself to be exercised in a hot conflict, challenging
Satan hand to hand: that ouercomming in this first and great combat, he
himself might be consumed, and others might know, that he came to destroy the
works of the devil. And to the end that Satan might have the greater power
and fuller blow at him, he was led into a solitary and desert place, where the
devil might be in his ruff; and to such a place wherein men possessed were
specially tormented, and there Christ lived among wild beasts, as Mark says
chap. 1.13. that Satan might do his uttermost. And forasmuch as Moses in the
delivery of the Law, ( Exodus 34.28.) was taken up into a mount to God, and was
taken from men, where he abstained from meat forty days and forty nights,
that the excellency of his doctrine might receive the greater grace, and might
further be authorized: and forasmuch as Eliah (1. King. 19.8.) in the restoring
of the Law defaced in the idolatrous reign of Ahab, did go in the strength of
one cake and a pot of water forty days and forty nights: So here before
the doctrine of the Gospel was to be published, it was meet that Christ
should do no less, lest there might be thought some disparagement done, and
less glory to have been in the Gospel, that the law being written but in
stone, and to endure but a time, should be adorned and beautified with a
greater miracle then the Gospel, which should be written in the living stones
of men's hearts. Howbeit in this, Christ gives us no example of abstinence: for
he fasted because he had no manner of stomach all that while; which was to
confirm us, that he was a man merely supernatural, being able to forbear
without a^^ appetite forty days. During which time, the Devil set upon him,
and he was not free from this encounter any while, but after beginning to be
hungry, then the devil more furiously assaulteth him, hoping to work and
prevail somewhat upon this occasion of his infirmity: whereupon follow three
several temptations, which in their place shall be spoken of.

In the words are set down three points: first, Saint Matthew diligently
delivers all such circumstances as went before his temptation: secondly, what
these temptations were, both in number and in kind after he grew hungry, from
the third to the end of the tenth verse: thirdly, the event and issue of this
assault, that when he had repulsed the rage, and driven back the darts of his
enemy, the Angels came to do him homage, as to a great and mighty conqueror.

For the circumstances before the combat, they be five: first, is noted the
time (then:) that is, immediately after he had received testimony from heaven,
that he was the great Doctor of the church: secondly, the place where this
was, in the wilderness, a place most for the advantage of Satan: thirdly, by
what motion he was carried thither; by the direction of that spirit which before
descended on him: fourthly, to what end he went, namely, to be tempted:
fifthly, the occasion Satan took more specially ta assault him, which was his
fasting and hunger.

For the first: when he was solemnly pronounced to be the Son of God, and
that he was full of the holy Ghost, then the devil sets upon him. While he
lived a private life, and kept himself close and within his compass, he
assaied not to assault him: but when he is to execute a matter and work of his
office concerning the salvation of mankind, and that this is now to be
accomplished by the preaching of the Gospel and by miracles, and that the
power of the devil is to be extinguished, and that he is to be cast out of
men's consciences, now he begins to challenge him. Where learn, that the same
which befell to the head, the members be not exempted from, especially such as
be ordained to be instruments for the setting up of the Gospel. When Moses
lived private and showed not himself to the world there was no cause of
quarrel: but when he saw one of his brethren suffer wrong, and defended him,
and avenged his quarrel that had the harm done to him, and smote the
Egyptian: Act. 7.25. then they began to disgrace him, and he was feign to fly
to preserve his life, Exodus 2.15. So Paul when he was a Pharisie, no man in
greater credit nor more commended for being zealous in their religion: but when
he began to preach Christ crucified, then was there none more buffeted by
Satan, nor more exposed to contumelies, nor in greater peril of his life then
he; so as once he was feign to be privily conveyed away, by being let down in
a basker, Act. 9, 25. and a second time to be rescued from the Jews malice by
a Centurion, Act. 23.23. And this policy and stratageme of the Devil is
confirmed to us by our own experience: for when a Minister begins to make a
conscience, and to stand soundly in the doctrine of Christ, and the holy life
of his Apostles, then Satan stirs up instruments to bring his name in
question, and kindles such coals, as in the end he is either removed, or by
the multitude of disgraces made weary of well doing. The cause of this in
Satan is two fold: first, his malice against the Majesty of God: secondly, his
envy against the salvation of man. For being adjudged to torment, he labors
to be avenged on God his justice, and sins against the holy Ghost of purpose
to despite God, and seeks to disglorifie him by seeking to destroy the seed of
the woman. Hereupon it is noted, that Angels sinning were never restored,
because they sinned without temptation merely of malice, being created
excellent and pure spirits. But yet howsoever Satan bestirreth him to heap up
the displeasure of the world upon us, and is ever at our heels with some flood
of waters or other, let us not be discouraged, but proceed on in that
sanctified course we have begun: for the Lord will either stir up the earth
to drink up our affliction, or else our faces shall shine notwithstanding his
temptations. For Christ till he began to exercise his office was quiet, and
though he was thus troubled, yet ceased he not to perform his work.

For the second, which is the place: he went into the wilderness, partly to
imitate that Eliah had done, (1. King. 19.8.) being in the mount of Horeb in
the wilderness, and fasting there forty days: but especially to provoke
Satan the more, and to give him all advantage that might be, that in the end
be might show himself the stouter champion. And for this cause they that were
possessed with devils were cast into solitary places, that the spirits might
have the greater power over them. Now, herein Christ shows his greater
courage, giving Satan as it were leave to appoint the field, and to set down
his weapon: like them that being determined and resolute to fight, and to try
their manhoods, go apart by themselves, where they may have no company to part
them. Even so Christ, as a victorious Captain, deals where satan himself
will choose, that he ouercomming as it were at uneven weapons, it might be an
encouragement and confirmation to us, that this was he who was sent of God to
break the Serpents head, and that has the power to disarme him. Where
notwithstanding observe, that though Christ who was indeed the stronger, did
lay himself thus open to his enemy, yet that this is no example for us to
imagine that we can follow, who are lighter then vanity, but that we must avoid
solitariness as much as can be, except we will provoke the devil: for this is
the humor that lies fittest for his temptation, when we are destitute of the
comfort of company, to work the more violently upon our affections. Hereupon
the Philosophers are wont to say, and that truly, that he which lived alone,
was either a God or a devil.

For the third, the guide by which he was directed thither, was the holy
Ghost: where we learn this comfort, that seeing the devil could not have
tempted Christ, but that God by the wisdom of his spirit had so appointed
both the time, the place, and the occasion, we may hereby have good security
given unto us, that since Satan's power is limited, and he deals but by
commission, and all temptations outward and inward are so sent from God, that
he intermedleth but as an instrument for the hardening of the reprobate, and
for the trial of the elect; and since he has no absolute power to exercise
his tyranny, but runs like a dog that is chained by the arm of the Lord,
we may return this joy to our souls, that though we be compassed with clouds
of calamities, yet we shall never be temped above our measure, for he cannot
do it but by permission. And since God is the master of the prize, to judge
who fights most valiantly, if we fear and tremble before him, and walk
according to the direction of his spirit (provided always that we tempt him
not to try his goodness) we may assure our selves, that as he has begun
a good work in us, so he will end it to the praise of his glory: and as Esaias
49.24. the just captivity shall be delivered, and the pray shall be taken from
the tyrant: for the Lord is stronger then he, and therefore is able, and has
better title then he, both in creating us when we were not, and in redeeming us
being lost; and therefore we shall be victors in this strong man Christ.

For the fourth, the end why he was tempted: which was to sustain the
uttermost assaults Satan could make by suggestion to seduce him. Here it may
seem strange at first, that our Savior Christ should be so far abased, to
be subject to the temptations of the devil, and to be directed to it by the
spirit of God. True it is, there was no matter in Christ to work upon, his
nature being fully sanctified from his conception, free from all corruption,
yet he was apt and capable to be tempted: that is, it might glaunce as a
thought thorough him, but it was presently repulsed. For such was the state of
Adam at first, that though he had no inward concupiscence, yet he was such a
one as might be tempted to hear and to see, if he would: but this is the
difference, it clasped about Adams understanding, but it could not possibly
lodge with Christ: and it is no more disparagement to him thus to be tempted,
then it was for him to take and assume our flesh. Hereupon consider, that
there be three kinds of motions in the mind of man. The first, which glaunceth
and passes thorough the mind without any troubling of it at all. The second
more permanent, when somewhat assaults the mind, and yet without any consent
of the mind. The third, is that kind of motion to which the heart consents.
The first of these is against no commandment, the second is against the tenth
commandment, the third against the other nine commandments. And this is
singular comfort and consolation to us, that Christ was tempted; for now we may
be bold to assure our selves, that we may power forth our souls unto him,
and may approach to him in all our agonies, not doubting but he will
compassionatly respect us, because he in this flesh of ours, knew and felt the
hard encounter; according to that is said often in the old Law to the
Israelites: Remember thou were once a servant in Egypt: experience of
afflictions making men more merciful: and as it is said, Heb. 5.2. he is meet
to have compassion on us that are out of the way, because that he also was
compassed with infirmity: and Heb. 12.3. the Apostle draws his argument thus:
that the consideration of the sufferings of Christ should persuade us not to
be wearied nor to faint in our minds, both because he by his sufferings
learned obedience, and also because he in our sufferings will be a bearer of
the weight lest it ouerpresse us, that we also might be consecrated through
afflictions. And this also is a second comfort to us, that as Christ overcame
by flesh, so shall we also victoriously conquer through him, if with patience
we persevere: for herein has Christ recovered what Adam lost, who received
concupiscence by Satan's temptations; but Christ has overcome the devil in as
great temptations as ever Adam was overcome.

Further, in that Christ is led by the sprit, and the devil tempts him:
consider what the purpose of them both are, since being opposite one to the
other, they both join in this one action. We must learn, that temptations are
diversely spoken of in the Scripture: first, the devil tempts; therefore when
we are moved to anger, give not place (says the Apostle) to the devil; Ephesians.
4.27.
for he blows the coals to kindle thy wrath, which is murder two ways:
first, either in the unjust matter of it: secondly, or in the immoderate
measure of it, and in all things he as an external instrument works upon
the corruption of our hearts. Secondly, one wicked man tempts another, as it
is said in the Proverbs: Come, lay thy lot with us, and we will take a purse;
Prou. 1.14.
alluring others by their example to the participation of the same sin: and
these are two causes of temptations without our hearts. But Saint James ( chap.
1.14.) goes to a third cause: Every one (says he) is tempted of his own
concupiscence, as speaking of the inward cause that another provoke us by and
Satan works upon, namely, our own pronenesie and pregnancy to sin, and
the fire that burns in our breasts, so as ever we must charge and challenge
our selves for our sins, and every temptation is either from an outward
provocation, or inward instigation, or both. Fourthly, God tempts not only
to try what strength we have to use prosperity with sobriety, and adversity
with patience: for this is not enough, though by this he does manifest what is
hidden in the inward mind: but these other inward solicitations come not
without God, yet does he not tempt ( James 1.13.) as it is evil, but uses
the ministry of Satan two ways: first, toward the elect: then toward the
reprobate: toward these, to give them up into an evil mind, that sins past
may be the punishments of sins to come, and the deserts of punishments that
are to come; which the Lord does, as a just revenger, and not as any evil
author: for to punish sin by sin, is but justice with God. As God wills,
that Absolon shall plague his father by committing incest, 2. Sam. 16.22.
to bring David to repentance for his adultery; not that he wills it as
adultery, but as a just plague to him that did it, and to convert his servant
David. Now for the elect, the Lord lets the raines loose, that thereby he
may manifest their strength, and his own power in their weakness. And by
this was made known what excellent graces Job had received, Job 2.10.
when by his extremities and anguishes he was not consumed, but refined, which
otherwise had been hid; even as the Pilot cannot show his cunning but in a
storm, nor a man his valor but in a combat. So David was by affliction
brought low, Psalm. 32.3.
that the Lord might show the richer mercy in his recovery: that all his
children might be assured to find the same mercy, though they fall into the
same sin, if they follow his steps of repentance. So as temptations are
sent of the Lord to discover his graces in them, or their own wants if they
relent, partly to heal their pride, partly to teach them to repent of some
sins which before were not thought of: and that the Church of God might be
comforted, knowing that in the extremity of a bleeding heart the Lord sends
compassion. Satan tempts Adam to prove God a liar, and to bring him to
dishonor, and to be the instrument of man's damnation: Adam tempted himself
to taste of that which as he thought should make him God: God tries him by this
means to make a way for his justice in thereprobate, and for his mercy on the
elect: for if there had been no fall, God had been neither just in condemning
some, nor merciful in saving others. So here Christ is carried to be tempted.
The purpose of God in this is to confirm it unto Christ, that he should be of
power to destroy and extinguish the power of the devil, but Satan fully
intended to have destroyed the head, by this means to have hindered the
salvation of the members.

For the fifth circumstance, which is the advantage satan took by Christ's
fasting: understand first, that it was not the purpose of God nor of Christ
himself to commend unto us his abstinence: for it is no commendation to
forbear when he has no appetite to eat, but it was to commend his miraculous
power, for he was qualified with such divine virtue, as he was for the time
like an Angel, not subject to humane desires.

The Papists from hence do draw the institution of Lent, saying, that all
things are written for our instruction: therefore as Christ fasted forty
days, so must we. It is true, that all things are written for our instruction,
but not for our imitation: for he was borne of a Virgin, conceived of the holy
Ghost, Mat. 17.2.
transfigured in the mount, he had a confirmation of his doctrine by diverse
miracles, came into the house the doors being shut, John 20.26. Mark. 6.51.
commanded the winds, walked on the waters; and must we be like him in these
things? No: for all these taste of his Divinity. But his obedience, his
patience, his love to give his life for his enemies, his meekness, not to
break a bruised reed, his willingness to suffer all kind of affliction:
these things let us imitate, for these be fruits of the spirit only but to fast
forty days and forty nights is no more imitable for us then it is to be borne
of a Virgin. Yea but, say they, it is good by this to take occasion to exhort
to abstinence. We answer, it is no reason that because Christ fasted having no
stomach, therefore we should abstain having stomach. Again, in all this time
Christ takes nothing, but they pamper themselves with wines and iunkets, which
be as irritable to lust as flesh; therefore theirs is but a mock-fast: for
Christ fasted not sparingly only, but abstained altogether. Again, if they
will imitate Christ, they must do it in the wilderness: and if it be a
commandment because Christ did it, why did they it not in Eliah and Moses
time? If never any Jew proposed to himself this imitation of him that fasted
not but by the power of God, much less should we in this follow Christ that
fasted by his own power. Again, Christ fasted that Satan might take him in
his infirmity; but must we do so, to expose our selves the more to the
opportunity of his temptation? God forbid. Yet if we will know what fasting is,
we say it is a necessary exercise which our own calamities do require, and
the desolations of other churches do exact: and he that takes in more then
will well fit him to the duties of his calling, has surfeited.

Now in the fasting of the Papists we note four faults: first, they destroy
the work of fasting in the bodily exercise; which they do two ways: first,
by fullness: secondly, by delicacy. Secondly, there is a mere deceit and
cosinge in their fasting; for with fasting should be joined prayer
extraordinary, both for feruency and continuance: which by humbling our selves
in this sort does set an edge upon them, which otherwise would crawle upon the
ground, and were not able to pierce the heavens: for if fasting had not this
use, but that the action would be complete by outward abstinenc only, then
were it a brutish fast; for the beasts of Nineveh ( Jonah. 2.) fasted in this
son. But they do notioyne prayer extraordinary, that the body may be crucified
and the mind humbled, that thus it might be as: grindstone to set an edge on
their supplications; therefore theirs is no fast. Thirdly, all fasting is for
the obtaining of some grace, or preventing of some danger: but they have
enjoined and appointed set days to fast on: as if the Physician should say,
such a day he would let blood, not regarding the present state of the patient,
wherein he should rather show himself a Prophet the^^ a Physician: even so
do the Papists deal in their fasts, either very ignorantly or prophetically.
Fourthly, where fasting is appointed to humble us, and to confess our
vileness by feeling our wants, and to power forth our souls unto God: they
think that having pleased him by the bare action of abstinence, they may do
what they list, or else puffed up with a Pharisaicall pride of merit, thinking
they have deserved at Gods hand, they will match their alms with the very
blood of Christ, which is most sacrilegious. Of these the Apostle speaks, 1.
Tim. 4.3. that In the latter times there shall come men which shall forbid
marriage and meats, speaking in hypocrisy, etc. Yea (say they) this is meant
of gross heretics, which should condemn marriage and meats altogether, as
the Marcionists, that said, men and women were coupled for generation of the
devil. This is absurd, for these men speak it not in hypocrisy but in open
blasphemy. Yea (say they) but we do not hold that meats are unclean in
themselves. And yet they forbid it to all men at some times, and to some men at
all times. Again, a Doctor of theirs in approbation of their Lent, says, that
flesh was accursed in the flood of Noah, but so was not fish. Yea but God
forbad the tree in Paradise and certain meats under the Law, yet were they
not vnlceane. We answer, that which God has made lawful what man can
interdict? And as it is Antichristian to command what God forbids, so is it to
forbid what God commands. The meats in the Law were forbidden for
significations, and they cease: so for meats offered to Idols, for they are
abolished: and a man may now eat meat offered to the devil, for he cannot
pollute it; for every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused
if it be received with thanksgiving, (1. Tim. 44.) Again, if they speak of
the quantity and quality it were somewhat, but they do not so, but all fish
and no flesh is lawful.

Then came to him the tempter, etc. This is the first special temptation
wherewith Christ was assaulted: as if Satan should have said, there has been a
voice heard from the air, that thou art the son of God, and there has been a
visible cutting asunder of the heavens by a miracle, and by this thou
perswadest thy self that thou art so; and thou have fasted here forty days
which makes thee highly conceited of thy self, yet is it not possible thou
should be Gods Son, for thou want not only the host of heaven to wait
upon thee, which were worthy the glory of the Son of God, but thou art so
distressed as thou want a piece of bread for the strength of thy body,
therefore it is unlike thou should be Gods child, for then he would more
respect thee then now he does, to leave thee thus destitute of comfort. Well I
know thine infirmity to be such as bread thou must have, and being here where
is none but wild beasts, and where no present supply can be made, bestirre thy
self and be thine own puruetor; and because without bread thou can not live
be thou Gods Son or no, look how thou can furnish thy self, whether by
miracle or without miracle. Now here in this desert there is nothing but
stones, which if thou be such a one as thou would be thought to be, thou
can change their natural hardness and make them fit for nourishment.
Therefore to satisfy me, and for thine own good, let me see at thy
commandment their nature to be altered and transubstantiate. Our Savior
Christ being well furnished and appointed, not only with the graces of the
spirit but with the word of God, does not answer whether he be Gods Son or
no, or whether he can turn those stones into bread or no, but he overthrows
the ground of his reason, that it is not impossible man should live without
bread: as if he should say, Thou give the power of sustenance to a piece of
bread, but my Father is able by his power and providence to fustaine me though
I have no bread: and not only my self an thus persuaded being Gods son, but
even flesh and blood may be able to live without food if so be it be Gods
pleasure; therefore there is no cause why I should work a miracle, since not
only I but many other may be relieved without these ordinary means. And that
thou may know I have truth on my side, I speak nothing but scripture, for
Deuteronomy. 8.3. it is said, Therefore he humbled thee and made thee hungry, that
he might teach th^^ that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does a man live. And as for thee, thou
go about to tempt me to have me use my liberty in this place; but I discern
thy subtilty, and to do this thou requirest should be no glory to my Father,
nor any confirmation of doctrine hereafter, therefore I will not cast pearls
before Satan.

The words contain two parts; first, the suggestion or temptation: secondly,
the beating back of the temptation. In the first consider, first the occasion
satan took to tempt him, namely his hunger: secondly, the matter wherewith he
was tempted* For the first, he tempts him in a matter of food, being hungry.
Where learn, that Satan espieth all advantages where and when he may find us
best; and he uses our present infirmities or conditions of life as the fittest
coals to set us on fire withal. For the rich man is never assaulted with the
temptation to steal, because he has enough; nor beggars to purchase, because
they want; nor private men to pervert justice, because they sit not in place:
but there be some temptations on the right hand and some on the left, some are
tempted by sickness to impatience, by health to forget God, by youth to
embrace liberty, and by age to love riches, by fullness to lift up their heel
against God; some by penury to distrust him, as if he had cast off all care of
them: some are moved to revenge by being disgraced, and some to work mischief
by being flattered; therefore we must correct such imperfections whereunto by
nature we are most inclined, and not to give the least advantage unto Satan,
lest upon our vnwatchfulnesse we be surprised, for every one shall find, that
in something he is not left vntempted; and since temptations come on both
sides, we must arm our selves with weapons on each side.

For the second, which is the matter of the temptation: we observe a double
drift in Satan: first, to drive Christ to doubt that he is not Gods child
because of his present exigent and want: secondly, upon this to drive him to
use a preposterous miracle against Gods glory, and whereby he should have
granted the devil that he could not have lived without bread, and by this
means to have lost the glory of the triumph.

For the first of these, leaving the particular of Christ the head, let us see
whether the members be not afflicted with the same temptations. Psalm.
73.13.14.15.
The greatest man the Prophet David was mightily shaken with this, when he saw
Gods children live so miserably, and the wicked so prosperously. The Prophet
Jeremy ( chapter 12.1.) desires to reason with the Lord about this matter, and
bursteth forth with wonder; Why does the way of the wicked so prosper, why are
all they in wealth that rebelliously transgress? They are planted and they
grow, where as the godly lead a life fraught and full of sorrow. And this was
the argument of all Jobs friends, that being so strangely afflicted he must
needs be Gods enemy, Job. 8.20. Indeed if the Lords love should be measured by
outward blessings, the ungodly had far greater cause to boast, for they wear
pride about their necks as a chain, and are covered with extortions as with a
garment: their faces shine (says Jeremy) and their plants are safely rooted;
yea not only their persons, but their children are like flocks of sheep in
the pleasant field, and like olive branches at a furnished table: they see
their houses established before their faces, and are comforted with the sight
of their childrens children: Nay all things fares well with them, their Cow
calueth and casts not, their hear^^ come in and out with daily plenty, so as
with them every thing prospers by a proportionable kind of happiness. And
as they are happy in their lives, so they have a great privilege in the time
of death, for they die like lambs, and pass away far men comfortably to the
eye then Gods children; for they die not languishingly, or as the prisoners of
death, but they go to the grave suddenly: yet their wickedness is such, and
their hearts so full of poison, as Job describing their cogitations, says,
they regard not ( chap. 21.15.) the Almighty, but say, what is the Lord that
they should serve him? And David ( Psalm. 7.5.) she^^^ that their mouths speak
blasphemy against the heavens, and their tongues walk freely through the
earth, not fearing m^^* Whereas on the other side, 1. Pet. 4.17.
the judgment of God beginner a^ his own house, and they drink the dregs of
the cup of sorrow, they are but worms scarce worthy to creep in respect of
the magnificence of the wicked: they eat the bread of care, and quench their
thirst with the water of affliction: they are for their bodies poor, for their
credit despised, and for their consciences they have many combats: the terrors
of death do often so fight against them, as they are shaken in the foundation of
their faith, so as they doubt besides these miseries they sustain here, they
shall be adjudged to death in the life to come: yea they are hated of those by
their name, that never saw them by their face. And besides this, amid these
waves of their miseries they are tempted yet by Satan, as that they are but
grasshoppers, abiected of the world, overwhelmed with sin, which wounds
their soul to death, and yet they take themselves to be heirs of heaven, and
fellow-heires with Christ. These seas of miseries should never ouerflow thee
which sting thy conscience, nor these disgraces outward should never overthrow
thee which touch thy body, if thou were Gods child, for then should his eye
watch over thee to ease thee. Such is the portion allotted to Gods Saints, so
as David was carried so far in perturbation of spirit, that had he not entered
into the sanctuary of the Lord, he had utterly condemned the generation of the
godly. Howbeit when we are assaulted on this sort, let us not be dismayed, but
let us know, that herein is wrought our conformity with the Lord Jesus, let us
and learn the same defense that he used, not to seek to wind out our selves
by our own power or policy, but to rely wholly upon the Lord, for the has
many secret ways to rescue us if it please him to show the power of his
providence: and by this trouble and depth of sorrows we are plunged into, we
may the rather assure our selves that there shall be a general restoration of
all things, because they are now so out of frame; whereas if the wicked should
here be punished and the godly prosper, we might more call in doubt the
coming of the Lord to glory. But now seeing things in such a lamentable
confusion, even this nay* persuade us with Saint Paul, that there shall come a
day of vengeance for them that live wickedly; 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8.
and for them that are now distressed a day of comfort: for if every thing
should be carried with an even hand, we might well doubt of an immortality.

For the second drift of Satan, which was to urge Christ upon this his
distress to work a miracle, it shall more conveniently be spoken of in
Christ's reply.

Now for the second general point, which is the beating ^^ke of the
temptation, we must consider two parts: first, that ^^^ulseth him by alleging
Scripture: secondly, the place alle^^^ what sense it is to be applied.

For the first, understand that out Savior Christ might many ways have
overcome him, yea by the power of his God^ead he could have confounded him
without an answer, but it leased him to fight with the weapons of flesh and
blood, that we by his exampl might learn out of the word as our of a school of
defense to beat back Satan. Where observe, that Christ alleging Scripture
as an instrument to repulse the devil, that there is no sword of the spirit to
drive away temptations so sure as the Word of God, being most necessary for
this purpose. Where two sorts of men are justly reproved: first they that wring
this weapon out of the peoples hands: secondly, they that cast it from them,
that are content themselves to abide the blows, but another must wear the
sword.

For the first, they are the prelates of Rome, who in the time that heaven was
made a haire-cloth, and Antichrist set foot on the Lords throne, shut up the
book of God into the rusty scabberd of Bishops houses, where it was kept under
the bondage of the Clergy upon pain of excommunication, charging the lay
people not to meddle with it: as if it had been the readiest weapon to have
cut their throats. But since the Son of righteousness appeared, the Gospel
shining in men's hearts, they being ashamed of this, and being persuaded in
common equity that men were not to be kept from it, they have published one
part of the word the new Testament, not (say they) upon any absolute
necessity, but to avoid corruptions that may g^^^ by reading other
translations, they knowing the people (...) would not be made such fools and
babes as they were (...) there was a general mistouer the whole world. But we
do stand upon the absolute necessity of having the word common, because the
danger is common that thereby is to be avoided: and this for two causes:
first, it is necessary that every one should try the spirits; so as he must
understand more then he is taught by the mouth of that spirit which should be
tried: therefore they must have the book of God, according as the men of
Beroea had, Act. 17.11. giving no further credit to Paul's Sermons then they
were consonant to the written word.

Secondly, every Christian is a soldier, and in his baptism has taken press
money of Christ, to serve him in this field of the world, against the Devil
our sworn enemy, who works outwardly by the glittering shows of the earth,
inwardly by the desires of flesh and blood, adding his own suggestions to both
these. Now the weapons to encounter him are the word as the sword, and faith as
the shield. And every one being tempted in his own person, the more to offend
the enemy and the better to defend himself (and since our own sins shall be
required at our own hands) we must every one take his sword out of the Lords
armory, that we may resist in person as we are stricken in person. And it was a
fearful thing for them to put out the kandle, while the people were smitten;
and a shameful thing to put out their right eye, that they might not discern
their evil wares they uttered them for their good money. Oh (say they) it is
good they should have them, to keep them from the infection of other
impressions: as if the reading of the Scriptures by the people, were Physic
when men are sick and not meat when they be whole; Treacle to drive out
poison, and not preservatives to keep from it; as if it had strength to put
the enemy to flight, and none to hinder his approach: the contrary whereof is
rather true. For if it be meet to give light to the simple, when the heavens
are ouercast with the mist and clouds of heresy, it is much more forcible to
show the way when they are not so clouded. Oh but there be many hard matters in
the Scripture, past the common reach. So there be many easy within their
reach: for the Lord has so tempered them, as some be easy to provide against
penurious stomachs, and some difficult to prevent fastidious lothsomnesse.
Yea, as in the most champion and plain ground of the book of the Scripture
there be some mysteries, as hillockes higher then the rest, so in the greatest
and steepest hill thereof there is footing whereby with labor and travel we
may come to that height of it, where we may see and discover so much of the
land of Canaan and the kingdom of heaven, as our places do require. Therefore
it is well said, that the Scriptures are like a flood, wherein the lamb may
wade and the Elephant swim: for the plainer places are to be digested with
comfort, and the hidden treasure to be dug out by prayer. Therefore says
Christ: Mat. 23.14.
Let him that reads consider, etc. Oh but this takes away the glory of the
Church, when every one may control his master, and breeds heresies, when
every one may maintain by this his own opinion. Yea but it is good that every
one should know the truth, that they may follow the steps of their teachers
but in the way of truth: and if because some have been seduced, all should be
deprived of this blessing, then away with preaching, for it is the savor of
death to many; 2. Cor. 2.16.
and with the Sacraments, for many feed of Christ's flesh, but to choke them to
damnation: and then away also with Christ himself, for to many ( Luke 2.34.)
he is a rock of offense, to rush their bones to perdition. And if Heretics
have abused the Scripture, this is a reason to restore it, that they may be
again convinced by Scripture. And if it be sufficient to say, the devil
alleged Scripture, therefore hide it from the people: we say to this, Christ
used nothing but Scripture, therefore let them have it: for it is no reason to
take away the thing for the abuse of the thing, no more then that a lamb
should cast off his fleece, because the Lion sometime wears it: or that
because one abuses is sword, therefore none should wear any weapon. For
howsoever some mad-men-or quarrellers in the campemay abuse them to their own
and others destruction, yet the Law of not bearing sword in the field will
never be just. And to meet with such an evil by taking away the good, is ^^e
unto those unskillful Physicians, that rid their Patients of no disease,
unless they take their lives from them. Yea, but it is dangerous meddling. Why
then put out the candle, lest it burn the house. Oh, but put not knives into
childrens hands. But there is no such comparison in the Scripture: it is indeed
compared with a sword in the hand of a soldier: Ephesians. 6.17.
and this is that we urge, that every man may bear his own sword, since
every one is to fight: and in the justice of the Law of Arms it should be so,
since we know not how soon we shall be assaulted: and except they will
discharge us of the Lords service, and say that we are no Soldiers to combat
against the corruptions of the flesh, and suggestions of the devil, it is a
wrong not to be suffered, thus to have the weapon wrested out of our hands.
Yet I cannot but commend the wit of the Clergy, for they had not sold their
wares, unless they had folded the peoples eyes; wherein they have done like
thieves that put out the candle, that they may rifle more safely in the dark:
so they wisely have sought their vantage, that their vile filthy merchandise of
Masses and such like might be vented abroad, which would lie rotting at home
upon their hand, if men might be suffered to bring any light with them into
their pack-houses. Oh but, they say, they have kept it but from hogs and
dogs. Yea, and from sheep and lambs too; besides that many are unclean in
their lives, which yet are not hogs. But in this they bewray a clean
contrary spirit to that wherewith our Savior Christ was conducted: for he often
preached in the hearing of known hogs and dogs, the Scribes and Pharisees,
lest for their sakes the children should be defrauded of their bread: whereas
on the contrary, they deprive the children of their appointed portion, lest the
dogs should happily snatch at it: which is no reason that it should be kept
from the just owners, because there be some usurpers by. Yea but (says
Stapleton) by searching the Scripture diligently, they have erred shamefully.
This is as if one that were to train up a child to be an archer, should give
him this precept: that by a^ming at the mark most surely, he should miss
most foully. Whereas men have erred only because they sought it not diligently
enough: and though many have missed, yet herein have they been brought to a
conscience to crave the Lords help in guiding their hands, that they may come
as near to the price of Christ's glory as may be. Well forsooth, to gratify
the people, they have now given them (as they term it) the Rhemish Testament:
but as the cursings of the people have hitherto pierced their souls, and run
them thorough, for engrossing into their hands the grain of life: so now they
will be as sore and sharp against them, for selling them such mustie, mildewd,
and blassed grain: neither is their impiety less now in poisoning them, then
it was before in staruing them.

The second sort of men that wring this sword (...) the people, are they that
dare not but allow some instruments for tillage, yet they content themselves
with bare reading; as if they would have a soldier but half armed, like unto
the subtle practice of the Philistims, who to keep (1. Sam. 13.19.) the Lords
people always in slavery, permitted no use of weapon unto them (a few excepted,)
whereby they would show grace unto them. Hereupon men are to be exhorted not
to except against them that come to feed at a Sermon, having none at home. For
we ought to learn in this school of defense how to handle our weapon: and
Service is commanded by the law, not to exclude Preaching, but to go with it:
so, as if they come for conscience to hear, and not for contempt to their own
Pastor at home, they are to be permitted without complaint. Here also are they
to be charged, that having gifts, and being Christ's Lieutenants, yet neglect to
train up those soldiers that are to serve under their band. And by this
means many of them are strongly assaulted in their absence, taking the fleece
and not looking to the sheep, and sitting to guide the stern, and yet
suffering the vessel to be blown about with every tempest. For it comes to
pass often times, that some of the flock are taken with the trembling of the
heart, and dismayed by the terror of conscience Satan has driven them unto,
wanting a teacher to bridle his rage and to answer his so phistry, and to salve
the wound of the distressed: so that their faith is so dangerously assailed, as
sometimes they are strangled with despair: whereas for any thing such a
teacher knows, his disease might have been cured by prayer, and for any
thing he knows, also he may pay the price of his blood. Again, though the
judgment does not pursue them thus far, yet sometimes through these hot
conflicts they grow senseless leading a long life in fear, and leaving an ill
example of a miserable end: whereas if their want of knowledge and experience
had been supplied by the lips of their guides, there had been great hope
they might have prevailed.

Now for them that deprive themselves of this jewel, and fling this weapon
from them, saying, that they believe as the Church believes, and so hang their
faith upon the hooks of another belief, and being miserably abused refuse to
read the word, saying, God keep them from the new and old Testament: for if
there be such books they are books of controversy: but think if they come
to a Mass, it is enough though they believe they know not what. It is to be
lamented to see, that they have thus put forth their eyes, to abuse them after
as they list. And thus have they all the secrets of the people brought unto
them by their auricular confessions, keeping their own iugling and playing
fast and loose from the peoples sight, because they hide away the glass of the
word, wherein they might view their own deformities, and the scabs of their
instructers. Which is all one, as if a man being ready to go a dangerous
journey, wherein he were sure to meet with riflers, and being well appointed
for the purpose, should be persuaded to go, but in no case to carry his
weapon with him. Wherefore let us not hang our swords upon other men's backs,
for we shall be judged according to our own works: but let us still hold the
sword in one hand and the shield in the other: for we are beset on every side,
our sleep is a thing to tempt us, single life and marriage are things to tempt
us, yea there is no minute wherein we are not assaulted. Let us therefore since
the Lord has furnished us with all things fit for the warre-fare, and since
Christ has sanctified by example this weapon of the word unto us in the like
conflict, let us apply our hearts to read it, and strive to have this light
both in our lives and in our mouths: for it is necessary for the king to read
and lay up, that he may command not through the pride of his heart things that
are unlawful: and for the people, lest in too great baseness of mind, they
should obey man rather then God, Act. 4.20. Now for them that think Satan
such a babe as he will be out-faced with a word of defyance, scorning at
reproof, saying: They will shield themselves from Satan as well as they that
admonish them, the foul feend shall have no power of them, and yet continue in
the obstinacy of their hearts, laboring to extinguish the feeling of
conscience that they may live more licentiously, they shall prove that Satan
can bear a few words so he be sure of the soul, for they be but feathers: and
it is a lamentable way to defy a Lion, and yet to come within his clutches:
thy soul he will account gain enough.

But he answering, said: It is written, etc. Here follows the resistance
Christ made by the sword of the spirit, to the temptation of the devil.
Wherein are to be observed two parts: first, that he uses the word to beat
back his fiery dart: secondly, what text he chose and the sense thereof, in
which there are two parts set down: the first, negative: Man lives not by
bread only: the second, affirmative: but by the word and promise of God, if
the means fail.

For the first of these consider, he does not gratify Satan so much, as to
tell him whether he be Gods Son or no, neither does he work any miracle as
he could have done, as well as pay the tribute out of the fishes mouth, Mat.
17. verse. 27. but he tells him plainly his speech is untrue; for a mere
natural man may live without bread, much more I, that have a privilege above
men by my heavenly generation. Where we learn to have this resolution, that
using lawful means how ever things sueceed or prosper, that we stand upon
the promise of God, that we shall never want; a thing which shall continue
firm, when the mines of the Indies shall fail: and a promise that no earthly
Prince can make, because he cannot assure himself of his own estate. For he
that did rain down Angels food ( Exodus 16.15.) not which they made, but which
they did minister: he that could make the shoes of the Israelites not to
wear, cause water ( Number. 20.8) to issue out of a hard rock, command the winds
to bring quails in such a multitude, sustain Eliah (1. King. 17.4.) by the
ministry of Ravens, that has at sometime ( Mat. 15.36.) fed so many thousands
with a few fishes, the same God has given us his word, that his providence
shall be as watchful over us; not that we should look to be fed by miracles,
or not to use the means to feed our selves, but think that come should grow
without sowing, as it did (2. King. 19.29.) in Hezechiahs time: but that we may
be assured his hand is not now shortened; for we do not look to be rapt up to
heaven as Enach was ( Genesis 5.24.) before the Law, or as Eliah was (2. King.
2.12.) after the law, yet do we expect that our souls shall go thither as did
Lazarus, Luke 16.22. So though we are not to expect to be enabled forty days
to fast, yet he that did it this once, did it to confirm us, that the same
power of his Father does still continue. And among all Christ's sermons, he
ever took most perswasible reasons to make an impression of this in his
disciples minds, and to root out that humor of worldly pensiveness, and
carking carfulness, that they might come to a meditation of the Lords
providence. As Luke 12.22. Be not immoderatly careful to heap up unto your
selves riches, for no man's life stands in his goods: which albeit in
judgment we discern of, yet in affection we are overtaken. And to persuade
this, he brings the Parable of the rich man, ( verse. 17.) who when he had
spent his care to fill his barnes, and had thought to have blessed his soul in
his substance, the same night was deprived of his life. Christ in that place
showing all care to be double: first, for the back what we shall put on:
secondly, for the belly what we shall eat, and persuades us not to distrust
the Lord in either: the life is more then meat, therefore he that gave thee
the one being greater, will also give thee the other being less. Consider the
ravens, the Lord feeeds them, and can he have less regard of his children?
Insinuating unto us, that we should not fear the persecution which is
accompanied with scarcity, not stirring up men to desperate courses to entangle
themselves in needles troubles: but having the cross laid upon them by others,
not brought upon them by themselves, then in a holy resolution of the cause not
to fear: for five sparrowes shall be bought for two farthings, and yet not a
feather of these, much less shall a hair of thy head, fall without Gods
providence. Secondly, he persuades us by this, that our care can do us no good
without Gods blessing. For apparel, we see the Lillies garnished with such
beauty, as exceeds Solomon in his glory: and if he thus doatheth the grass
of the field, much more will he provide for us. O that our hearts could
conceive the comfortable security, that Christ gives us in resting under the
wings of his Father: for he is the same God now, no less careful then he was
then, if the fault were not in our infidelity that we distrust him. But seek
(says Christ) the means whereby ye may come to salvation, and all outward
things shall be cast upon you: fear not little flock, for he that will give us
a heavenly kingdom, wherein we may contemplate the glory of God for ever, and
he that has given us his Son out of his own bosom, when we were his
enemies, and had no grace to ask pardon, how can he now deny us any thing he
knows to be convenient for us? Yet for our comfort let us know, that none
have this promise, but the godly: for the Lions, that is, the tyrants of the
Church, they shall want and be hungerbit, Psalm. 34.10.
but the righteous shall never be forsaken. Many had more oil then the widow
of Sarepta, (1. King. 17.16.) yet hers by reason of the promise of God wasted
not, but lasted longer then theirs: so as not so much for the quantity as for
the quality of having it in some competent certainety, the children of the
most high shall never want. Where further we learn to forbear the using of
unlawful means: for we must make that reckening Abraham did, ( Genesis 22.8.)
when Isaac told him, there was wood, but where was the sacrifice: God (says
he) will provide the Scrifice: so we must say, God will provide to relieve our
necessities. Let us therefore owe nothing but love, not borrow where we cannot
pay; Romans 13.8.
and if the lawful sweat of our brows will not afford it, let us use no
shifts to disgrace our profession: for what God has cursed with his mouth, he
cannot bless in the use; therefore it is better to want with his favor, then
to abound without it; and better it is to be the Almighties beggar, then the
Devils belly. Whereas we so look to the means on earth, as if there came no
blessing from heaven: when as we should in duty first lift up our eyes to the
Highest, that he would add his favor to our labor: for he can make us
as well want in abundance as abound in scarcity; the dearest things a man can
have either for possession, as lands; or for affection, as wife in the midst
of persecution, if the cross be sanctified unto us by the hand of God, in the
want of both these we shall have an hundred fold more, that is, more peace of
conscienc, more contentation of mind, and more sweet taste of the Lords love,
then we should have had avoiding this persecution, in an hundred wives, or an
hundred times more living. We being now assured of Gods favor, and being but
pilgrims on earth, we shall see Christ in the heavens with his arms displaied
to embrace us, a joy surpassing all that worldly men can conceive in all their
superstuities; this but tickling the sense, and nothing contenting the mind,
the other wrapping up the soul in assurance of full and perfect blessedness.

For the second point, which is the affirmative, that is, for the blessing of
God, and the way he has deemed to be most fit to maintain our selves, that
is his word: we are to learn a double use: the first, special: the second,
general. Special in the matter here expressed for sustenance, that it is the
Lord who does maintain us, so as his blessing must be upon the bread, else it
can afford no nourishment. Whereby are to be reproved those inordinate men,
that go unto their meats like horses to prouinder, and like hogs gathering
the mast and never looking up to the tree whence it falls. They should
consider first, that the bread unless it be sanctified (1. Tim. 4.4.5.) by
God, is none of theirs, for we lost all the benefit of Gods creatures in the
fall of Adam and can no way challenge them but by restitution in Christ, and
this must be by prayer. Secondly, if we would think that God could take away
the strength from bread, we would feed more religiously: let us know that he
may rot the grain in the clods, or blast it in the ear, he may restrain the
latter rain that it may not yield, in the barn vermin may consume it, if it
pass the flaile, the mill, the oven, yet in thy mouth it may be rats-bane and
turn to poison, or in thy stomach it may become the gall of Aspes: for why
should thou feed on Gods creatures not acknowledging them whence they come?
Set before thee the example registered in the Scripture, Numb. 11.33. qua^les
came loath somely out of their nostrels, and they died with meat in their
mouths, having fat bodies and lean souls. Therefore let us pray, that the
food we take may do us good, otherwise we have no more right to use them
then the Israelites had to the quails. And as God can turn stones into bread,
so can he also turn bread into stones, for it is not the nature of the thing
it self simply to nourish without a blessing: but wine which does comfort the
weak, the Lord can make it to the wicked a cup only to infatuate them, that
their account may be the greater for usurping the Lords creatures. And this is
the reason why we are taught in the Lords prayer, to pray that our daily bread
may be given us, thereby acknowledging first God to be the giver: secondly,
that we have trust that through our prayers only it shall be given us:
thirdly, that not only the creatures themselves but the blessing upon them
comes from God; for though our garments were as costly as the Ephod of Aron,
yet without his blessing they were nothing. For so miserable is our condition,
that we are not able to li^^ one moment without the special providence of God.
For the second use, which is general: as it is true in bread so is it in all
other things, that without the blessing of God they can avail us nothing: when
we are sick we seek like Asa (2. Chron. 16.12.) to the Physician, fixing
our eyes and fastening our hope only upon this outward means: whereas if the
Lord has called for a plague upon us, what man can cure it unless the Lord
do revoke it? So is it for wars, men may provide money, munition and horses
for the day of battle, but victory comes of the Lord: for it is he that
amazeth the rider, Prou. 2^.31.
and asswageth the fury of the enemy, and blinds the wisdom of the Princes
of the world, that they shall fail in policy. And how comes it to pass
(says the Prophet Hagge 1.6.) that ye sow much and reap little, wear much
apparel and it does not warm you, drink and your thirst is not quenched, but
only that the Lord has blown upon it, has blassed and not blessed it?
Therefore let us learn to remove this fault, that by the secret infidelity of
our hearts we do not attribute too much to the means; for the Lord can feed
without bread, but bread cannot nourish without his blessing. The use then of
this doctrine is double: first, for our indgements: secondly, for our
affections. For the first, first we are hereby warranted to pray for things
necessary for this life; as Math. 7. it is said, Ask and it shall be given
you: secondly, that the expectation of these things from God, and not to have
them without him, is an outward profession that he is only the distributer of
them, and therefore will give to every one his appointed portion. We may not
therefore simply pray for these outward and earthly things but with limitation:
first, that they be subject to the pleasure of God: secondly, that they be
desired not for themselves, but to glorify God and to profit our neighbor.
Thirdly, here is confuted the error of the heathen, that worshipped Ceres as
the God of corn, and Bacchus as the God of wine; which howsoever they were the
first inuenters of grinding the one and pressing the other, yet both the Corn
and the Grape come from God. For the second, which concerns our affections:
here is first reproved covetousness in getting, the venom of all virtue, and
is contrary to the keeping of a good conscience before God, and desiring of a
good name before men, making us deaf to the noise of infamy. For if the hand
of God contains all, and the blessing of God continues all, to what end
shall we tempt him, or bury our selves as it were in the graves of lust?
Secondly is reprehended our unthankfulness in using Gods blessings, pasting
by them with our eyes shut, and glorifying the means above the matter.
Thirdly, our diffidence, lest we should lose or want them, for the fountain of
all riches streaming from the Lord, he can convey unto us whole rivers of
them, and measure them unto us without stint if we depend upon his providence.

Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, etc. This is the second
temptation, wherewith our Savior Christ during the infirmity of his body for
want of food was aslaulted, where it pleased God to give Satan leave to carry
him in the air after a strange manner, and to set him on a pinnacle of the
Temple, where he reasons thus with him; Thou say man lives not by bread
only, but by the blessing of thy Father, who can maintain thee without bread,
and herein thou do well: now because thou art assured, and do promise
thy self that God will never destitute the nor forsake thee, show me thy power
in casting thy self down and not hurting thee: the power of thy father is
able to do this, thou art here at Jerusalem the famous city, show them what
thou art able to do, that they may all give thee the applause and it will be a
notable means to make them swarm after thee. And because thou may know, I
go about nothing preindiciall to Gods glory, or dangerous to thine own
person, it is written that especially thou shall be protected by Angels, and
they shall wait upon thee to keep thee from hurt, therefore thou needst not
despair. Now Christ tells him not, that he was not able to do this, for he
would not gratify him so much, but lets him know that he wronged the words,
and wrested the sense of the place alleged: for it is not said generally, the
Angels shall support him in all things, but they shall defend him in all his
ways, that is, such as my Father has appointed me to walk in: so that if I
or any other Christian will lay claim to this promse, I must keep me in my
wates, and so must they: that is, from this pinnacle I must come down by the
stairs, and not throw my self headlong, for my father has appointed me no
such way, but this should be an unlawful means: and to that thou have brought
corrupted, I oppose another plain place, that I must not tempt God, but keep
my self within my compass, and then I am sure to have sauegard.

Hence we may gather two parts: first, the temptation: secondly, the repulse.
The temptation has two parts: first, whereto Christ is tempted: secondly, a
reason persuading him to yield to the temptation.

For the first, generally observe, that Satan deals by contraries, both with
the head and with the members; for when he saw he could not overcome Christ in
the case of famine, to make him despair of Gods providence, now he labors
to ouerreach him in a matter of presumption, that he should try his
providence, that since he could not doubt but to be fed without bread, he
might make him presume to be vp-held without means. Even so deals he with
us, either to make us distrustful through penury, or proud through plenty; in
the time of ignorance seeking to make us proud through works, and to be in love
with them without faith, and now to stand upon faith without works; before
laboring in zeal without knowledge, and now hunting after knowledge without
zeal.

For the second, which is the reason, he alleges scripture, namely Psalm.
91.1. wherein observe two things: first, that though scripture here be opposed
to scripture, yet not to withdraw the determination of matters from the book
of God, and to post them off to Rabbis and Councels, for none can better try
the truth then the spirit of truth. Secondly, that it detracteth nothing from
the glory of the Scripture, to come forth of Satan's mouth, nay nothing
graceth it so much as this: the reason whereof is, that Satan knew what bait
Christ and all the faithful would best and soonest bite at, and in his
subtilty if any stratageme could have prevailed more then other he would have
used it, but he knew Christ relied upon nothing so much as the voice of his
Father, and therefore he uses the greatest weapon against the greatest enemy,
that he might show in pretense to have as much truth on his side as Christ.

If thou be the Son of God, etc. This is the temptation it self, wherein
consider three points: first, that the devil transformeth himself so far
into an Angel of light, as he brings scripture. secondly, to examine how
rightly and truly he does apply it: thirdly, how falsely he does abuse it.

For the first, It is written, says the devil, dealing with the sharp, and
blading it out with the Scripture: sometimes he deals plainly, and shows
his horns as it were by apertly opposing himself with violence against the
truth: sometimes more privily, and shroudeth himself under pretense of truth,
and this two ways: first, by heretical doctrine and gross superstition:
secondly, by persuading men that he is a lover of the truth, as in this place
that he would persuade Christ to nothing but that he had scripture for. Thus
dealt he Act. 16* 17. where a woman possessed with a devil having the power of
spiritual divination, having seen Paul after he had there preached, the
spirit in that maid gives an honorable testimony by a subtle stratageme of
Satan, of Paul and Silas, saying, These be the servants of the most high God,
which show unto you the way of salvation: a strange testimony to be given from
the devil, and far degenerating from his nature, to give witness of the
truth, himself being the father of lies; and knowing Paul to be a sworn
enemy, should yet yield voluntarily, and proclaim audience, and ring the bell
as it were to gather the people about him, is worth the wonder. But what was
his drift and subtilty in this, saving that by the maids often repeating it
and clamorous noising of it, it might persuade the poor disciples and weak
followers of the Gospel, that Paul and the devil had both combined and
compacted together, as if thereby the Gospel might be brought into suspicion
to be but the illusion of Satan, and light to be mingled with darkness:
therefore it is said verse. 18. that Paul was grieved till he had cast him out:
even so here to bring the people to suspicion that the scripture serves him
as well as Christ, thereby to make us forsake our hold, and suggesting this,
that nothing has brought more disparagement to the Scripture them this, that
all men of all opinions do allege it. Hereupon some take occasion to
dispense with their conscience for any profession: so many places one against
another, the Devil alleges it, Christ alleges it, what shall we do? if we
go in either way we may go a miss, and if we turn on the right hand, for
any thing we know it leads to hell. This is most profane: for whereas they
pretend to be abused by this incertainty, they are so civil to displease no
part, as they are content to take any kind of tergiuersation or flinching to
extricate and shift themselves of the enquiry of the truth: whereas they might
fear as well to eat lest they should be choked, and open the gates and leave
watching because the enemy has so many subtilties as it will be hard to keep
him out. Whereas God does this to exercise his servants in prayer, and to make
them more diligent in searching, and not that we should turn it to a matter of
security and idleness: these men not being so devout as they that worship the
Sun and Moon, Reu. 12.4.
for they have some conscience. We must know that Satan is able to pull
stars from heaven, as it is in the Revelation, and he does not always
speak with the mouth of a Dragon: therefore in these perplexities we must
approach to God, Mat. 7.8.
whose promise we have, Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened: and John 7.17. if any man have an honest heart and good inclination to
live well, I will show him, says Christ, from whence my doctrine is. And the
Lord has promised to be a Schoolmasters to the humble, they being not
prepossessed with prejudice, and he will give plentifully and never vpbraid. O
most bountiful inuitation of our gracious God. whereby we may be assured
that asking the truth he will not give error, Luke 11.12.
and desiring to be conducted in the right way, he will not lead us into
bypath, no more then asking bread he will give us a Scorpion, but he will
uphold us in the most dangerous temptations, whereas others having no desire at
least in a single affection, for their malice and prejudice may be justly
damned. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.

But what shall we do? shall we make them like wax, flexible to every
impression? or like bells tuneable to the ears of the heater? What resolution
is there for the conscience, the text cannot speak: It is written, says
Christ, It is written, says the devil: if they be written they are both true,
and must needs be contrary being cited by enemies. We answer it is true, the
letter printed cannot speak, and they that writ it are in heaven. The Church
therefore has provided certain means whereby a man not preiudicate may know
the truth, which be six: first, prayer with David, that the Lord would open
our understandings, and show us the light of his statutes, Psalm. 25.12.
and the way that we may choose whereby our steps may be assured. Secondly,
we must understand the words of the place in the original tongue, of the old
Testament in the Hebrew, of the new in the Greek, for this was the instrument
sanctified to that purpose. Thirdly, we must consider the words, what they be
by themselves, and what they be together joined with others, whether they be
to be taken properly or figuratively, which shall be known if either they be
not proportionable to the analogy and rule of faith, or not agreeing with the
circumstance of the place. Fourthly, to examine the drift of the place, what
went before and what follows: as Christ to one asking him how he should get
eternal life, answered, by keeping the commandments; Luke 18.2^*
not meaning thereby that we must come to it by our works, as the Papists
gather, Luke 10.26.29.
but he speaking to one that justified himself by keeping the Law, spoke after
that sort to show him his wound, namely that that was not the way unless he
fulfilled all. Fifthly, by comparing and conferring of places one with another,
the true sense of the Scripture against the Scripture abused, as Christ in this
place does; and as elsewhere, Love covers the multitude of ^^nes, 1. Pet.
4.8. confer with this, Prou. 10.12. Hatred stirs ^peontention, but love
covers all trespasses: love being taken ^or the love of men, whereby things
are qualified, and the best made of the worst, and not for covering of sins
before God, ^s the Papists would have it, but inding it before men. So A^raham
was justified by faith, faith Paul Romans 4.3. by works says ^ames, chapt. 2.21.
Saint James, dealing with them that denied ^orks altogether, S. Paul with them
that stood too much upon ^^em; the one speaking how aman might approve himself
before men to be justified, the other how men are justified before God.
Sixthly, approve of no interpretation, nor accept of any scripture which is not
proportionable to the analogy and agreeable to the rule of faith, which is
threefold: first, the ten commandments: secondly, the Lords prayer: thirdly,
the Creed of the Apostles. As when it is said, This bread is my body, I must
not take it for the very substantial body of Christ as it was on earth,
because it is against my Creed, which teaches me to believe he is in heaven.
Again, if we eat him in the bread flesh and bone, it crosses a commandment,
Thou shall not kill, for it is cruelty so to rend his flesh between our teeth.
Oh but how shall unlearned men do this? Let us know that God is the teacher of
the unlearned, and he will not give a stone if we ask food, but he will
instruct the humble, and in compassion will bring them forth of darkness, if
they will confer with the learned, as the Eunuch did with Philip, Act. 8.31.
and if they will frequent the word preached with the same hearts that the men
of Beroea did hear Paul's sermons, Act. 17.10. comparing then with the verity
of the word written.

For the second, how truly Satan applied the Scripture he brought: the place
is taken out of Psalm. 91.11. and though his purpose was to abuse Christ having
no promise of protection going out of his ways, yet in this he says truly,
that he applied the pomise especially to Christ the natural Son of God,
though it extend to all the faithful: for Christ is that ladder of Jacob, Genesis
28.12. whereupon the Angels ascended and descended: and so much did he himself
tell Nathaniel of (1. John 51.) that he should see the Angels ascend and
descend upon the son of man, for they are serviceable properly to him as the
son of God, and of him it is principally true, that the Angels do attende^
for though they serve us it is but for his sake, not that they are inferior to
us in themselves, but God having for his sons sake made us heirs of glory,
and Christ vouchsafing us to be companions with him in his kingdom, they
minister unto us, and by that ladder do descend unto us, having of our selves
nothing.

Further note, that the devil does know that Christ and (...) Gods children
must have sufficient security from God, th^^ walking in their calling, and in
the ways prescribed them, they shall be guided by the providence of the most
high: which is our comfort, that neither the pestilence that walks by night,
Psalm. 91.5.6.
nor the arrows that fly by day; neither the dragon, nor the aspe, the open
furious, nor the secret malicious tyrant shall once hurt us: for Satan knows
and does here testify, that we dwell in the secret of the Highest, and under
his shadow that shall shelter us from stormy blasts and boiling heat: and no
more shall we need to fear, Genesis 11.4.
then did the heavens when the Tower of Babell should have been erected to
them: and as easy it is to pull God out of his throne, as to disgrace us
further then he permits: for our salvation is as sure as his own seat, and as
steadfast as if our selves had been in heaven and seen it written with Gods
own singer. Yea we shall stand like mount Sion, Psalm. 125.1.
and not a feather of a bird, much more not the hair of our head, nor the hem
of our garment shall be touched or fall without his appointment. Wherefore
Satan sins against the holy Ghost in laboring to seduce the faithful,
whom he knows he cannot stir, and when he knows we cannot fall finally,
since the Angels have charge over us, and cannot but be faithful keepers of
that is committed to them. And herein may we embrace the riches of the Lords
mercy, who when his own providence might be sufficient to secure us of our
safety, yet to relieve our infirmity, and to support our weakness, has given
us the guard of heaven to wait upon us: as if one that were to pass the seas,
should not only have the letters of the Prince for his safe conduct, but
should be guarded with his royal Nany, to assure us, that doing that we do by
the warrant of his word, we shall neither be persecuted nor molested, but so
far as he may have glory by it, and we reap comfort.

For the third, wherein he does falsify the text alleged: and this he does
two ways: first, by wronging the words: secondly, by wresting the sense: for
the Psalm. 91.11. is: He has given his Angels charge to keep thee in thy
ways, so as the promise is made with a limitation: that he keep him in his
ways. Now from the pinnacle of the temple to fall down is not the way, but
he leaves out the demonstration of the truth, (thy ways) that is, those
ways that be prescribed, as from the Temple to come down by the stairs: by
this means dealing fraudulently, leaving out the principal. Secondly,
consider the wresting of the sense: for where this was spoken, that Christ
should depend upon his Fathers providence walking in his ways, he labors
to secure him generally of the same providence, though he were out of the way,
hereby to overthrow him.

Now as he dealt with the head, so he does with the members: for pretending
Gods protection, he labors to bring men to destruction. For predestination,
he will tell a man Esau was hated and Jacob beloved before they had done
either good or evil; Mal. 1.3.
that it is not in the willer nor in the runner, neither in the affection,
Phil. 2.13.
nor in the action: which he does only to make us rest in the providence of
Gods predestination, without having regard to our conversation; whereas hereby
we ought the more to be induced to get as many testimonies as we can to
prove, that this election pertains to us, and not to wait till grace should
distill by divine influence, or to make the decree of God a means of our
security to live as we list; as that being elected we cannot perish, and being
appointed to be damned, we cannot avoid it. So for Justification he will
suggest: We are saved by the blood of Christ only, and when we have done
all, we are unprofitable servants; the more we sin the more grace abounds,
Romans 6.1.
and God has most glory in pardoning most offenses: Whereas being elected we
work well, not to recompense the goodness of God, but to show our
thankfulness. And there is no promise where the commandment is not kept: for
this is to be performed on our part, else God is discharged on his part: for
being out of our ways the devil may take us as vagabonds, the protection of
the Lord not extending to us in this course. And thus does Satan almost labor
to pervert all the Scripture, that he may find us straying out of our Fathers
house: as to suggest, that the Sabbath is made for man, therefore he will
labor to make us work on this day. Mark. 2.27.
But let us not give ear to him, for this leads out of the way. So when it
is said: He that labors not for his house, 2. Tim. 5.8.
is worse then an infidel, if he abuse any of us by this, to covet after
riches, away with it: for it is said in another place: Covetousness is the
root of all evil, and the desire of riches is simply unlawful, (1. Tim. 6.9.)
for by this he falls into many snares.

It is written again, Thou shall not tempt, etc.

This is the second general part: namely, the repulse of the temptation:
wherein consider two parts: first, that Christ answers again by Scripture:
secondly, in what sense the place is alleged.

For the first, we may observe and see, it is no disgrace nor disparagement to
the Scripture to proceed from Satan, nor any occasion to make us leave our
hold: for Christ answers again, and strikes with the same weapon wherewith
he was stricken, showing us, that it is lawful to use a text well against them
that do abuse a text: and if Christ's example be our president, then we may
allege Scripture against depraved Scripture. For the Be may gather honey on
the same stalk that the spider does poison. And though a swashbuckler kill a
man with his weapon, yet a soldier may lawfully knit a sword to his side: and
though there be many piracies committed on the sea, yet may the merchants
traffic; or though some surfeit by gluttony, yet may others use their
temperate diet. And if the devil change himself into an Angel of light,
shall therefore the Angels lose their light? Or shall Paul therefore deny
himself to be a preacher of salvation, because the Pythonite ( Act. 16.17.)
spoke it? Or because Caiphas by the spirit of the devil ( Ioh. 11.50.) said,
one should die for the sins of the people, must we not therefore believe it?
And though ( Numb. 22.) an inchanter wished that his soul might die the death
of the righteous, yet is it a prayer fit to be used of all Christians, though
he sold his soul for gold: For (says he Numb. 24.17.) a star shall come
out of Judah, a true speech of a false spirit. And here the devils own mouth
protests, that Gods providence reaches over his children, which we may
believe with comfort, though it proceed from his lying lips.

For the second, which is the sense of the words: herein Christ does plainly
show, that he abused the place before alleged, because he enforced the
promise contrary to the commandment, mandement, making it absolute, where it
was but conditional: that the Lord would protect him if he kept him in his
ways; and for him to expect the promise if he went astray, were merely to
tempt God: so as the devil by concealing that part, did poison and adulterate
the Scripture.

Now we must observe, that God is tempted by man two ways: first, when we
doubt of his power, using lawful means, and yet we do not think God can
relieve us: as Exodus 17. and Numb. 20 both the Israelites and Moses himself
doubted there would come no water out of the rock though it were stricken,
whereupon the place was called Massah and Meribah, Strife and T^mptation: for
the Lord had told them by that means they should gain water. Secondly, he is
tempted, when we neglect the means, and yet presume upon his power, which is
most proper to this place. For if Christ here would have come down from the
pinnacle head long and not by degrees, he had neglected the means, and so had
been out of the compass of the promise. And thus do we try whether. God can
keep us when we are gone out of the way; which is as if we would cut off a
man's leg, and send him then on our errand; and clip the wings of a bird to try
whether it can fly: for our presumption can tie up Gods arms that he cannot
help us, and make him brass, that he cannot rain mercy upon us. We know
there is a peremptory decree of election and reprobation: Phil. 2.12.
what of this? yet we must strive to obtain the price set before us, and work
our salvation forth with fear and trembling: for there are none predestinate
to life, but they are predestinate to the means, faith and repentance, and he
shall believe and repent that shall be saved, and he that does not, was never
elect; and yet we try whether God can save us contrary to the means he has
appointed, by walking in profaneness, and in the works of darkness. But let
us know, that the promise is upon condition that we believe, and that the
means stands with the decree, and cannot be separate. Oh, but it is said,
Ezec. 18.32. Romans 2.4.
At what time soever a sinner does repent he shall live. True: but it is said
again: Abuse not the bountifulness of the Lord unto thine own damnation: For
the door is not always open, but thou may knock too late, and weep when
thou can get no blessing: for if the sun once set upon our sins, or the
inheritance be once given, then we come too short to expect any share.

Here we are to consider two extremities we are fallen into: first, that we
distrust most where we ought not to doubt: secondly, that wherein we should be
most fearful, we are too bold: Care not (says Christ) for food and
apparel, ( Mat. 6.25.) they shall be cast upon you: and yet in these things we
dare not trust the Lord without a pawn, for unless we have bread, we think
straight way we shall starve: but concerning heavenly things we are more
careless, as for the preaching of the word, which is as necessary to keep
life in the soul, as is food to maintain life in the body. Without bread a
man will confidently say he (...) live, and yet despising the bread of life,
and never tasting of it, he will not doubt but he has a sound soul, and can
retire to the song of mercy; as that he trusts God will spare him: when as
in truth we have no promise of mercy, but through obedience to the Gospel,
embracing it by faith, and expressing it in our conversation. And this is our
misery, that we are grown so sluggish, that we dare trust God with our
souls without means, which is the more precious part, but not with our bodies
unless we see the means present, these being of no value save in respect of
the soul which makes the whole immortal. Christ here refused to fall down,
because there was another way: so let us cease to tempt the Lord by our wicked
lives, upon hope of his patience, or presuming that in compassion he will not
fall out with us, nor take vengeance on our offenses: for we cannot turst or
rely upon mercy without obedience to his commandment. Example hereof we
have, Act. 27.24. where Paul had a promise of the Lord, that not a hair of
their head should perish that went with him in the ship: yet when upon violence
of the tempest they would have committed themselves to the sea, Paul tells
them they could not be safe unless they stated in the ship: for God having
set down the means of their safety, meant to have their hearts inclined to
it; even so he that does not amend his life, can no more be secure from the
ship-wracke of his soul, then these from the danger of their bodies if they
had forsaken the ship: or Christ to have had his Fathers Angels to have vpheld
him if he had cast himself down.

Again the Devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain, etc. This is
the third battery or assault was laid against our Savior Christ; wherein are
two general parts: first, the temptation: secondly, the resistance of the
temptation. In the first, there are three parts to be considered: first, what
was the glorious and glittering sight he showed Christ: secondly, what was the
bountiful offer he made him: thirdly, what was the condition he required in
recompense of his royal liberality. The sight he showed him is set down by
these circumstances: first, he lifts him up into an exceeding high mountain
that he might have the advantage of the place to take the better view:
secondly, he shows him not some but all the kingdoms of the earth, not in
some but in all the glory of them all; and as Saint Luke says, chap. 4.5. in
the twinkling of an eye, that the sudden sight might have ravished him.

Out of which learn, that before the devil would propound his purpose and
manifest his drift, he uses an infinuation to prepare Christ, by making an
impression in his mind, to have that moved by the apprehension of the sense,
that if it were possible his mind might be ensnared. But Christ though he had
the natural faculties of man, yet was he not subject to man's infirmities. But
it is strange to see how forcible this temptation is to the sons of men that
are but flesh, to show them but the sight of things, for not only the mind
poisoned with concupiscence corrupts the sense, but the sense likewise
poisoneth the mind, and often times the Devil begins with thoughts and fancies
represented to the senses. In incontinency thus he wrought with David, 2. Sa.
11.2. by casting his eye from the turret to lust after Vriahs wife: and Gen
39.7. Putyphars wife fair the young man Joseph to be fair, and she said, Lie
with me: and Joshua 7.22. Achan saw a stately garment of a Babylonian, and then
coueted, and then took it. For sensuality and voluptuousness, the eye works
much upon men, and therefore in the Proverbs we are forbidden to look upon the
color of wine lest the sight inflame the appetite: Prou. 13.31.
and in Ahab 1. King. 21.2. it is to be thought he often saw Naboths
Vineyard, whereby he was brought so greedily to desire it: yea in most of the
sins registered in the scripture, this speech (They saw it) comes ever
between the heart and the sin; for thus Satan powers in poison into the
heart by the outward sense, and our looks are as windows whereat lust is let
in, and concupiscence inflamed. Hereupon it is that the Saints of God have
made their prayers, that the Lord would turn away their eyes from beholding
vanity: Job 31.1.
and Job made And if these that were so full of the holy Ghost, so painful in
crucifying their members, so fervent in prayer, and so awful of God did this,
much more ought we that are far behind them in religious exercises, and far
before them in fleshly desires, have a steady hand over our selves and our
senses, that they be not caught and ensnared. Therefore let us yield nothing
to the course of waters, nor seek to quench the fire with oil, or abate our
lust by dalliance. Some have the eyes of the Cockatrice of Egypt, that sends
forth poison to infect others, and rebounding back again poisoneth it self.
For him that can scarce stand of himself, it is not safe sliding on the ice:
nor for a weak brain to come near an Iuie bush: for in this he betraieth
his own soul.

For the second, which is the promise he made him, All these (faith he) I will
give thee: and lest he might seem to promise that was none of his own, it
appears by S. Luke 4.6. that he does not challenge this as his of himself,
but as given him: as if he should say, They are all given me, and I will give
them all to thee; wherein partly he says true, and in part lies most
shamefully. His truth is in this, that he acknowledges it to be bestowed by a
higher Lord; but hereby he would insinuate, that they are so given, as the
Lord has utterly renounced and abdicated his care of the world, and has left
the earth to be disposed by Satan, or the wheel of fortune, contenting
himself with the government in the heavens. Where learn, that though Satan
does rule against Gods will, and that he never allowed his power, whee rules
not without his will. Hereupon we must understand a double power; the first
given, the second only permitted: All power thou have (says Christ to Pilate)
is given this of my Father. John 19.11.
But the Devils power is so permitted as it was never ordained of God:
therefore it is not so lawful as that of Magistrates, be they never so wicked;
for this is so given, as though it be abused yet the authority in it own
nature comes from God. Revel. 13. The beast, that was the Emperor of Rome,
came tumultuously, and advanced by wars had his authority given him from the
Dragon. Where we must distinguish two things: first, the ordinance of God
commanding such magistracy so far as it is pre-eminence: secondly, their
Apostasy, their tyranny, persecution of the Saints, and their unjust coming
to that seat, was from the devil. But the devils power he executes is no way
lawful as from God, for he never commanded it; so as he is a mere usurper:
and according to this is the lieutenancy of Satan, which God does suffer but
not ordiane, namely that princely imperious popish Priest of Rome, neither
Magistrate nor Minister, and has no power but from satan, and is absolutely
as unlawful as the Devils. Where further consider, that there is nothing so
evil but it is by Gods decree, though not allowed, and it is good there should
be evil. And though the devil as he is the Devil rules not well, yet it is
to Gods glory, for the exercising of his children by the buffetings of Satan
to humble them, lest they should wax proud, and for the condemnation of the
reprobate by the suggestions of Satan to ntangle them, that they might not
escape the justice of God.

The second thing Satan assumeth to himself is most false, namely, that they
were his to dispose; for since they were never given him, he cannot assign
them over, for he has gained no interest by usurpation. And this is true that
Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 4. learned by living among beasts: Now (says he verse. 31.)
I see by experience which I could not before judge of, that the Lord of Lords
disposes of kingdoms. But it may be thought a strange impudency in the
devil, to go about to persuade the Son of God that he could give these
things, for scarce any of us would think his sovereignty so great. It is true,
Christ could no^^^ this proffer be seduced; but a great part of the world does
think, that he can dispose of the comforts of this life, which is proved by
the means they use to come to these blessings, using lewd practices and
unlawful means, not for a kingdom but for a trifle; which they would never
do, if they were not persuaded the disposition of these inferior things were
turned over to the Devil, for God gives nothing as a blessing, but by a
lawful course: so as using Satan's means how can we think it comes from
God? And that such is our judgment also, appears by the proverb, He that
lives an honest man shall die a beggar; and what is this but to give over the
government to the Devil of these earthly things? And though they ask their
daisie bread of God, yet they testify that this their God is Satan. For note
the means they use. For kingdoms, can a man persuade himself that God
sets up Princes, and that promotion comes neither from the East not from
the West, and shall he aspire to it by treason? For authority; can a man think
that to come to a place is in the disposition of the highest, when he is
advanced by bribery and corruption? He that thinks to win somewhat from a
Prince by flattery, persuades not himself that God can dispose of Princes
hearts. And he that comes to a living by simony, thinks not that the holy Ghost
has appointed him there, nor he that increases his wealth by usury, holds not
that riches come from the Lord; for all these means has his mouth cursed.

Further, for the promise, he will give him all if he will give him but a
knee, a small matter; and if he would acknowledge him a benefactor, he would
gratify him as a person worthy, with all he showed him. Now how ever Christ
was not overcome with this, yet it mightily preuailes with the sons of men.
Look into all particular places, and we shall find he has many to crouch to
him for a great deal less then this was: Judas will betray his master for
thirty pieces of silver, Mat. 26.15. Doeg will flatter Saul 1. Sa. 22.10. and
speak all evil of David, in hope of preferment. Absolon will seek his
fathers life, to step into his throne, 2. Sa. 15.2. Ioab will kill Amasa (2.
Sam. 10.) to get but the chief captainship of the guard. And Abimelech will
slay threescore and ten men ( Judges 9.2.) to make himself way to the Crown.
This made Balaam ( Numbers 24.) that he would feign have cursed; that he might
have been advanced: and Diotrephes (3. John 1.9.) to hinder preaching that he
might be chief: and the Disciples to fall out ( Luke 9.46.) among themselves
who shall be chiefest, one desiring to sit on the right hand, the other on the
left, that they might be jolly fellows. But never any took the Devil so much
at his word as the Hierarchy of Rome, who from God had nothing given them but
the Word and Sacraments, but from Satan has had his staiers and degrees to
ascend into the mountain, first God having provided men should be Pastors
over the people, it was appointed by man that there should be superintendents
over the superintendents, that is, Bishops, over Pastors, which was thought
good to appease the ^^^ention of the church, and to advance men for the
excellency of their gifts. After was devised that some should be over the
Bishops, as Archbishops, devised at first by singular policy, that as Bishops
in their Dioces were over the Pastors, so these should be over them, to deal
with them as they did with the Pastors. After was invented that some should be
over them, and then was the Church given to four Patriarchs which were to have
as ample authority over them as they had over the Bishops, and these were
placed in every corner of the Church, namely at Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople and Rome. Hereupon by reason of the multitude of matters
brought to these four, Satan withdrew them from their studies, being so
instantly importuned as they were. From hence they being in such eminent
places, and bearing the name of great professors, the Emperors growing to be
Christians endowed them with great substance, called them to be of their
Council, and gave them much worldly wealth, as to great men of the earth; and
when they began thus to negotiate in the world they despised preaching. After
when they were enriched and brought thus far ad gloriam mundi, to behold the
glory of the earth, then Satan wanted no more then to see which of these would
fall down first and have all: at the end the strife grew between
Constantinople and Rome, as Patriarchs of the East and West Churches, and after
some buckling Rome prevailed, partly by the absence of the Emperor, partly by
the division of the Empire in the East, partly in that it sought it more
ambitiously than the other, and partly for the fulfilling of the Prophecy,
that the seat of the Beast should be built upon the seven hills. And how was
this done but by Phocas that killed his Master Mauritius? whereupon afterward
partly by worldly power, disposing of Emperors, and the yoke of conscience
thinking them Peter's successors, he was stupor mundi, the wonder of the world,
having power in the peoples understanding, both in hell, heaven, earth, and
purgatory; and when he came to rule in all these, them was this fulfilled here
spoken of, Fall down and worship me. And this has also infected the Churches
of the Protestants, as one Bishop Bennet has written, namely the Devil has
showed them the (...) Bishoprics, Deaneries, and Parsonages of the land, and
having once gotten them at this lift, has brought them to disclaim and
renounce the simplicity of the truth, and leaving their calling to betake
themselves to the glittering show of the world, and to be sed and fatted with
ambition.

For the third, which is the condition he requires for his ^^berality: he
will not give it for nothing. Where note, that the Devils promises are fair,
but there is some cursed condition tied and annexed to them. He will give
Absolon a kingdom, but he must ravish his fathers concubines: 2. Sam ^^ 22. 1.
Sa. 22.9.18 Luke 23.2. Ioh. 19.12.
he will get Doeg a place in the Court, but he must persecute the Church:
Caiphas shall be chief Priest, so he will betray Christ: Pilate shall be a
Judge, if he will be Casars friend: Balaam shall be highly promoted, if he will
but curse the people: and Christ shall have the whole world if he will but bend
his knee to him. He will promise, Number. 23.11.
a merchant shall be made an Alderman, if he will but continue his usury: a
Lawyer shall be made a Judge, if he will not stick at a little bribery: a
scholar shall have great preferment, if he but follow his counsel: at first to
preach pleasingly, not to do it often, for then he shall be stale, to come up
only in famous places, especially at Bethel the Kings Chapel: so as the
country must not content him, he must preach like a Clerk in his Greek,
Hebrew, and Latin, that the people may rather admire him, than understand him:
think he has knowledge, rather than get any for themselves: for Satan
cannot abide to have them learned, he must defend all things not only to be
well established but well executed; to beware lest he gall men in authority;
and howsoever in the pulpit he may generally glaunce at abuses, yet after to
show himself plausible, and to make himself deaf when he hears an oath.
Thus does the devil indent with men, and thus is wine given to the Nazarites,
Amos 2.12.
as Amos speaks, and unless thou will suffer God to be dishonored, and thy
soul hazarded, he will give thee nothing.

But it may be said, It is a shameful thing to demand this of Christ, so may
it seem of us; for no man will profess to worship the devil. But this cannot
be denied in action, howeuer it be in wo^ds: for if a man worship him whom he
serves, and serves him whom he obeys, as S. Paul says Romans 6.14. And if
we may measure the worship by the fruits of worship, he that by p^^ier
expects not a blessing, by loosnesse of life gives himself to uncleanness,
and from the poison of his heart profaneth the Sabbath, does worship the devil
greatly, though he cry never so much against it: for none will sooner defend
her honesty then a strumpet, nor give bigger words then a coward. Yea some are
so fully possessed with him as they do not know it; and those diseases are
most dangerous that are not felt. Now the devil is worshipped two ways:
either by idolatry in judgment, as in gross superstition: or by idolatry in
affection, as they that make their belly their God: for the covetous man is an
Idolater, Ephesians. 5. and so is the voluptuous man, Phil. 3. yea if we plant our
hearts any where but in heaven, we commit Idolatry.

Now for the resistance of the temptation, it has two parts: the first,
general: the second particular. Fist, answering by the detestation of the
person, Avoid Satan: for because he had dealt more shamefully in this
temptation then in the others, he gives him a more sharp answer then before.
Secondly, he descends for the instruction of the godly, into a more
particular answer: I must worship God.

Out of the first, learn the wisdom of our Savior Christ, who dealing with a
most malicious enemy, would not multiply words or argument with him, but
answers him with one only word of detestation, Avoid Satan: For the
blasphemous may not be reasoned with, if they should, it would make them but
burst forth into greater outrage against the peareles and matchless wisdom
of God, giving us likewise by this answer secretly to understand, that
whosoever goes about to withdraw us from God, is of the devil: so likewise
are they that seek by reason to dissuade us from the shame of the cross:
Therefore ( Mat. 16.23.) when Christ endeavored to prevent the ignominy should
come upon the cross, and to make his disciples and the rest unvanquishable
when it should come, it is said there, Peter took him aside, and used reasons
to dissuade him from such (...) comfortable speeches; whereupon Christ not
mildly but sharply, being displeased with this carnal excoption of his, bids
him (...) Satan: that is, as a great enemy to him and others. And so whensouer
flesh and blood shall take exception against the mystery of godliness, it is
thus sharply to be reproved. Hereupon ( Romans 3.31.) exceptions being taken,
that the law served to no use, because Christ's obedience had absolutely
purchased our pardon, the Apostle in like wisdom of the spirit of God,
answers not only by a simple denial, but by a denial with a detestatio^^.
God forbid: as that it is blasphemy to be of such opinion. And sometime to this
phrase the Apostle adds more, as Romans 3.8. not replying one word, but only
says, their damnation is just, rather setting before them their cursed end,
then conuincing them by reason: for as Solomon says, A fool may not be
answered in his folly.

Out of the second answer which Christ makes, for our instruction and
satisfaction, observe, that God must have both all outward and inward worship,
so as it is impious to think a man can keep his soul for God, when he
humbles his body to strange gods: and in this he does withdraw his reuerenc^
from his own religion, either through fear or profanen^^^^ reaching forth
part of the worship to another. But we must know God will have both, and in
creating both he challenges both, besides that of them both he has made but
one man which cannot be divided, but goes together. For we are not baptized in
our bodies only, but in our souls: out souls only were not redeemed, neither
shall they only be sa^ed, but the whole man. If the body then be the Lords
both by creation and by redemption, let us give testimony of his worship in
both, otherwise it is as if a woman should protest she loved her husband at the
heart and in her soul, and yet should prostitute her body to uncleanness:
but we are espoused and married to the Lord, therefore let us keep both for
him unspotted.

Lastly, out of the devils argument, let us learn to fear and serve the Lord:
for if gifts may draw on worship, as he pretends by his proffer to Christ,
then has the Lord offered far more largely for us: I will give thee (says
he) eternal life, and it is no advantage to win the world and to take the
devils offer, and after to lose our souls. But let us set God on our right
hand, in him we live, in him we have our being, it is he that feeds us with
natural and supernatural things and blessings, godliness having the promises
of this life and of the life to come: 1. Tim. 4.8.
he will make us heirs of the earth, the world standing for our sakes, we
shall be heirs of heaven, Ioh. 1^.2.
Christ having prepared places for us in his fathers house, yea fellow heirs
with his own Son, tasting of no other love, Ioh. 17.24.
nor feeling any other glory then his Son has; and therefore in the
judgment of the devil he shall worthily be damned that refuses so large an
offer at Gods hand, who gives and never vpbraideth, pardons and never
reperteth.

Then the devil left him, etc.

This is the third part, namely, the issue and event of the temptations had and
sustained by Christ, set down in two things: first, that when the devil could
not overcome him, he left him: secondly, that the Angels attended and ministered.

For the first, by this understand that as Christ was tempted for us, and in
our flesh overcame for us in his person, so we have good and comfortable
security, that using the same means he did, according as we shall be enabled,
and through the grace of the same spirit, we also shall overcome the Prince of
darkness: for we must not think our selves freed from these assaults, the
life of a Christian being a warfare, the world the camp, the first registring
and inrolling of us being in baptism, where we took a vow to be true to the
Lord Jesus: Christ is our victorious Captain: our enemies are, the world
without us, the flesh within us as accessaries, and the devil as principal,
besides temptations on both hands. Now the power we have to repel these, is
the sword of the spirit, the word of God: the school where we learn this
defense, is the Church of God, where we find weapons both offensive and
defensive, a shield of faith to defend our selves, and a sword of the word to
offend the enemy. And this may be our comfort, his rage will have an end, and
his malice shall not prevail: but as Saint James says: If we resist him,
James 4.7.
he will fly from us: that is, he will hasten as fast away, as he came
fiercely toward us, for here is promised victory to all that strive infeare.

For the second generally we note, how it pleased God by wisdom and
dispensation to dispose of the exinanition, (as I may so term it) or the
impairing and abasing of Christ, while he was in the flesh: that in the midst
of the greatest ignominy and reproach, yet he bore some mark and badge of his
notable and divine power, whereby by the eyes of faith he might be discerned
to be the Son of God. His baseness appears in this: that he lived in the
wilderness, he was assaulted of the devil, he had no company but beasts, he
was hungry and had no food but stones, Satan was busy with him to make him
tempt his Father; and in all this there was nothing but ignominy and extreme
baseness. But after all this there breaks forth like the Sun through the
clouds, a matter which makes him known and discerned to be more then a man,
that the Angels come to do him service. And thus did it ever fall our, that
he was never brought so low nor so near the ground, but there did at last
shine forth an impregnable work of his divinity: he was borne in a stable,
his Cradle was a Manger, there was lodging in the Inn, but none for Mary, Mat.
22.
yet was there then a star in the heavens, to signify to the Wisemen the
birth of this noble personage: he was baptized by John his servant, Mat
3.15.16.
but a voice was heard from heaven, and the holy Ghost was there by his sole^^^
presence. He had no possessions of his own, but was maintained by the alms of
devout women, but out of them had he cast Devils. He must pay tribute, Mat.
17.27.
but he will fetch it out of the fishes mouth: in the end he was taken with a
band of men, but when he spoke ( Ioh. 18.6.) they reeled backward and none
durst lay hold on him: he was whipped and ill entreated, but twice before had
he whipped the money changers out of the Temple, and none durst open their
mouth against him: Mark. 11.15. Mat. 27.19.24.
he was condemned to die, but the Judges wife dreamed and was troubled, being
persuaded of his innocence, and Pilat himself acquitted him. When he was going
to the cross he was so worn as he was not able to bear it, but he was able
to bear the wrath of his Father. He was hanged between two thieves, Mat.
27.32. Luke 23.43.
but he saves one of them. And howsoever sometimes he was called Beelzebub, yet
Beelzebub confesses him often to be the Son of God: thus was ever his
humility qualified with some testimony of his divinity.

In that it is said, The Angels came and ministered unto him: note, that
howsoever they be ministering spirits, to give us security of the Lords
protection, though his promise were sufficient, yet by special prerogative
they are attending on Christ, to whom alone they owe and do their homage. And
besides learn here the time when we are to expect this ministry of Angels,
not until we have fought the battles of the Lord, then to succor our faint
spirits, and to relieve our distressed hearts they are sent as comforters unto
us. Genesis 22.11.
And thus when Abraham held in his body an anguished soul, and in his hand a
blondy knife to have fetched the life of Isaac from him, then was the window of
comfort opened, and then had God provided another sacrifice. When Iacch was
wearied and benighted, ( Genesis 28.) having for his bed the earth, and for his
pillow an heap of stones, then stands the Lord about him and blesses him:
and when Eliah is forced to fly to preserve his life, and yet ready to die for
want of food, then does the Lord awake him by his Angel, and bid him eat, 1.
King. 19.5. And when Christ had finished the combat and won the field, then
the Angels come to wait upon him: so as we may not think to bear away the
victory without blows, nor to be comforted without sorrows, not to be
refreshed without (...).

MATH. 4. verse. 12, 13.14.15.16.










Here follows the real execution of Christ's office, and what he did after
John was in prison: For now was the time that the day star going away, the
Sun of righteousness might appear. In the words there are three things to
be considered: first, the cause why Christ returned into Galile, the very
place where that Herod dwelt that committed John for reproving him of his
adultery. Secondly, that he leaves Nazareth his own place: the reason
whereof is given by Saint Luke, chap. 4.29. because they sought to break his
neck. Thirdly, the cause of his going to Capernaum, to fulfill Esaias his
Prophecy, that those quarters should first be made famous through Christ's
doctrine and miracles, being the first that were carried away into captivity.

Now first it shall not be amiss, since we see John in prison, to seek out
the cause of his commitment, which though it be not here expressed, yet it is
in the 14. chapter of this Evangelist set down upon another occasion; that
Herod thought the soul of John Baptist to be gone into Christ: howbeit S. Luke
chap. 3.19. upon this very occasion, shows the cause to be for reproving
Herod for taking his brother Philips wife. Where note, and behold as in a
mirror, the wonderful resolution of a Christian servant of God, that durst
tell a king to his face of so enormous a crime. And if John lived now, howeuer
many might have commended his zeal, yet most would have condemned his
discretion, that durst adventure himself so far: for he was grown into high
favor with the king, as appears Mark. 6.20. Herod would hear him often,
acknowledged him to be godly, reformed many things, and granted many things at
his request: so that herein men now adays would call in question his
discretion, that having such interest in the king, he would not spare him in
this one vice, but must needs lance this sore; whereas if he had but stopped
his mouth in this one, he might have continued still and done much good. But
John Baptist durst not conceal any part of his embassage. The imitation of
which president will be thought to be prejudicial to the serpentine wisdom
of these times: for now it is thought good advice, not to wake a sleeping Lion,
nor to put our hands into the hiue, lest we be stung: but to beware of vae
nobis lest we come coram vobis; not at all to reprove, lest we be stricken.
Which is contrary to the wisdom of John: for though there were none left but
Christ, yet he spares not his message, nor is ashamed to tell Herod of that
sin he ought to be ashamed to commit: and away with this idol discretion,
which marreth all, even as the image in Daniel, chap. 3.1. which was set up in
Dura. Nathan (2. Sam. 12.1.) must tell David of his adultery to his face: and
Paul advises (1. Tim. 5.20.) those that sin to rebuke openly, that the rest
may fear: which being sealed by the canon of the Apostle proves, that men
must not only rebuke in general, but in particular. And if Paul had need of
the prayer of the Ephesians, chap. 6.19. that he might speak boldly, much more
have we that stand in such fear to be bound for our speech: for by this
courage and boldness shall we establish our doctrine in men's consciences.

Secondly, in this example of John, note, as his constancy to speak boldly, so
his persecution to suffer extremely: and this is the portion allotted to all
Gods Ministers. If Eliah speak the truth in reproving Ahab 1. King. 19.8. he
must fly to the mount Horeb to save himself. If Amos preach at Bethel the
destruction of Ieroboams house, Amos 7.12. he must go to his tar-box again. And
if Michaiah (1. Kings 22.17.) tell the king truly he may not go to battle, he
shall be sure to eat the bread of affliction. If Hanani tell Asah (2. Chronic.
16.9.) thou have done foolishly not to rest upon the Lord; to prison with him.
If Zachariah (2. Chron. 24.20.) tell Ioash he shall not prosper if he forsake
the Lord, and that he does ill to put down religion, he shall be slain even
in the court of the Lords house. Jeremy must to the dungeon, Esaias to the saw,
John Baptist to the axe, if they be so quick sighted and so hot spirited as
they cannot wink at sin. And Revel. 11.3. of two Preachers, out of whose
mouths shall proceed fire, though in the eyes of the Lord they be as Olives
dropping down most comfortable mice, yet at last the Beast shall get them and
overcome them, they being stronger in the spirit, but he in the flesh, and he
shall kill them, and they shall not be buried, and the people shall send gifts
one to another, saying the Prophets are gone, now making merry, as that they
might sin without controlement, and giving applause to that beastly tyranny
was showed on them.

Let us further consider the indignity offered to this man, borne a Prophet,
whose father was stricken dumb by a miracle, the Bridegroomes friend, yet was
he not condemned by public sentence, not at the desire of the people, but by
the request of a harlots daughter, executed in a private place. Could the Sun
shine upon such a King as could break forth into this impietys* And how could
the Lord spare his wrath and not power it forth, that such a famous servant of
his should be taken away by such an infamous death? But howsoever we may
after a sort co^^ fesie that our bodies are in the Princes power, yet this may
comfort us, that not the life, no nor the have of a Minister shall perish
without the pleasure and permission of God. To day, to morrow and the third day
Christ shall preach, let the Fox do bis worst, Luke 13.32.
and when his time is come their malice shall put him to death also. Thirdly,
note Gods providence, that both John and Christ may not be clapped up together,
but God ever will have some left to carry his message. When the three children
( Dan. 5.) were in the fire, Daniel was at liberty in the Court: and when
Dauiel was in the Lions den, the three children were in credit in the Court.
When John is fallen, Christ rises. When Herod ( Act. 1^.) had imbrued his
hands in blood, putting James to death, he thought to have done the like to
Peter, but the Lord sent his Angel to vnshackle him, for they must not both
go to the pot together. And when the Temple of God by the invasion of
Antichrist is become a slaughterhouse of the Saints, yet the Lord ( R^^ 11.3.)
had a number left, namely two witnesses at the least, one to comfort another,
for the propagation and publishing of the truth: so as we may be assured,
though the Lions of the field roar and rauin never so much, it is not possible
all the true preachers of the Gospel shall be abolished: but as their blood is
precious in his eyes, Psalm. 116.15.
so out of their ashes will he raise up others that shall hold the cup of his
indignation even to the mouths of Princes.

Further observe, how the Lord esteems the tyranny and cruelty of men in this
kind toward his Ministers: for Luke 3.20. it is said that of the evils which
Herod had done, he added this above all, to imprison John: so heinous a thing
is the persecution of the Gospel in the sight of God, and much more of them
that are his Ambassadors; and therefore this is noted 2. Chron. 16 12. to be
the captain sin of Asah, that he put Hanani in prison; so beautiful be
they in the opinion of the Almighty, for he priseth the death of these Saints
at a high rate: as may be seen first in their often redemption from death, as
Paul escaped Act. 23. when the people had sworn to stay him; and Peter was
loosed from his chains when the governors had conspired against him.
Secondly, it may be discerned in the precious reward of it, Blessed be they
that die in the Lord. and Stephen Act. 7.60, is said but to sleep when he had
been stoned of the Jews, his spirit being received of the Lord Jesus. And
thirdly it is manifested in the severe revenge of their death, the Lord first
having (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) they stay in the sea still: so if we
do but nibble at the Gospel, we shall continue in the sea of the world still,
and so shall never be blessed.

Secondly, observe in the speech of Christ, he does not say; I do make you,
but I will make you fishers of men: that is, I will train you up to be
competently fit for that work I call you for. Where they are convinced that
place men in the Church before they be sufficient; for he must have no hand
laid on him till he be qualified, says Paul, 1. Tim. 5.22. and he must be
able to bring forth of his store new and old, says the Gospel, Mat. 13.52.
and he must not be placed in hope he will prove sufficient; for while the
grass grows the horse starueth, and while he is furnishing himself the
people perish. Saul (1. Sam. 9.16.) being but a shepherd, was suddenly by Gods
spirit qualified for the civil government. For the Lord never commanded any,
but he enabled him first; neither has he less provided for them that should
have the administration and custody of souls. Moses ( Exodus 4.11.) had a
tongue made him before he went; Esa. 6.6.
Esaias had a coal from the altar before be spoke; Christ had his grace
increased ( Luke 2.52.) when he began to preach; for it is said, he grew in
wisdom, and was corroborated in spirit; and when he elected his Apostles, he
prayed to his Father a whole night, that he would direct his choice; and ( John
20.22.) when he had breathed on them the holy Ghost, yet he charged them to
stay at Jerusalem till they had received more grace, and then ( Act. 2.3.) the
holy Ghost came down upon them in cloven tongues to speak to all nations; and
fiery, that they might be zealous, Luke 24.45.
and then they were fit. In the old Testament the Priests were first anointed,
that God might testify by that oil their invisible grace; and in the new
Testament hands were laid on them to signify, that that hand which had called
them to this great office, would always be ready to protect them. Who would
choose a Captain that never saw the enemy in the face? or send him of an
embassage, that knew not how to deliver his message? And yet is the Lords
embassage committed to them that have no language; whereas the shepherds of
Gods sheep must be watchful to defend their charge from wolves, careful to
bring them home that stray, and skillful to heal them that are wounded. Make
no young plant (1. Tim. 3.6.) a Minister, says Paul: and though Paul himself (
Act. 22.13.) was suddenly called to preach, and Amos from his sheephooke, (
Amos 7.15.) to prophecy, let us know that the Lord that called them, had power
to give them gifts in a moment: for he has the fullness of the holy Ghost to
dispose at his pleasure: but men that want this power must try the gifts
first, and the Church must allow of none, unless they be persuaded he be such
a one, that if Christ were on the earth, he would give his consent.

Thirdly, learn by the word Fishermen, that the ministry is no easy, nor
idle, but a laborious office: wherein they must always be either casting their
nets, or mending their nets, or sorting the fish, traveling sore both night
and day. As Peter could answer Christ ( Luke 5.5.) We have traveled sore all
night, and caught nothing: so as they that think much to take this pains, are
not fit for this calling.

For the fourth, which is their obedience: it shows that it was more than the
voice of a man, that thus wrought upon their conscience: for he secretly and
inuisibly spoke unto their hearts by his spirit, and he might as easily have
drawn Caiaphas as Cephas, if it had been his pleasure: for he mollifieth the
soul on the sudden, and can open the doors of death with the least breath of
his mouth.

Secondly learn, that no affection or delight ought to make us to forsake, or
drive us from following Christ in our calling. These men we see left their
father whom they loved, and their nets by which they lived: and (1. King
19.19.) Elizeus left his oxen and made haste after Eliah had cast his mantle on
him. And ( Mat. 8.21.) one whom Christ called, would but have done his duty to
have buried his father, and was not permitted. Howbeit here men must beware of
two extremities: first, that they frame not excuses, but willingly leave their
nets when they are called. Secondly, that they leave them not till they be
called, and leave into the Ministry of themselves; being as fit for it as a
blind man to be a painter.

For the last point which is the effect that came of Christ's teaching: it is
said, The multitude followed him, where learn, that when the Gospel is fresh
and green, and first flourishes, men are very greedy to taste of it: but if
it continue long among them, even Manna proves horsebread, and men are soon
weary of it. For so it fell out with this people, against whom Mat. 11.23.
Christ denounces a fearful judgment for their unbelief, making them worse
than Tyrus and Sydon, which were before condemned. Whereby we may see, how
dangerous it is to grow cold in our first love of the truth, and to suspect
them that in a preposterous zeal will seem to run after Christ, bragging with
the young man in the Gospel, that they have kept the commandments, and yet
know not the least point of charity, how to distribute to the poor.

LVKE. 11. verse. 24, 25, 26.






IN this text there be five points to be observed: first, what is meant by
the going out of the spirit: secondly, his behavior after his departure,
namely, that there is a restless desire in Satan to reenter into his former
habitation: thirdly, the fit opportunities he observes for the regaining of
his possession: there be two set down in this place, he staieth till he finds
it swept and garnished, and a third is expressed Mat. 12.44. he finds it
empty: that is, deuoid of all cares, quiet, and swept of the grace of God, and
yet notably garnished with hypocrisy: fourthly, the vehement invasion he
makes at his reentry, that he will so garrison and lay such munition about
the house, as he will never be dispossessed again, for he brings seven
spirits worse than himself, the Lord does so darken the heart of that man, that
was for a while, enlightened: fifthly, the lamentable and damnable estate of such
a man: his end is worse than his beginning.

For the first, how Satan is said to be cast out, we must understand: so cast
out, as he still continues in: for if he were once utterly dispossessed, then
could he never return again. And this kind of casting out here meant, is
matched with diverse other places of the Scripture; as Heb. 6.5. It is
impossible, that they which have tasted of the good word of God, if they fall
away should be renewed again. And Heb. 10.25. If we sin willingly after we
have received the knowledge of truth, there remains no more satisfaction or
sacrifice for sin: and 2. Pet. 2.21. It had been better never to have known
the way of truth, than after they have known it to turn from it. If a man
then may know the truth and yet forsake it; be enlightened, and yet fall away;
be sanctified, and yet crucify Christ again: by the same reason may Satan be
cast out of a man, and yet continue in that man. For when these terms be thus
used, either of casting out Satan, or of letting in the truth: and yet by the
sequel of the words used by the spirit, we see the ruin of such men set down,
we must never take it for any effectual working of the spirit of God, but
only of the greatness of the Lords mercy offered them in the outward means
of their salvation, namely, in the word and Sacraments to cast out Satan:
according as it is said, Luke 10.11. The kingdom of God was come near them,
but not at them: or as ( Luke 17.21.) Christ speaking to the Pharisees, says:
The kingdom of God is within you, as if he should have said, Ye look about
for a Messiah, as if he were absent, but he is even among you, and in the
midst of you, though not by spiritual operation. So that observe hence, that
as often as we partake of any of the Lords graces, it is to cast out Satan,
and to root out his kingdom in us, though we receive it not with that effect
it should have: and therefore though that for a time Satan seems to have lost
his dominion in us, yet by the unright receiving of Gods blessings, and the
vnreuerent using of them, he does still continue in us.

David may well persuade us, Psalm. 32.4.
who found such leanness and emptiness of grace in him, as if he had been
but newly entered into the school of Christ: when after his long profession of
God, and yet after a tedious hypocrisy had ouergrowne his soul, he cried out,
( Psalm. 51.) Lord create a new spirit in me, as if he had not had it before:
even so may the unclean and evil spirit be like the snow hidden in the
thick clouds, and as fire raked up in the ashes that the heat when it breaks
forth may be the greater: for even in the powers of thy body and soul, there
may be an interruption of the sovereignty of sin for a season, leaving
notwithstanding some gross sins of a wicked conversation behind him, that
when he wandreth abroad, he may make thee know he has a home in thy heart, and
that this abatement of his power in thee for a time, may make thy sin at
length more ugly and enormous than before.

Judas, being a disciple and one of Christ his scholars, till the Lord
discovered his hypocrisy? Yea Satan may seem both to the man himself, and
to the Church to be cast out, and yet not to be so indeed: as appears Luke
8.18. where it is said: Even that shall be taken away which he seems to have:

when he was in him before, because in coming in, there comes in a more
forcible and stronger illusion of Satan than there was before: as ( Luke
22.3.) it is said, that Satan entered into Judas before the Passover, and we
cannot think that the spirit of God was in him before: for he was a thief,
and carried the bag, and paid himself for the carriage: and yet ( John
13.27.) it is said precisely, that Satan entered into Judas after the soppe,
meaning, by entering in a greater power than there was before. Even so he may be
said to go out, and to be cast out, when he is not let in for a time, that
after he may be given up into a reprobate sense: for it was but a weak kind of
Sunshine that ever appeared in his life.

Hence observe, that so much is Satan cast out of us, as sin (...) cast out of
us: for Satan fights against us with two weapons: first, with that he found
within us, which is flesh and blood: secondly, by that he brought upon us,
which is death. Why then the special weapon wherewith he strikes us being our
corruptions, they must be cut off and east away, or else Satan himself is not
vanquished. If thou therefore wilt say he be cast out of thee, show what
alteration there is in thy life, and what change in thy affections; if the
greatest part be not piety in religion, and purity in conversation, be sure
Satan has more weapons in thee than God: for as Christ says, Ioh. 8.44. Ye
are of the devil, for ye do his works. And therefore every one must make
this examination with himself, that if of a despiser and vnreuerent speaker of
the word of God, he do not now show his words to be such as may give grace to
the hearers. Satan's weapon still remains in him: for this is the argument
Saint Paul uses, Romans 6.19. As when we were servants to uncleanness we did
commit iniquity; so now being servants unto righteousness, we must have our
fruit in holiness of life, that our end may be salvation:

Secondly, observe since Satan may be cast out of thee in thine own
judgment, and in the opinion of those with whom thou live, and yet be
besieging thy soul with hypocrisy; that thou must labor to get good evidence
of the spirit of God, that thou art Christ's: which especially thou shall
perform by winning the spirit of humility to dwell within thee. For if thou
do publicly vaunt and brag how fruitful thou art in thy profession, and
how far thou have run in a short time in Christianity, when thou art not
called thereunto by God, but thrust forward in the pride and vanity of thine
own heart, then may thou with the Pharisee ( Luke 18.14.) depart home puffed
up in thy self, and seeming to others like a painted sepulcher, when as within
thou art nothing but rottenness, and far from being justified before God.
This did Solomon in his wisdom find in his time, which made him leave it as
an example for us to learn by, Proverb. 30.12. that there was a generation
pure in their own eyes, and yet they were not washed from their filthiness;
such as would carry a glorious show that they had tasted of the tree of life,
and such as in presumption of their own strength, will knock at heaven gates
as due to them by desert, when (alas) the Lord never knew them. Howsoever
therefore every Christian is in duty to sit in judgment upon himself, yet
let him know, that he must solemnly keep this Court in his own conscience,
and there let him survey and examine his manners and his members, his wit and
his senses, how he has used them: and in this trial let him make the law of
God his Judge, for that shall cut him to the quick: and by this shall he
truly see, whether Satan be truly cast out of him or no. For Satan will
teach thee to hide thy sin, but the law will discover it to thy face: if thy
sin be seen, he will double it with this temptation, that thou shall
dissemble it: but the law will set thy sins in order and in a rank before
thee. If he cannot teach thee thus to beguile thy self and God, yet will he
move thee to excuse and lessen it: but the law shall show it thee in such a
glass, as shall truly set forth the ugly shape of it. And if when thou have
made this perfect law of God to be thy Judge, thou can likewise make Christ
the answerer of this Judge, and can walk clothed with his garments of
innocence, humility, and obedience, as with the garments of our elder
brother, and out of a clean and pure heart and affection, can send forth
the fruits and actions of thy life, then may thou assure thy self Satan is
so cast out, as he shall never have power to return to thee again.

Thirdly observe, since Satan may seem to be cast out for a time by an
interruption of the power and strength of sin in a man, which at length
breaks in upon him like whole floods of waters: that therefore if we will
have Satan effectually cast out of us, we must learn not to discontinue some
sins, and to retain others; not to take up some in the imbers, while we
suffer others to rack our souls; for one sin nourished and maintained is
sufficient to keep possession for Satan. But we must loath and detest all
manner of sin with an absolute and perfect hatred, or else his weapon is not
taken away: for what praise is it for a rich man not to fall to theft, a sin
whereto he is not tempted; or for a beggar not to slip into briberie, a sin
that is kept far from him; or what is it to keep thy body clean from
filthiness, if thou defile thy tongue with evil speeches? It was nothing for
Herod to hear John Baptist gladly, Mar. 6.20.
since he kept his bed polluted with incest, for the sweetness of this sin
did so possess him, Matthew. 14.3. that for Herodias the strumpets sake John was
bound and beheaded. A lively example we have of this (2. King. 5.18.) in
Naamun the Syrian, who vowed unto the Prophet to worship none but the Lord:
here was Satan cast out of him in good measure: Yet when I go (says he) with
my master into the house of Rimmon, and he leans on my hand, and I likewise
bow there, the Lord be merciful unto me in this point. So he will continue
still an example of idolatry in the service of a superstitious master, which is
a sufficient hold for Satan to get into his soul again, and even in this did
he carry a weapon to kill himself, for Christ died not that we should die to
some sins, but to all sins, and if we make exception of any one, we are
guilty of all: as S. James says chap. 2.10. if we fail in any one point we
are guilty of all: and therefore ( Ezech. 18.21.) the wicked are admonished to
return from all their sins, and to walk in all the ways of the Lord: In
omnibus sine exceptions, quamuis non in omnibus cum impletione, in all without
exception, though in all we cannot with perfection; for repentance must not be
to some dead works but to all, with a full purpose of our heart to renounce
all sins. I speak not of infirmities, but of presumptuous and crying sins,
that we do not bless our souls in any such sin, for if we do, it is
Satan's ladder to clime up again, though for a time he be cast down, that is,
neither so forcibly felt, nor so visibly seen in thee.

Fourthly observe, that Satan in policy will be content not to show himself
always in thee as he is, but sometime even to transform himself into an
Angel of light, and he will not grudge at thee though thou remit somewhat of
thine enormities and gross sins, so he may retain somewhat to himself: he
cares not to be cast out of thee in idolatry, as that thou shall not bow thy
knee to Baal, so he may be kept in thee by Atheism, to say with the wicked
in thy heart, There is no God. He was well pleased that Judas should become a
Disciple of Christ, learn of Christ, follow Christ, so covetousness might so
possess him as to sell his master for money. Mat. 26.15.
He cared not though Abimelech entertained Abraham the servant of God ( Genesis
20.14.) with the best of his land, when he had once drawn him to consent to
adultery with Sara his wife. A most lively example of this we have in the
bodily Pharaoh of Egypt, Exo. 8. Moses had a commission from God that he
should go three days journey with the children of Israel, to celebrate a
feast unto the Lord. Go (says Pharaoh) verse. 25. but first do sacrifice unto
the Lord in this land: verse. 26. No, faith Moses, that were abomination to
sacrifice beasts to them that worship beasts. verse. 28. Go, says Pharaoh, but
not far: verse. 27. No, says Moses, I must go three days journey. Chap.
10.11. Go (says Pharaoh) ye and the men, but leave the children: No, says
Moses verse. 8. young and old must go. verse. 24. Go all, but leave your cattle
and your sheep behind you: somewhat (...) will cross the commandment of the
Lord: verse. 25. No, we must have all, for we know not what need we shall have
of sacrifice. Thus we see how Satan deals in sin by conditions and
limitations; for he will suffer himself to be dislodged of ignorance by a
general knowledge of the truth, and if he cannot send forth error to corrupt
our knowledge, if he can but work by worldliness to prophaine it, he will not
greatly care, for this shall be as a cable rope to pull him in again. We must
therefore learn to encounter this spiritual Pharaoh if we have a desire to
go out of Egypt, that is, to be delivered from eternal darkness, with Moses
his courage^ and if we gain by our courage as Moses did, let us follow on
stoutly to keep the ground and commandment which is set before us. Satan
will if he can retain some sin, and make thee relish some iniquity; but if
thou preserve any works of the flesh for him, thou cariest a most fearful
weapon to destroy thy self.

Again, since so much of the unclean spirit may be said to be gone out of a
man as admits any participation of the spirit of God, and since even the
reprobate may partake of all the graces of God, Heb. 6.5. saving one grace, to
be made new creatures, lest this doctrine not rightly understood, might shake
the foundation of some weak Christians, we will set down certain marks to
distinguish between Satan's going out of Christians and out of the reprobate,
since the holy Ghost may be and is communicated even to them. The difference
then stands in two points, for the graces of God in these be different:
first, in the measure of grace, being greater in the elect than in the
reprobate: secondly, in the obedience and working, whereby the elect show
themselves conformable to the grace, and so do not the reprobate. Now there be
two kind of graces, wherein the measure is greater in the children of God than
in the reprobate; and yet the first of these is really communicated to the
wicked, that is, the enlightening of the mind; for the reprobate are indeed
enlightened in the knowledge of God, and (as Heb. 6.5.) do taste of the good
word of God, but not effectually as the elect do. And though the Lord does not
regard the quantity but the substance of this enlightening, so as sometimes
there may be more light in a reprobate than in the child of God, yet for the
most part the elect have received a greater measure of this grace. For the
reprobate (as Mark. 8.24.) be like the blind man, who at the first putting on
of Christ his hands, saw men like trees, that is, a shape advanced upright: but
the elect, as verse. 25. are like unto him when the Lord had laid his hands the
second time upon him, for then he saw clearly a far off. So as the hypocrite
may go thus far, having not a vain but a vanishing light, No^ enim gratia
vana est sed euanescem: to walk for a time in the light: as John 12.35. Yet a
little while the light is with you: and as John 5.35 for a season to rejoice in
this light: but that is only spoken of the elect, which is ( Malac. 4.2.) that
unto them that fear the name of God shall the Sun of righteousness arise,
and health shall be under his wings. And as it is in the Prophet Esaias, The
Sun shall never go down, Esaias 66.23.
nor the Moon be darkened, that is, their light shall never be put out. Again,
the reprobate may conceive and retain a knowledge of reconciliation, but it is
a confused knowledge; but the elect has a more particular knowledge, that he
can receive it to apply it to the reforming of his life, whereas the other have
it only to make them inexcusable, or to make them burst forth into some
confession of their sin without repentance: Examples here of we have: Esau (
Genesis 27.38.) losing the blessing wept: and Peter ( Luke. 22.62.) losing Christ
by his denials, wept bitterly. Here are tears alike, but not in truth alike.
So ( Math. 27.3.) Judas betraying Christ, says, I have sinned: and (2. Sam.
24.10.) David numbering the people against Gods commandment, said, I have
sinned: here is repentance in both, the work alike, but the faith unlike. So
as the reprobate have a common beginning with the children of God, under the
veil and covering of hypocrisy; but they can never come to that height wherein
the elect do stand, as (2. Cor. 3.17.) to behold the Lord with open face, or to
be transformed to his image: or as Reu. 1.7. to have received that true
cie-salue, as to see Christ coming in the clouds with comfort: or as it is
said in the Prophet Jeremy, that true anointing of the Lords grace, which
neither wastes with time, nor decaieth in virtue.

him to utter some words without feeling, sometime so far as to condemn his
own sin, Mat. 27.4.5.
as Judas did his selling of Christ, but yet his conscience never disalloweth
it: for this is an inseparable mark set upon the prayers of the elect: Romans
8.26. Neither have any this sanctified spirit to pray as they ought, but they
which are of God. And as Galath. 4.6. For that assurance in prayer whereby we
cry Abba Father, the reprobate cannot possibly have, nor feel that force in
prayer: for as the Apostle there says, it is proper only for the sons of
God. The reason is, because the reprobate want the second grace, which
accompanies and waits upon the spirit of adoption, that is, good affections
toward God: for he does but dissemble his love of God, that he might still
continue as a bay^rec ever flourishing; the reverence that he yields him is but
in hypocrisy; James. 2.19.
and the obedience that he gives him, is but constrained as is the devils.
Howbeit with the elect it fares far otherwise, for their prayers are
auailable, because they are taught of God, and their affections are good,
because they are changed by his spi^^e: and they can come to God as children to
a father, only loking to speed in the name of father: for this shows
reconcilement after our first enmity, and sets forth more sound love than
nature can afford. And this his love draws our fear to oftend, and our care
to please: and we do lift up our voice with an assurance we shall be heard,
Ioh. 5.15.
because we humble our selves in a detestation of our sins, and with a
resolution to be obedient to his commandments, which the reprobates cannot
do: for though the Lord do often even show mercy to them in their prayers and
other Christian exercises, so as they may think they have their sins
forgiven, as he did to Ahab, (1. King. 21.27.29.) who having sold himself to
work wickedness in the sight of God, upon the judgment pronounced against
him, sitting but within the shadow of prayer and fasting, was spared that the
evil should not fall in his days; yet can they not possibly love the Lord of
heaven but in a confused sort, nor come before him but with a slavish fear.

But it may be said: If the Lord shows mercy to hypocrites and yet their
prayers nor available, it may be thought the Lord is deceitful. No: for the
hypocrite is taken with the sweetness of the Lords mercy, but he not
apprehending it as he should in obedience, it proves to him but a decaying
sweetness. Neither yet does this any whit prove the will of God to be
changeable, though after his mercy disclosed he does withdraw it from them: for
they rely only and stay themselves upon the present mercy not seeking
further: even as Esau, Genesis 25 34.
who so he might presently have to fill his belly, cared not for his
birthright: whereas the elect ground themselves upon Gods mercy in all manner
of tempests, and do gather together as many remembrances of it as they can, in
any of their afflictions: after the example of David, who (1. Sam. 17.37.)
armeth himself against Goliath, upon the remembrance of the Lords mercy
formerly showed him, in delivering him out of the paw of the Lion, and of the
Beat. Neither yet does the spirit of God at all deceive the reprobate: for the
Lord did not so extend his mercy as to take them to be his, and keep them as
his; but did cast that seed into them to make them without excuse, and to
double their damnation, Mark. 4.5.6.
in that they loved darkness more than light, so as for their ingratitude it
was taken away.

Ezechiel 18.31. they shall have a new heart given them, to walk in the
commandments of the Lord: and as Dania speaks, Psalm. 40.6.7.8. they have a
new song put into their mouths, and the Lord has so prepared their ears as
they can say: Here I am O Lord, I desire to do thy will, for thy law is
written in my heart. And they be such of whom Esaias 50.5. says, the Lord has
opened their ears, therefore they are not rebellious. But otherwise it is with
the hypocrites: for though their ears be opened, yet they are rebellious; and
though the word of God be in their stomachs, yet like dogs they cast it up
again, and do not show themselves pliable to the grace of God.

He walks through dry places. This is the second part spoken of at first,
namely, that when Satan is gone out of a man he has a restless kind of
desire, and every place is to him as a wilderness, unless he may return
whence he came, for he walks through dry places, that is, his operation and
power being interrupted in that man, all other places are as irksome and
unpleasant.

Out of this generally observe, that whether Satan be really cast out, or
only so dispossessed as the power of his subtle illusion is made less, that
is, whether the judgment be only enlightened, or with the light of judgment
the affections be also changed, which is the effectual casting out, it does so
provoke Satan, and distemper him, as he will assault that man more fiercely
than he did before in his time of ignorance. And if he be cast out by a true
enlightening, then he is more busy than with hypoc^i^^ for being Satan, that
is an enemy, he is an enemy to God, because he disthronized and threw him out
of heaven, and he does therefore most oppose himself against Gods children,
because he cannot assault the person of God: and yet we see how he assaied it
to God in the flesh, Luke 4.2. Again, as he is an enemy to God, so he is
said to be the Prince of the world, and therefore would draw all to be under
his seepter: Ioh. 16.11.
and he can find no rest in a Papist nor in an Atheist, for he knows there
is a canker already grown upon their consciences, which only must be seared
by the hot iron of the Lords wrath, 1. Tim. 4.2.
for they are already so hardened in profaneness, and so rooted in the
obstinacy of their error, that he is sure enough of them. But his labor and
rage is to assault professors, such as have a true knowledge of the true God,
and especially such as bear true affections toward God, and whom he sees to
yield obedience to the Gospel of Christ. A lively example and figure of this
we have in Pharaoh, who while the children of Israel ( Exodus 5.7.) continued in
Egypt, only oppressed them with heavy burdens, but then most fiercely and
deadly pursued them when they were gone out of Egypt. Even so let every of us
assure our selves, that the further we be from the regiment and dominion of
Satan, and the more excellent servants of God we be, the more will Satan
buffet us and vex us. This is that Christ forewarned Peter of, saying, that
Satan desired to winnow him like Wheat. Luke 22.31.
And why him above the rest of the Disciples? First, because he was one whom
Jesus loved: secondly, on the confession of whose faith he said he would
build his Church. And this is the condition of all true Christians, that when
Satan is effectually to be cast out and distodged, it cannot be but by
violence, for he will not only winnow us that we shall feel the fan to
grate us, but even the flaile to bruise us. Example whereof we have in the
dumb man in the Gospel, Mark. 9.18.
who before Satan would lean his fort and habitation, was so tormented, that
he fomed, raged, and was even rent in pieces: so as he is not to be
encountered with a false alarm, or with one hand; but in this combat between
us and him we must prepare our selves to great temptations, and carry Job
before us as our pattern, Job 1.7.
in the subversion of whose faith and constancy in the love of God the devil
took more delight, than in compassing the whole earth; yet was he faithful to
the end, whereby he obtained the crown of life.

Further, observe hence the wisdom and policy of Satan, that his purpose is
always to be some where, yea and he foreseeth his future place before he will
leave his former habitation: as Math. 8.32. he would not go out of the men whom
he possessed before he had liberty to go into the swine, and would be in
them rather than no where. For Satan being by nature a destroier, seeks
oftentimes by the loss of goods and substance to draw men's faith and fear
from God, as he assaied in Job, chapter. 1. verse. 15.16.17. by his oxen taken
by the Shabeans, by his sheep devoured with fire, and by his Camels led away
by the Caldeans, to drive him to impatiencie against God. But yet because the
shaking of a man's estate in substance pierces not the soul so deeply, not
withdraws not the heart so swiftly from God, as the sin and corruption
seated in himself, therefore his travel is to keep the cup foul within, and
to have still some foul blood lurking in our veins which in time may break
forth to some distemper: not but that thou must expect when thou art called to
feel thy sins, and have withal this grace to see some comfort of Gods
mercy, to be so haled and pulled between these two, as thou shall have many
perplexed fears, many troublesome garboiles, and infinite great temptations
when sin is to be cast out of thee: and seeing so many difficulties thou
shall stand appalled to be restrained from the loose custom of thy former
sins. But as the siege is great which is against thee, so must thy encounter
and resistance be fierce against him, and not done percunctorily or slowly as
the sluggard rises in the morning, Proverb. 6.10. with a little raising of his
head, and folding of his hands to sleep again; thinking that if thou be
not so evil in thy life, nor so malicious in thy heart against God as others,
that then thou art good enough, and have sufficiently profited in the school
of Christ: for thy luke-warmth in religion is loathsome to the Lord, Reu. 3.14.
and a strong stirrup for Satan to get up to thy soul again. And therefore
consider, and thou shall find whether he be truly or hypocritically cast out
of thee, consider whether thou feel not foul and gross temptations to beset
thee: for if Satan labor not mightily in this, thou art not called: for if
thou be a despiser of the word, or nourishest any such enormous fault as
seems sweet to thy taste, Satan has thee at commandment; what needs he
tempt thee when thou temptest thy self? Not that he that falls into
temptations and fulfilleth them is the best Christian, but he that has no
tubbes set in his way to stumble at, and finds every thing plain and easy,
may know he lives in the broad way that leads not to heaven: Math. 7.13.
for he that is most vexed, and has felt most suggestions, and yet has
resisted them, may assure himself that Satan is cast out: for flesh and blood
cannot be cured but by temptations, as Paul witnesses of the Churches of
Macedon, 2. Corinthians 8.2. whose joy abounded in their great trial of
affliction. And as the same Apostle testifies of himself, 2. Corinthians
12.7. lest he should be exalted above measure, the messenger of Satan was sent
to buffet him: which though Satan does it of malice, yet the Lord does it to
humble us: for if he should at once cast Satan out of us, then the wild beasts
of pride and of not feeling the infirmities of our brethren, would devour us:
even as Deuteronomy. 7.22. the Canaanites were rooted out but by little and little
from among the Israelites, lest the beasts of the field should have increased
upon them.

I will return, etc. and when he comes he finds, etc. This is the third
point, set down in this parable that sets forth the enlightening of
hypocrites to their most just condemnation, namely the means and the fit
occasion Satan espieth to surprise again that man out of whom he was cast.
There be two set down here, the first swept, the second garnished, and the
third is supplied, Mat. 12.44. He finds him empty, that is, void of the
graces of God, and fitter to receive Satan after his enlightening then he was
before. It is a metaphor or translated speech taken from travelers or guests,
that desire to be entertained with clenlinesse. For so it is with Satan, that
when thou art filled with all bitterness, gall of heart and hypocrisy, then
art thou a clean habitation for him, and the fuller of sins the fairer and
fitter; not that Satan does delight in cleanliness, but that thou art to him
most neat and handsome when there is in thee the superfluity of all
wickedness, and when thou art become a most excellent and perfect hypocrite,
as th^^ thou can pray at Church and cousin at home, pretend kindness to thy
brother, and yet eat him through with usury, the sweeter dwelling is there for
Satan in thee.

Hence let us observe for our comfort, that this cannot be meant of the true
children of God: for it is impossible that Satan can find the soul of a
Christian empty, that is, deprived and void of the whole grace of God. For an
abatement of the spirit of God must not be taken for an emptiness, as Ephesians.
4.30. it is said the spirit may be grieved: and 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. it is said, it
may be quenched, and many of the graces of God in his children may be empty,
that is, there may be no feeling of them for a time: but the chosen of God
cannot clean fall away, not the image of God be clean defaced in them, for
then could they not be brought home again, unless Christ should suffer
again, which cannot be, Heb. 10.10. Again, in the greatest sins when men have
deserved the greatest punishments, yet we presume they have some of the good
spirit in them, as Paul did of the incestuous person, 1. Cor. 5.5. whom he
willed to be separated for a time that his flesh might be tamed; which shows
the Apostle had some hope, he had the spirit: for if all in him had been
flesh, then should he not have been excommunicate by the censures of the
Church, but wholly cut off from the Church, and accursed. David, Psalm. 51.
prays to have a clean heart created in him, verse. 10.11. not to have it
taken away, which shows he felt it, therefore he prays not there for the
holy Ghost simply, but for some graces of the holy Ghost, as for a stable
spirit that he fall not again, for that grace he had not before; and after he
prays, Lord give me peace, so as he had not the peace of conscience before:
and when he says, Take not thy spirit from me, that is, though his sin had
deserved it: even as we pray, Lord be not far from us, not that the Lord is
at any time absent from his Saints, but that we feel it not at that time so
comfortablie as we desire: so David prays, Lord give me a free spirit, that
is, that he might pray more seruently then he did before; for except he had
had indeed the heat of the spirit, it is impossible he should have yielded
obedience to the chasti^^ment of God: or for Peter to have wept in his heart at
the rebuke of Christ, except he had some seeds of the spirit of God in him.
Mat. 26.75.
Howbeit we may not be drawn by this to presumption, to think it makes no
matter how we live; for as the children of God have the invisible mark of the
earnest of the spirit, so must they also bear the visible mark of zealous
profession and honest conversation. For if we do not cherish the spirit of
God by good emploiment and spiritual gain, that we grow from faith to faith,
it is a sign that the spirit of truth is not in us: so that we must not
flatter our selves because there cannot be indeed an emptiness, but with
Saint Peter (2. Peter 1.5.) we must join virtue with faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, etc. For if we stay at the first
staire we shall never be able to ascend to the Saints of God; and if growth and
increase be not in us, we are but idle and unfruitful in the acknowledging of
Christ. The reason is, because being elect when we receive grace of God, we
receive withal grace to employ and use it, that it may abound (always
excepted the storm and tempest of an afflicted conscience) for that time, for
the Lord if he see us prosper with one grace, he will give us more: and if we
thrive not with a grain of faith, Mat. 25 16.
he will take all from us; so as though thou can pray, yet unless thou
can pray better, with more fervent zeal, and power out thy soul more fully
before the Lord than before, it is nothing: for the first grace to pray only
was but given thee as an hypocrite to make thee inexcusable.

Further observe hence, that Satan's fittest garniture and best entertainment
is hypocrisy, to make thee pretend holiness when thou intendest nothing but
wickedness; and this hypocrisy stands in two things: first, in not doing
that which God has commanded: secondly, in doing it otherwise than God has
commanded. If thou fallest into the first, thou show thy self rebellious:
if thou slip into the second, thou discouerest thy thy self against the law of
the Eternal? If he tell thee thou shall not eat of the forbidden tree, thou
ought not so much as to look on it, lest the lust of thine eye betray thy
heart, and the desire of thy heart do beguile thy taste. If he prescribe thee
a rule and a course wherein thou shall walk, thou must not (as Numb. 22.18.)
for a house full of gold go beyond the word of the Lord, to do more or less.
And therefore if we will not be hypocrites we must arraie our selves with a
contrary garnishment, casting down (as 2. Cor. 10.5.) every thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ. For as Satan delights to have his house
garnished, and the fuller of sins thou art the fitter for him: as that if the
cup be full of extortion, if it be fair without Mat. 23.25. he makes thee
think thy self a great Scribe. So also there is a furniture the Lord delights
in, namely sanctification: and (as 2. Cor. 7.1.) to keep our souls clean: for
since Satan (...) needs be doing, and willingly contenteth not himself to get
the borders, but he will assay to take the arch city, we that are the
children of God must keep him occupied in some out-house or outward member at
the most, and above all strive to shut him out of the bedchamber, and from
ruling in the heart, bearing a religious care to follow the ways of God, and
to be garnished in humility to receive the riches of the Lords graces, not
excepting against any thing the Lord wills, but showing our selves reformable
to all.

He takes seven other spirits worse, etc.

Mat. 23.15.
not to make him two fold worse as Proselites, but seven times worse like
Devils. Wherein observe, that God in justice is provoked to revenge himself
upon ingratitude for his graces, according to the proportion of the grace that
was offered; so as Satan upon the contempt of the grace given, shall prevail
more than before: which the Lord does as a just revenger of sin: for Satan
is chained, that without his permission he can do nothing; and the Lord is
always present vel per gratiam vel per vindictam, either by grace to prevent thy
sin, or by revenge to punish it: and therefore thou that have spurned at the
riches of the Lords mercy, that have thought Manna to be loathsome, and
syncerity in religion to be burdensome, the Lord shall so punish thee, that the
sins past shall be the punishments of sins to come, and the deserts of
punishments that are to come. For if we think not the hearing of the word and
receiving of the Sacraments to be special means to bring in Satan, look
Luke 13.26. and it will make us take heed, whether we come to them of
conscience or of custom: for Christ may teach in our streets, and we may eat
and drink in his presence, and yet not know us to be his: for it is said. To
him that has profited shall more grace be given; but if thou have only
heard, that grace (...) have shall thou be spoiled of. Heb. 6.7.
And it fares with the (...) as with the rain, that never falls upon the
ground, but if makes the earth more barren or more fruitful: so the word of
God never returns in vain, but every man is made thereby either to savor
damnation or salvation, 2. Cor. ^.26.
as Saint Paul speaks. Even so it is also of the Sacrament: for though Christ
was kind in giving the soppe to a traitor, yet we see ( John 13.2.) that
after the soppe given, Satan entered into Judas. For the more familiar and the
better acquainted we are with the best of Gods graces, the more shall our
pain and torment be for our profane use of them.

Secondly, in that it is said, Seven spirits worse, we must understand a
very forcible seducing and great power of Satan: for here is put a certain
number of an incertaine, seven spirits, that is, an infinite number of enormous
sins, expressed in diverse places of the Scripture, as Acts 5.3. it is said,
Satan had filled Ananias heart, that he should lie unto the holy Ghost: and
Act. 8.23. of Simon Magus, that he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity: and Act. 13.8. of Elymas the sorcerer, such an enemy of
righteousness, as the least occasion will move him to sin: and having (as
Ephesians. 4.19.) their hearts past feeling, have given themselves to all
wantonness: and such as ( Revel. 22.11.) being filthy, will be more filthy.
Now if any should expostulate and question, why the Lord will suffer this,
where he once bestowed his graces: we answer, Mat. 2.
if the Lord do gather where he sowed not; if he take away the talent for not
using it to gain, by a spiritual traffic, then what shall his case be,
that casts the pearls of his graces to swine? Again, as Romans 1.20. the Lord
did justly condemn them, that only had the law written in their hearts, and
had no other spectacle than the book of heaven and earth, and thereby did see
his power and justice in administering these inferior things which he had
created: if I say, (as verse. 24.) he gave them up into a reprobate sense, what
shall become of those that have the book of the Gospel, and have acknowledged
the Lord, and yet have trodden him under foot, but that they be given up into a
triple reprobate sense, since the Gentiles were cast away only for despising
him in his creatures, and yet we despise him in his Christ?

Further, in that it is said, Seven spirits worse: observe, the there is a
difference of sins, sinners, and punishments: for it is said, they be worse,
yet the first was said to be unclean: which we note, not that we should
learn to extenuate any sin: for thought idle words be but an unclean spirit
in respect of whoordome which is worse, yet shall thou be judged for them
as well as for this. In Mat. 5.22. there is a difference of sins and
punishments set down, whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly shall be
culpable of judgment: but he that says Raca, shall be worthy to be punished
by a Council: but who so shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with
hell fire. So as we see, though some sins be more sharply punished than
others, yet the least is culpable of judgment. So David, ( Psalm. 1.1.)
pronounces blessedness to him, that, first, has not walked: secondly, that
stands not: thirdly, that sits not in the sea^ of the scornful, that is, has
a resolute purpose to despise the spirit of grace, harder shall it be for him
than for the other: and as the Apostle Saint Jude v. 7. harder for them than
for Sodom, and yet they be in hell. For as all have not the same spirit of
grace in like measure: so is it of the unclean spirit which reigns more in
some than in others. Withal observe the speech of S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.30. who
after warning given not to grieve the spirit, sets down how one sin
increases another: as first, let there be no bitterness: secondly, a degree
further, a heating of the blood by anger: thirdly, wrath, more then anger, that
is, into a further distemper: fourthly, loud speaking, that is, crabbednesse or
brawling: fifthly, blasphemy, standering, backbiting, and open reuiling: sixthly,
malice, when a man will keep it in his heart. And all these by degrees do
grieve the spirit, let us not therefore yield a little to the course of the
waters, lest some stream carry us away.

Lastly, since we see what is in an hypocrite, that is, seven spirits worse,
an infinite number of enormous and notorious sins: examine thy heart whether
thou have contrary affections to an hypocrite, or is assure thy self thou art
one too. For the Lord sets down their sins for us to take heed by: and
their punishments for our example. As they then have seven worse spirits, so
must thou labor to have seven better spirits: for if thou do not increase in
zeal, in thankfulness, and in humility, nor have greater grace now, than thou
had when thou first began to believe, thou art not the Lords: for if thou
were, he would have multiplied his mercy upon thee, as he does his justice
in sending seven worse spirits to them that despised him. And this is proved,
Matthew. 25.28. the talent that was taken away, was not given to him that had
five, but to him that had ten talents; so as to him that has shall more be
given, and the more we have, the more delight will the Lord take to load us: as
verse. 29. To him that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
Wherefore commend me to thy conscience by this token, if the grace of God be
not increased, in the end it will be taken away: which is proved Revel. 22.11.
He that is righteous must be more righteous: the reason is rendered by Saint
Ioh. 1.4 4. Because he that is in us, is stronger than he that is in the
world. Why then as they grow daily more wicked, so must we grow more godly,
the rather because he that has the seven candlestickes, that is, Christ, that
has the fullness, and is the distributer of all the graces of God, will give
liberally to us, whom he has vouchsafed the name of brethren.

So the last state of that man, etc.

This is the fifth point spoken of at the first: how Satan whom he first
trained on in hypocrisy, never leaves till he has brought him to confusion.
Answerabale to that, 2. Peter 2.20. If they be tangled again, and overcome of
the filthiness from which they were at first escaped, the latter end is worse
with them than the beginning. And this is true, whether we respect this life or
the life to come: for first, while they carried a face and countenance of
religion, they were wrapped up in the general prayers of the Church: but when
the mask of hypocrisy is taken from them, and their leprosy appears, they
are singled out as the enemies of God, and his judgments hastened upon them at
the entreaty of his servants. Secondly while they lived in their hypocrisy,
they were quiet within themselves, and they had good hope the night would never
have come: but when they depart in the open contempt and hardness of heart,
then they find their consciences open to condemn them, and hell gates open to
let them in. Thirdly, their end shall be worst at the last judgment, when the
least part of the Lords wrath shall be bigger than all the torments they felt
before, when his iron rod shall bruise them, and they shall be beaten with
worse than Scorpions. But now with the godly shall it fare otherwise, whose
end shall be better than their beginning, whether we measure the blessings
they have here, or which shall be revealed to them hereafter, as Ioh 42.10.12.
when the Lord had turned away the captivity of Job, he blessed his last days
more than the first, and gave him (as the text speaks) twice so much as he
had in outward things, and when he died full of years, he gave him ioies
without comparison, without measure, and without end.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 1.


THe Apostle begins this chapter with a conclusion full of all comfort,
depending upon his former treatise and disputation: for before he showed what
our estate was in the marriage with our first husband, which was the (flesh,)
namely that while we live at the beck and commandment of our corruption, and
can no sooner have a motion to sin, beating as it were in our pulse, but we
bend our desires and consent to encourage it to the fruit of actual sin;
that all this while so long as we give wine, as it were, to strengthen sin in
the conception, we are no better then in the state of damnation. But when
being divorced from the flesh, we are by the power of the spirit united unto
Christ; which not only keeps us from that bondage of sinning whereto we
were at first enthralled, and under which we were so forceably held as we were
constrained to sin by violence, but also so kills that muenomed flesh of
ours, that there is as it were a new creation in us, the strength of Christ
dispossessing and disarming the strength of sinful flesh, and we are so
changed both in the outward and inward man as all is become fresh and new, our
thoughts, our wills, our affections, our endeavors serving and performig their
duties to God in the newness of the spirit, not in the oldnesse of the letter:
then when Christ has thus sanctified us, and we live sanctifiedly in him;
when his spirit has rifled the corrupted corners of our hearts, and planted
the flowers of grace where before grew the weeds of concupiscence; then
neither is there any hell to swallow us, nor any fear of condemnation to
torment us, nor any sin so to press us down, but with the wound we receive
the cure, nay before we are smitten we have our Savior Christ our most
approved Physician and salve, who when we are left more then half dead by the
sting of sin, like the merciful Samaritan does lay us in his own breast and
bosom, Luke 10.34.
powers the oil of his own blood into our wounds, and delivers us over to
be cherished, preserved and guided by his own spirit.

This verse stands on three parts: first a description of the persons that
are and shall be preserved from damnation, set down indefinitly, yet restrained
to a particular: all those, and those only and alone that are in Christ, and no
other. Secondly, by what means this preservation from hell is wrought; namely
by our being in Christ, not by our being near Christ. Thirdly, to take away
the strife which commonly is in the world, because (forfooth) all will be
Christ's, he sets down a visible badge whereby to discern whether we be
truly married to Christ or no. For if we rather desire the flesh pots of Egypt,
then the Manna in the wilderness, and being drawn a little from the custom
of sin by the impulsion of the spirit, we make more haste to return back
to our vomit, then to follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ, then is not Christ in us nor we in him, and being
out of him there is nothing but condemnation, Phil. 3.14.
and we are already in the jaws of the Lion.

Out of the first, observe, that salvation is not appointed for all men; for
all pertain not unto Christ, as himself says, Luke 12.32. mine is a little
flock, and John 10.26. those that believe not, are not of Christ's sheep, but
those that be his, hear his voice; putting a difference between believers and
those that are in truth no better than Infidels; which is more lively expressed
by the reward, verse 28. I give them (that is, my sheep) eternal life, and
they perish not. What becomes then of the other? They are, as Jude 6.
reserved under darkness unto the judgment of the great day, and the cup of
vengeance and condemnation cannot pass by them, because the wrath of God was
never satisfied for them: so much also is signified by Christ, Mat. 7.13.14.
There be two ways in the world fitting with the two fold condition of men, the
one strait and narrow, the other wide and broad, those that in this life love
not to be pinched and crowded, but to have their walks easy and their rooms
large, their feet leads them to destruction; and of this kind (says he)
there be many. Let us not therefore vainly nozzle our selves in this opinion,
that heaven shall hold us all, for Christ, as John 10.9. is that strait door by
which we must enter; and though goats may here feed with sheep, and tares
may grow up with corn, yet when we come to the fold and to the harnest, our
shepherd knows who are his, and gives them only entrance, and our Lord who
is the husbandman gathers only the grain, and scatters the chafe as
before the wind; for condemnation is the inheritance of all such as have not
Christ for their head, and he is head to none that have not their life from
him, and none live in him but they that are ruled by him, and he rules none
but by the scepter of his word, within the reach whereof few desire to be
drawn, but all almost do seek how to slip the collar, as if the patient
should only dislike that medicine which would rid him of his disease; yet such
are most in the world that hate to see Christ in the glass of his word wherein
he is most perfectly to be beholden, and therefore no marnell though
condemnation as a cloud do cover so many.

Secondly, let us observe, and as it were with tears of thankfulness
acknowledge and reverence the special and spiritual love of God, Mal. 1.5.
that has so magnified himself upon the borders of us Christians, that when
wrath had ouerspread the earth, and the curse of God for disobedience had run
through the end of the world, and that we were besmeared and misshapen with
sin as ugly as the Ethiopian, and condemnation as due to us as to them that
already hang in hell, yet has the Lord preserved us, not from a bodily death,
as Exodus 1.17. the midwines did the young Israelites, but from the spiritual
fire of hell which should have tormented our souls, and this merely through
Christ that lo^eth us; for though the first and original cause of our
salvation he the love of God, yet this is conveyed to us through his son,
the Lord being as tender to us as a father is to his child, only through the
obedience of that child and Son of his, the Lord Jesus: and therefore most
fitly has the Apostle delivered here this bridge of condemnation to be
broken down, that we have now no passage to hell, through the form and
virtue of our living and being in Christ: for there being but two impediments
to our salvation, first, the destroying of Satan's power in us through sin,
secondly, the appeasing of Gods anger toward us for sin, Christ has removed
both these: First, in breaking the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. and himself
possessing the hold which Satan kept, namely the Temples of our bodies: And
secondly, in treading the wine press of the wrath of God, Reave. 14.19. that
what possibly could in justice be exacted of us, that himself paid in his
own body and person, suffering for the time the pains and pangs of hell:
therefore there can no condemnation remain for us, our debt being already
paid to the utmost farthing; which ought to stir up our hearts to the praise
and thankfulness of so good a God, that passing by thousands that lay polluted
in their blood no worse then we, hash thus graciously visited and received us
to mercy.

For the second, which is the means whereby we are fenced and freed from this
condemnation, namely through Christ, we are to note two things: First, how we
are said to be in Christ, and Christ in us: Secondly, what profit we receive by
this conjunction. For the first, it is such a mystery as man's imperfect wisdom
and shallow reach cannot sound the bottom nor come to the depth of it, but
shall hereafter better be known by our fruition of it, then now it can be by
the description of it? howbeit so far as this secret of God is opened unto us
in the book of God, so far may we seek, and no further. Now this union
between Christ and us is expressed in the Scripture two ways: first,
plainly: secondly, by way of comparison: the first is set forth by Christ
himself the master of all truth: First as a thing to be felt and discerned
even in this life, as Ioh. 14.20. At that day (says he) shall ye know that I
am in my father, and you in me, and I in you; that is, though ye shall lose
the comfort of my presence bodily, yet I will leave you such a spiritual
pledge of our conjunction, namely my spirit, as you shall know and perceive I
am only absent from you in the flesh, but am still with you to aid and
succor you: secondly, it is plainly set forth as a thing to be perfectly
inioyed in the life to come, as Ioh. 17.23. where Christ makes it part of his
prayer for all believers, That as thou, O father, art in me and I in thee, so
they may be also one in us, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one; which places prove the undoubted truth of this point, that
Christ and we are joined together, for otherwise it had not stood with Gods
justice to have punished Christ in our flesh, nor to have accepted our
obedience in Christ's person, if we had not been in him and he in us; for it
was not possible for the flesh of man so wilfully sinnig against the express
commandment of his maker, to have approached unto God, without the suffering
and crucifying of the flesh of man in Christ Jesus; neither had this punishment
sufficed, had not Christ in our flesh by his obedience recompensed our breach
of this law of God. And yet because this is the anchor of our hope, the ground
of our faith, and the security of our happiness hereafter, the spirit does
more nearly bond it self to our capacity, teaching us this heavenly mystery
by seven earthly comparisons: First, Romans 13.14. It is Saint Paul's precept to
put on the Lord Jesus Christ; wherein he compares Christ to garment; which
has two properties, first to cover our nakedness, secondly to keep us warm;
thus as we put on our apparel to cover the shame and to hide the nakedness of
our bodies, so we should put on the robes of Christ's righteousness to cover
the deformity of our sinful souls: and as by our garments our heat is kept
within the body, whereby our life is preserved; so by our putting on of Christ
we that otherwise should be frozen in our dregs receive a spiritual warmth,
whereby the life of our souls is kept in and maintained: and as while our
garments are on us we are said to be in our clothes, but being cast from us
we are even ashamed of our selves and unquiet till we have got some other
covering of place to hide us in; so while we are covered with Christ we are
said to be in Christ; but if we lay him aside, then are we laid open to the
shame of the world, to the age of Satan, to the tyranny of sin, and to the
wrath of God. Hence arise many fruitful meditations for our particular
instruction. First, that we think it a matter of more necessity to be clothed
with Christ then with our carthly garments, and that we are never fully
apparelled till we have put him on. For by how much the soul is of more value
then the body, so much ought our care to be increased rather for the furnishing
of the one then of the other, in this respect also that the soul is the
defense of the body, that if we be sound and sincere within and have spiritual
heat at the heart, there are no outward discomforts of poverty, reproach or
persecution that can at all dismay us. This David has taught us out of his
own experience, 1. Sam. 17.38.45. who went against Goliath, not in the kings
raiment, though that was offered him, but clothed himself with armor of
better proof, the name of the Lord of Hosts, who closed his enemy in his hand
of far greater strength than himself. Naie to persuade and provoke us unto
this, we have example even in the time of Christ, Matt. 14.36. that as many
as touched but the hem of his garment were made whole of bodily diseases; and
if there were such virtue in his apparel, how much more strength and power is
there in himself to cure all spiritual diseases of the soul, and to keep
the body from sickness also, unless by sickness and infirmity we shall
thrive and prosper toward God? Secondly, when thou put on Christ be sure
thou wearest him as thine uppermost garment both on thy body and on thy mind;
for that that is above the rest, is best seen, and let the world think of
thee as it will, it shall be thy true glory to have Christ seen in thy
attire, that thou go comely and not vainly and garishly; to have him seen
in thy speech, that it be not wanton and blasphemous, but such as may give
grace to the hearers and tend to edifying; to have him seen in thy behavior
and in all the actions of thy life, that others by thy light may be drawn out
of darkness, and that glory may be given to thy father which is in heaven;
for if thou shall think to wear Christ, as we say next the skin, and shall
put any garments over him, thou deceiuest thine own soul, and couerest thy
self but with the lusts of the flesh and the pride of life which will lead
thee to destruction, for as Paul says Col. 3.9.10. we must put off the old
man with his works, and put on the new which is renewed in knowledge after the
image of him that created him. Thirdly, when thou put on Christ thou must
take heed thou put him not upon thy head, or upon thy hands, or upon any
one part of thy body, but he must be so put on as he cover thy whole body from
the head to the foot, for if the devil find any part uncovered he will
possess that, therefore S. Paul Ephesians. 6.11. bids us put on the whole armor
of God, that we may be complet soldiers, for if we be unarmed in any part we
may receive a wound in that part, which may be dangerous to the whole body; so
as if we wear Christ only in our mouths that we can talk religiously, and
have him not in our feet to keep us from running astraie to wickedness, or
have him only in our thoughts and not in our actions, or in some of our
actions and not in all, then are we not covered with Christ at all, for says
the Apostle Ephesians. 4.15. we must in all things (not in some) grow up into him
which is the head, that is Christ. Fourthly, when thou have once put on Christ
thou must never lay him aside nor put him off again, for he is a garment that
never wears, he is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, and his years
shall not fail, Hebr. 1.12. thou have the same need of him and use of him in
the night as in the day, in thy rest as in thy labor, in thy health to prosper
thee, as in thy sickness to comfort thee, in temptations to strengthen thee,
as in peace of conscience to secure thee, for there being no time free wherein
we are not subject to fall, we can at no time want his grace which must be our
stay and sufficiency: 2. Cor. 12.9.
Peter may well teach us the use of this lesson by the danger himself was in,
Matt. 26.70. by shaking off this garment in the high priests hall, for he would
needs before them all deny, and double it by an oath, that he knew not Christ:
so as if Christ in mercy had not stuck close to him, and kept himself on,
Luke 22.61. by turning back and looking on him, we see how even in a chase
and when there was no eminent persecution over him, Peter had cast him aside as
if he had never received any former good by him; which must make us fear and
tremble to give such a guest no better en^^^tainement, and such a garment no
safer keeping, since only in the robes of Christ we receive our blessing, and
for his sake alone are beloved.

The second comparison is, 2. Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, or
dwells in you, except ye be reprobates? Where Christ is compared to our
dwelling houses, that as we dwell and abide in them, so does Christ by his
spirit dwell and abide in us. And 1. Cor. 6.19. Your body is the Temple of the
holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God. And 1. Cor. 3.16. ye are the
Temple of God, and the spirit of God dwells in you. And 2. Cor. 6.16. Ye are
the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell among you and
walk there. And John 14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my word; and my
father will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell with him. By which
places appears, how these earthen vessels of our bodies are honored by being
the habitation of God and of Christ: Ephe. 2.22.
that as by the former comparison we are said to be in Christ by putting him
on us, so by this Christ is said to be in us by his dwelling and abiding with
us. Out of which we must learn, first, to keep our selves unspotted of the
world, because we are to entertain so great a Prince as the Lord Jesus: for if
we think all our labor too little to cleanse and beautify that room wherein
the Kings of the earth shall sit, 1. Cor. 6.20.
who are taken out of the same lump our selves are; how much more must we
strive to have all our members kept chaste and sanctified, which are as it were
so many several rooms for him who by his heavenly generation is the Son of
God, Esaias 9.6.
the fathers Counselor, and the Prince of peace? Secondly, by this dwelling of
Christ with us we are assured that we are his, for no man will willingly dwell
in a house whereof he is not owner, especially the heir of the whole world
whom the heaven of heavens is not able to contain, would not set up his throne
and seat in our souls if he did not delight in us, neither could he take any
pleasure to lodge with us if we were not his; which may be our undoubted
comfort, that Christ possessing the fort and castle of our bodies, it is not
possible for Satan either by deceitful policy to surprise us, or by his fiery
darts to sti^^^^s, or by his subtle illusions to ensnare us, or by his bitter
and cruel invasions to vanquish us; for, as Ioh. 10.28. we are the sheep of
his pasture, and none can pluck us out of his hands.

The third comparison is in 1. Peter 2.4. where Christ and his members are
resembled to a building, for as a building cannot be firm and sure except it
be built upon a strong foundation, no more can we stand one minute, if we be
not built upon Christ: and as the foundation and the rest of the work make but
one building, so is it betwixt Christ and us, he being the chief corner stone
elect and precious, and we being lively stones whereby we are made a
spiritual house unto God by Christ. Hence learn first: That all our strength
and sufficiency is from God; for if we will be a building of our selves, and
lay our foundation in our own righteousness, a little sprinkling of
persecution will wash us away, as it did, Mat. 7.26. wash away the house that
was so foolishly built upon the sands: but in Christ alone we live, move, and
have our being; it is he that can command the Sea to be as a pauement for Peter
to walk on, Matt. 14.29. who at the sight of a wind arising, through
weakness in himself is forced to cry, Master save me; yea when as his
disciples stricken with the fear and force of a storm, challenged him as if
he cared not though they perished, Luk 8.22. Mark. 4.39.
he then being through their prayers awaked, rebuked the winds, and commanded
the sea to be still, and it was so. Now if Peter that had such strength of
faith as that the Church should be built upon his confession, and the rest of
the Disciples that were so continually taught of Christ, felt no power in
themselves to resist the fears of the flesh without the hand of God, much
less are we able to set one foot forward toward the way of heaven, or to draw
one foot backward from the way to sin unless we lay the foundation on our
rock Christ Jesus, who has measured the heavens with a span, holds the
winds in his fist, and has sounded the deepes of the earth, that whatsoever
falls on him shall be broken, and whosoever resists him shall be dashed into
pieces. Secondly, observe that we are no further the house of God then we do
build upon Christ, and that since the foundation and the building make but one
work, our prayers and all our other service of God must be offered up upon the
golden altar, which is Christ: Reu. 8.3.
^^at as Paul's reioicing, Galat. 6.14. was only in Christ crucified, so may
ours be, resting our selves wholly upon him, and placing our whole contentment
in him, for as he is the strength of the building, (...) is he also the honor
of the building, we being without him a sinful nation and a people laden with
iniquity, but through him, 1. Pet. 2.9. a chosen generation, an holy nation,
and a people set at liberty, to show forth the virtues of him that called us.
Let us therefore beware we daw be not our selves with untempered mortar
bringing in the stubble of man's merit or invention to make up this frame, no
not so much as to have any corner in this house, that is, not the least member
of our body nor the least power of the soul, to leave upon the arm of flesh,
or to be supported by the wisdom of vain man, for this were to settle part
of the building upon a rock, and the rest upon the sands, which will overthrow
all, for the whole man must be built upon Christ, and he must be the corner
stone, to join both the body and soul, the flesh and the spirit unto God.
For as the gold is never said to be purified till all the dross be severed
from it, so is it not sufficient to have as it were some of our affections
refined and the rest to remain drossie and polluted, but if we will be wedges
of gold for the Lords use, and vessels of honor for his house. Christ must be
in every part of us to join us to himself that we may be holy even as he is
holy.

The fourth comparison is, Ephesians. 1.22.23. where God is said to have given
Christ to be the head to the Church which is his body. In which place Christ
is compared to a body, that as the members are knit and united to the body, so
are all we as members ingrafted and incorporate into the body of Christ; and
as the members being thus united are said to be part of the body, so we being
joined unto Christ are said to be Christ's: and as the heat and life which is in
the body, is dispersed and diffused into every member, even so the life and the
graces which are in Christ are through this conjunction made proper and
communicated even to us; and as the life in the body cannot be maintained
without food, no more can the life in the soul be held and kept in without
her feeding on Christ; and as the body has natural instrume^^, as the hands
and the mouth to receive her sustenance, even so the soul has her members and
instruments, as prater, faith and hearing the word, whereby she receives her
spiritual nourishment to eternal life. Hence let us raise this use. First,
that since our bodies are the members of Christ let us not make them the
members of an harlot, 1. Cor. 6.15. but as in the time of our ignorance we used
them to uncleanness and to profaneness, so now being free from sin through
Christ let us make them servants unto righteousness in holiness, Romans 6.19.
For, as it were an unnatural part in the hand to strive to pull out the heart,
or in the teeth by tearing the flesh to make the rest of the body deformed;
even so much more uncivil and beastly is it in us, to fly upon the Lord
Jesus, and to rend his name in sunder by out oaths and blasphemy, and to lend
as it were our forces to his enemies that do invade his Church, our selves
being not only faint-harted, but false-hearted, to fight for him who fought so
many cumbats for us with Satan, and wrastled so strongly with the wrath of his
father: which otherwise had fallen upon us, whereas now in recompense of his
grace and favor toward us, we should sift as it were our armory to find out
the best weapons of perfection for the defense of him, and of his truth, and
should keep such a continual harmony in our life, as if our eyes were only
given us to behold him wounded for our sins, and now advanced for our sakes,
our tongues only lent us to set forth his praise, our cares to hear of his
godnesse, what he has wrought for the sons of men, our feet to carry us into
his sanctuary, where we may more nearly approach to him in his word. Finally,
all the parts of our thoughts, of our affections, of our actions, to be
employed and taken up wholly to his advantage. Secondly, let us learn hence
that as the life is conveyed into the inferior members from the head, even so
our life is hid in Christ, and we hold it only from him: for as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 1.12. without Christ, we are aliants from the commonwealth of
Israel, strangers from the covenants of promise, and without God in the world:
which must teach us, not to avoid, but rather to embrace those means wherein
the life of Christ is made manifest in us, which principally is by our inward
worship of God, which is performed four ways: First, by our obedience to his
laws: Secondly, by our patience in afflictions: Thirdly, by our humility in
our gifts: Fourthly, by our affiance in the Lords assistance. All which were
performed by our head Christ: for he submitted himself to his fathers will,
even to the death of the cross, he was reviled, yet answered not again, as a
sheep before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth, he taught humility to
others, and often humbled himself before his father; he could by prayer have
obtained twelve leagions of Angels to rescue him, such confidence he had both
in his fathers love and power; but he knew there was a greater work to be
done, his testament to be sealed with blood for our redemption; for we were
before but rotten and corrupted members of sinful Adam, till by being made
one with him we were brought into his marvelous light: therefore as the head
has the government of the members, so let Christ have the rule and dominion
over us, that we may run when he calls, stoop when he smites, stop our
mouths when he afflicts, debase our selves till he exalts, and not at all
to distrust in his deliverance.

Fifthly, this union of Christ with us, is set forth under the estate of
marriage, Ephe. 5.30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones. That as there is an inseparable bond in marriage between a man and his
wife, so is there between Christ and the Church his spouse; and as the woman
was taken out of the side of man while he was a sleep, so was the Church
taken, as it were, out of the side of Christ while he fell a sleep upon the
Cross; and as the woman is not married to the goods of the man, nor to his
lands, nor to her dowry, but to the man himself, and so has power and
interest in his body; so are not we married and joined to the gifts and
benefits of Christ, but to Christ himself; for it is improper to say we are in
the graces of Christ, but by our being in Christ we are partakers, and are
interessed in all the benefits of Christ; even as the woman by her marriage is
in her husbands goods. Hence observe, first, that all that are elect are only
flesh of Christ's flesh, and none other; for though Adam was in the flesh four
thousand years before him, yet was Christ the lamb, slain from the
beginning; so as by their faith in the virtue of the promised seed, which is
Christ; were the Patriarchs and the rest saved, that were before him, as John
8.56. it is said by Christ, Abraham reioiced to see my day, and he saw it. And
though Christ was made of our flesh, as Phil. 2.7. He was found in shape as a
man, and not we of his, yet this must be understood spiritually and mystically,
and not grossly and carnally; for then will the reprobates step in and say,
that they are of Christ's flesh and so challenge salvation: but note, though all
men and women are of one flesh, yet between man and wife there is a nearer
bond, not that the woman is of her husbands flesh only, as she is of all other
men's, but that she is also in her husbands flesh by reason of the sanctified
ordinance of God, and so is she not in the flesh of other men: so fares it
between Christ and man; all men are of Christ's flesh, because he took upon him
the true substance and nature of man, but yet none are in the flesh of Christ,
but those that by his spirit are ingrafted into him. This then being a special
prerogative to us that are elect, let us labor in our lives to show forth the
fruits of Christ's flesh, that we may show we are bought from men, by following
the lamb whithersoeuer he goes, by having no guile found in our mouths, nor
pollution in our bodies, Revel. 14.4*
but keeping our selves pure virgins, and unspotted, as being the first
fruits unto God. Secondly, observe that if we will be flesh of Christ's flesh,
and will be ingrafted into his body that we may die unto sin, then must we
first consider where Christ is: secondly where our affections are; if they be
here upon earth, then do we seek Christ on earth, when we know he is gone
into heaven. But from whence has he delivered us? From hell. Then must we take
heed we do not the works of hell and of darkness. And then whither has he
brought us? Where he is, that is in heaven. Then if we will say we are married
to him, Ioh. 14.2.
and that he was crucified for our sins, and has crucified sin in us, and
freed us from sin, Satan, and condemnation, let our conversation be where
his body is, for where the dead corse is, thither will the Egles resort, and
where the husband is, thither will the wise haste to see him, and to live with
him; so that as Christ died in body, so must we die in spirit, that his spirit
may have his full work in us to raise us up to heavenly meditations. Thirdly,
we must learn, that betwixt the corporal and spiritual marriage there is
great difference, for the woman for certain causes may be divorced from her
husband, and he being dead she may as lawfully keep herself a widow as marry
again: but in this our spiritual marriage there is neither divorce nor
widowhood, for as soon as we are divorced from the flesh and the lusts
thereof, we must not stay and remain a widow, but we must presently marry with
the spirit of God and the fruits thereof, and he shall remain our husband for
ever. Howbeit we must know we have no liberty to marry with our second husband
the Lord Jesus, until we be deliuerd from the whole body of sin and the
powers thereof, as lust, sensuality, and such like; and the means of this our
freedom and deliverance is in the body of Christ; so as unless the body of
Christ has destroyed sin in our natural bodies we are not conioined unto
him. We must then consider what there is in this body of ours, which is a body
of sin, Romans 6.6. And in this body of ours there are three things: First,
condemnation for sin: Secondly, disobedience by sinning: Thirdly, the
corruption of nature which causes this disobedience. In the second place we
must consider, how we are delivered from these three, and how they be taken
from us. The first, which is our condemnation, is taken away by the
satisfaction of Christ for our sin: the second, which is our disobedience, is
taken away by the righteousness of Christ, free from sin; and these things
are without us: but the third, which is, the corruption of our nature, is taken
away by the powerful working of Gods spirit within us; so that except we have
this third thing, the spirit to abolish sin in us, we are not yet flesh of
his flesh, and so none of his spouse: For, as for Christ's satisfaction for
condemnation, and his obedience for our rebellion, the very Turks may hope for
their salvation as well as we; therefore it must be the slaying of sin by the
spirit that must assure us of our conjunction and marriage with Christ: for if
corruption remains whence springs disobedience, then there remains for
this disobedience condemnation, for every sin committed by them that are
regenerate is as it were the bringing forth of a bastard unto God, which we
know how much he abhors.

Sixthly, this our conjunction with Christ is set forth Ioh. 15.5. under the
parable of the vine to which Christ is compared, and we to the branches; for as
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self unless it grow up with the stock,
no more can we except we grow up in Christ; and as the branches receive sap
from the root whereby they fructify, so we being ingrasted into Christ receive
life from him whereby we are fruitful in good works; and as the branches
severed from the body of the tree do fall away and perish, so if we once
wither away and the graces of God decay and wax cold in us, drinking in the
rain and yet not bringing forth herbs meet for the dresser, then are we
near unto cursing and our end is to be burned. Out of which learn, that if
thou cariest in thy life only leaves as it were of thy profession, Heb. 6.8.
as the fig tree did, that seemed green a far off and goodly, and art not
fruitful in thy conversation to walk as one redeemed out of darkness, thou
art but as a branch broken off, and as a blade that withers before the time
of harvest, for, as Romans 11.16. If the root be holy, so are the branches, and
if the ground of thy heart be seasoned with the graces of God, it will spring
forth into all thy members.

The Seventh comparison, is Ioh. 6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him. Where Christ is compared to flesh and
blood, which we must not understand of material but of spiritual eating,
which is comprehended by faith, wrought in us by the spirit, revealed to us by
the Son of God, delivered to us by the word of God, and sealed unto us by the
Sacraments: Since then our feeding on Christ does draw such fruit after it, and
bring such efficacy with it, let us labor to meet him in those means himself
has ordained, namely, in his word and sacraments, the one being the storehouse
of his promises, the other as it were a patent of confirming them to us under
the seals left us by the King of heaven, that as these infirm bodies of ours
cannot be supported without the stafes of bread and drink, the one to kill the
hunger, the other to stanch the thirst, wherewith our natures are assaulted; so
we may persuade our selves that our souls for their cherishing and refreshing,
do require the like necessity to be sed with the flesh and blood of Christ,
that we may grow up perfect men in him, and be freed from the scorching heat of
desperation, whereinto we may easily fall through that stream and current of
sin wherewith we are carried in the whole course of our lives, and from which
we cannot be saved but through the sprinkling of that blood which was shed for
us upon the Cross.

Now for the second point, which is, the profit and benefit we receive by this
Conjunction, it is twofold: first, that Christ has taken our sins, and the
punishment of our sins upon him; for he being without sin, was made sinful
for us, was wounded for our transgressions, and, as 1. Pet. 2.24. bare our
sins in his body on the tree, that by his stripes we might be healed:
secondly, that by his death we are made partakers of his obedience, and the
reward of his obedience, which is, eternal life, and of his graces, and the
glory for his graces, which is eternal glory. Touching the first profit, it is
double: First, he took our sins upon him: Secondly, the satisfaction of our
sins, which is death, the first by imputation, the second really and
sensibly, for being clothed with our flesh, and appearing in our persons, he
became the child of wrath, subject to the everlasting curse of God, for so are
we all by nature, in which nature of ours he representing us, became vile
before his father in respect of us. But now for the punishment of sin upon
him, that was not imaginary, but true and sensible both in soul and body, so
extreme as in anguish of spirit he was driven to cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me, yea: the death he endured was in it own kind accursed,
as it is written, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree,
yea: look what miseries, what wants, what dangers he did undergo and taste
of, from his birth to his ascension into heaven, the same he suffered and slept
in only for us, which clears the justice of God that a righteous man should
smart for us sinners, because we are in him and he in us: which I urge the
more, that we may see the great price the son of God paid for our
redemption, to stir us up to a better and deeper consideration of it, he
being the only shepherd that ever gave his life for his sheep, the only lamb
which being unspotted in himself did ever take upon him the scabbes and ulcers
of the whole flock, the only man full of sorrows and experience of
infirmities, whom the world judged as plagued and smitten of God and humbled,
yet was it only for our iniquities that the chastisement of our peace might be
upon him. Therefore as Esaias 53.11. let him see the travel of his soul, that
is, the fruit of his labor, and the efficacy of his death, in the salvation of
us his people. For the other profit it is also double: as first we are made
partakers of his graces: secondly, of the glory for his graces. And this
stands also with the justice of God, that he being in us and we in him, God
must needs with him give us all things also. Now the graces we taste of by this
conjunction are twofold, first by imputation, which is his satisfaction for our
sins, we being stark bankerupts able to pay nothing; and the benefit of his
obedience, we being rebellious bastards able to fulfill nothing: secondly, in
our selves, but drawn and derived from Christ the fountain, as the change of
our affections, reforming of our judgments, renewing of our minds,
mortification and a sanctified life; and these graces did far more abound in
Christ then ever they did in Adam in his integrity, for he was flesh made ^^t
after the image of God, whereas this flesh Christ had the God head dwelling in
him bodily, and as Col. 1.18. had in all things the pre-eminence that we might
taste of the fulness of his graces as far as is fit. And for the second much is
the glory for his graces, namly eternal life, of this he has also made us
partakers, ye as if he had no other errand to heaven, he says, Io. 14.32. I go
to prepare a place for you in my fathers house. Therefore let us not say in our
hearts, that is, let us not doubt but assure our selves that as Christ is
ascended, so shall we, and it is no presumption to believe that the Lord for
his Sons sake will save thee: for he has first given thee his word and
promise, He that believes and repents shall be saved, so as if thou can
apply repentance to thy self thou may challenge him on his word; and
secondly, thou have his oath he swear to Abraham, that his seed through his
faith should be blessed, and this has Christ sworn again; A men, Amen, he
that believes, is already translated from death to life; showing the certainty
of it by the manner of speech, as if it were already done: and if thou will
rely upon neither of the former, he has thirdly left thee a pawn, that is,
his spirit to guide and conduct thee in the right way, that though thy self
connot be in heaven as yet, yet thy affections may be in the bosom of Christ,
and that thy faith in his resurrection may assure thee of thy incorruption, and
thy comfort in his sitting at the right hand of God, may rebound back upon thy
own soul in being an undoubted testimony of thy exaltation and advancement
hereafter, for where Christ is, there, by reason of this conjunction between
thee and him, thou must needs be also.

Hence arises a most comfortable instruction for an afflicted conscience, for
Satan will lay a whole scrowle of particular sins before thee, charge thee
that there be many omitted wherein thou have offended, that corruption is so
worn into thy bones, and lies so low at the heart, as it cannot be taken
forth but must needs rankle to damnation, and that thy sins are in their
number so many, and in their weight so heavy, as there can be no case nor
satisfaction for them. Thou must confess thou art indeed in thy self a worm
unworthy to creep upon the earth, but in Christ, as bold and strong as a lion,
yea if thou can appropriate the sufferings of Christ to thy self in
particular, as the Gosp^^ propounds them generally, thou may answer that by
the ^^rity of his birth, the obedience of his life, and the bitterness of his
death, he has cleansed thee from thy sin wherein thou were conceived, made up
the breach of thy rebellion, and ransomed thee from the cruelty of that second
death, whereinto thou were plunged by thine actual pollution; and this thou
know because thou art one with him, and he with thee. True indeed, satan
will confess that Christ took our flesh upon him, as himself said in the
Gospel, that he was come before his time to torment him; but yet he will
suggest that Christ being but one, his satisfaction can be but for one, and he
will tell thee in this truly, that the sins of all men are infinite, and the
wrath of God for them is infinite, for which the satisfaction of Christ must
be as infinite, which (says he) cannot be. To which answer, that as by the
first Adam all men are made sinners, so by the second Adam, which is Christ,
all that believe are made righteous; and as Adam can damn all that shall be
damned, for all in him did eat of the forbidden fruit, so Christ can save all
that shall be saved, for all in him are brought again into the Paradise of
God. Reu. 2.7.
In Romans 5.14. and 1. Cor. 15.22. Adam is said to be a figure of Christ,
wherein they agree in this: that as Adam gave as much as he had to his
posterity, so does Christ proportionably give that he has to those that be
his; Adam gave sin and death, Christ gives life and grace. And they disagree
in three respects: first, we receive sin from Adam by nature, but we receive
not the graces of Christ and life eternal by nature, but by imputation and by
grace only, and not by imitation, for we cannot imitate Christ in every thing:
secondly, by Adam came only original sin, not actual; but Christ has
satisfied for both these, for all that were before him, and shall come after
him, being true believers: thirdly, the graces of Christ do far exceed the
sin of Adam, else would Sa^^^ in persuade thee thou art half saved, and
half damned, for if the virtue thou have by Christ were but equal with the
corrup^^on thou have by Adam, it could not produce so incomprehensible a work
as thy salvation is, and therefore Romans 5.17. it is said: If by the offense of
one death reigned through one, much more shall they which receive that
superfluity or superabundance of grace reign in life through one, that is,
Christ: thereby showing that the righteousness of Christ, made ours by grace,
is of greater power to bring life then was the sin of Adam, to bring death to
his posterity. Therefore seeing through faith God reuealeth to thee these
riches laid up for thee in Christ, bend thine eye toward him, and he will so
supply thee with spiritual wisdom, as thou shall answer with ease and comfort
the sophistry and deceits of Satan who willingly would plunge thee into terror
and trouble of conscience.

Which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Unto such as thus walk
there is no condemnation: and this is the third thing spoken of at first:
namely, that a sanctified life must be the sure evidence of our ingrafting into
Christ, for howsoever the spirit which is within us testifies thus much, that
we are Christ's and Christ is ours, as 1. Cor. 2.10. The things which God has
prepared for them that love him, he has revealed to us by his spirit; and
verse. 12. We heave not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which
is of God; yet because through self love no man will say but he has the
spirit, therefore steps in the other testimony of holiness of life, and this
is visible, real, undeceivable and true, as 1. Ioh. 3.6.8. Whosoever abides
in him sins not, and he that commits sin is of the devil, which place
we must not understand simply of sinners, for all of us are so, but of such as
favor themselves in their sins, bless their souls in them, make a trade of
sinning, and persist in it; so as we that are made mystical members of Christ,
must labor to extinguish the life of any gross sin, and not to make them
the members of an harlot, of an usurer, of an Idolater, of a flatterer and such
like, for being ingrafted into Christ, it is as odious in Gods sight for us to
commit these sins as if Christ should commit them, and by them without
repentance we do rend our selves from Christ, for the Sons of God are led by
his spirit, Romans 8.14. And they are led by it that live in it, Gal. 3.25. And
this life is known by the effects, that is, by walking in the spirit. And they
walk in it, that fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. And they
fulfill them not that have crucified the flesh; verse. 14. And they only have
done this that cease from sin, 1. Pet. 4.2. with a full purpose of heart to
live better; for as the dead body has no breath, so must sin have no
strength in us: and he that does not this is a reprobate. I speak not of a
final reprobate, but of a reprobate for the time, for such stand in the state
of condemnation. But if we labor to live godly as near as we can after the
example of Christ, and make holiness of life as the load star, whereby we may
be seen to direct our journey toward heaven, then this does knit us in the
persawsion of our union with Christ, provided always that there be special
repentance for special sins, extraordinary repentance for extraordinary
sins, great repentance for gross sins, and daily repentance for daily
sins. Threfore let every of us examine our selves what sins remain in us
unrepented, and what unsubdued, what be blushing and shamefast, and what be
crying and insolent sins; and let us take the same course with them all, cast
them from us and purge our selves clean of the leaven of Satan, for a sin
suppressed and not destroyed, will at lengh break forth to the hinderance of our
walk in the spirit, and if we be stopped in this course, then so long do we
stagger in the assurance of our being one with Christ, which is the only helmet
of our salvation.

Secondly, observe hence the order the scripture sets down, namely that
first we must be in Christ, which is the cause, and then we shall walk after
the spirit, which is the effect, even as justification goes before
sanctification, our ingrafting into Christ being our justification, and being
so, it causes holiness of life, so as both must go together, making no
difference between faith and a godly life in the person, but only in the
properties and manner: and therefore if it be asked; who shall be saved? Such as
lead a sanctified life. But if how we shall be saved, the answer is, by the
merits of Christ apprehended by faith; so as by faith we are saved, for the
fruit makes not the root good, but the root the fruit, the streams are not
the cause of the fountain, but the fountain of them, and the streams are but
the effects, even as breathing is the effect of life; so we are not saved
because of our works and walking in the spirit, but because of our faith, for
works are the fruits of faith, yet we shall receive according to our works,
2. Cor. 5.10. and shall be recompensed for them, not for the dignity of the
work, but in the benignity of the Lord, who has accepted our persons in
Christ: and therefore Tit. 2.11.12. the Apostle does not say, Because we deny
ungodliness therefore the grace of God has brought salvation, but salvation
being offered in the Gospel, we must thereby learn to be profitable scholars
in holiness of life. So Mat. 11.28. Christ does not call us to ease us of our
sins because we live godly after his example, but faith being wrought in us
by the power of his calling us, we then live godly; even as the thief upon the
cross, Luke. 23.40. was no sooner called but he brought forth fruit, his
confession being a token of his faith. So we must first be within the covenant
of God, and then we shall walk in the covenant, as Genesis 17.1. God said to
Abraham, I am sufficient, therefore walk before me, so that he made not his
covenant with him to be his God because he walked before him, but first he made
his covenant with him, that being assured of his protection he might more
chearefully walk before him; even so fares it with us, we are first made
members of Christ, and then being united to his body we must show forth the
life of Christ in our conversation. And here we must further learn to answer
two objections: First, the carnal man will say: Christ has satisfied for his
breach of the law and supplied the imperfection of his obedience, therefore now
he may take his swinge in sin, as Pro. 7.18. the harlot entised the young man to
take his fill of love. But we must know, Christ has not satisfied for us to
live as we list, nor redeemed us from darkness to light that we should run
to darkness again: for a pardon is not given to a traitor that he should
offend again, neither does that pardon serve for offenses to be committed
after, but so often as he offends so often shall he be punished, or else he must
have so many pardons; so Christ has satisfied once, and that has taken away
the guilt of all that went before; but if we (...) sum upon this to sin
again, either we must look for (...) satisfactions, which cannot be, for
there is but one sealed (...) blood, or else we must suffer so many punishments
as w^ ^^^mit sins. Secondly, it will be said: since there can be (...)
satisfaction for sin, therefore we have now liberty given (...) sin. It is
true indeed, that the wrath of God could not ^^^ppeased for sin nor satisfied
without the blood of the So^^^ of God, and this was by him performed, that
being reconciled to his father we might no more fall at enmity (for sin alone
makes the separation between God and us,) but that we might live according to
his will in newness of life; howbeit there is a satisfaction God requires at
our hands, but that is only obedience in our affections, holiness in our
actions, humility in our hearts, and thankfulness in our persons, that we may
be as pretions stones in the breast plate of Christ to be represented to his
father. And therefore let us abhor such presumptuous and rechlesse impiety,
as either to live as we list, or to think we have time enough to repent
before we die, for who can tell when the cock will crow, or when death as a
thief will steal upon us? nay let us remember it is said, Revel. 22.11. He
that is filthy let him be filthy still, and in our age we shall possess the
iniquities of our youth, and therefore our life being but a span long, the day
is short enough by repentance to make our accounts with God even and easy.

Thirdly, observe hence, that we cannot serve God and riches, Christ and
Beliall, the flesh and the spirit, for their walks and courses are opposite
and contrary one to the other, as may appear by the Apostles putting of it
negatiuely, that we must not walk at all after the flesh; Mal. 1.6.
for if God be a father he will have all the honor, if a master all the fear,
neither will he suffer himself to be divided, or his worship to be performed
by halfes, for this is, as Eliah calls it 1. King. 18.21. the halting between
two opinions: but as before our conversion the affections of sins do force us
to bring forth fruit unto death; so being called, the strength of grace must
thrust us forward to bring forth fruits to God, and not to our selves: and
therefore it is said, Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting: so as though thou do that which is lawful, yet if thou
do it more unto men then unto God, thou sowest to the flesh, and shall
receive damnation; but if thou seek in thy whole life to please God, more
then men, yea, to please him though thou displeasest men, then shall thou of
the spirit reap salvation: for the end why God has created and saved us, is
to glorify him in this life, and were it not he respected and received glory
by thy life, what need he suffer thee to stay here on earth, but have taken
thee presently from the womb to heaven: but he suffers thee to live, partly
that by thy fruitfulness to God, the corruption that is hid within thee may in
part be abolished, and partly to distinguish between thee and the reprobate at
the last day, when thou shall be blessed and that worthily, even in the
judgment and acknowledgment of the damned, for the fruits thou have brought
forth to God. So as it stands us upon to have the eyes of our thoughts, and
the bent of actions, wholly upon God, to hazerd, yea to prefer his glory before
the glory and comfort of our own salvation: for if we be not rich in God and
good works, then are we still dead in sin, then is not Satan at all cast our
of us, then are we so far from needing but to wash our feet, John 13.9.
as we are wholly polluted hands, head, and all. Howbeit because every one
will say: he brings forth fruit to God, and walks in the spirit, being
inwardly greiued for his sins, and resorting unto public prayer and
preaching, which are indeed good steps to trace a Christian by, yet we must
know this is not sufficient, for the inward sorrow is invisible, and the
coming to prayer and to the word, is deceiuable and communicable even to
hypocrites, therefore we must bring forth visible fruit to be seen of men, in
performing toward them, the duties of the second table by love, patience
compassion, and such like; else is it as a light ^id under a bushel, if it be
not sensibly felt of men for their comfort, and seen of men for their example,
that they which are without may be won, and the rest which are of the same
fold with us, may be stirred up to glorify God in heaven for the fruitfulness
of his Saints on earth. To which duties we may be the better encouraged because
the whole fruit both in the practice of them, and in the reward of them, shall
redound to our selves, producing joy and peace of conscience in this life, and
the crown of glory in the life to come, Romans 6.22.

Fourthly, for thine own comfort learn to make a difference between walking
after the flesh, and walking through the flesh, the one being a following and
pursuing of thy sinful desires, with greediness and with delight through that
rage of corruption which rests within thee; the other being a performing of thy
duties to God, and a walking with him though with weakness and infirmity, by
reason of that remnant of flesh which will be in thee til death; so as though
the good thou do, be not done so cheerfully, so exactly, so perfectly as it
ought, but is mingled with many imperfections, that even in thy own judgment
thou think thine actions evil, be not discouraged; for albeit thou have in
truth cause to pray to have not only thy evil actions, but even thy best
actions to be forgiven, because they are a little tempered with the flesh; yet
know that this is the case of all the children of God which are effectually
sanctified, to have naturally concupiscence in them, which causes these three
things: first either it makes us always think evil thoughts; secondly, or
else it hinders us from good thoughts: thirdly, or else it makes us to
mingle with our good thoughts, evil thoughts. And herein we must first know
what we are by nature, and before our conversion, namely, we are bound both
hand and foot as it were with the chains and irons of sin, that we cannot
move to any good, and so long we are the slaves of Satan, who whips us with
our own corruption, and so hardens our hearts through use and custom of
sin, that we are led into the wrath of God before we see it; but when the
Lord does strike us on the sides as he did Peter, and open our hearts as he did
the heart of Lydia, that we do see the riches of his mercy, Act. 12.7.16.14.
and do feel our irons somewhat unloosed, that is, our corruption abated,
whereby we get some liberty to do that is good, though it be not done with
that perfection that is required, yet let us assure our selves that our purpose
and desire to walk with God and to do good is accepted of him, for he
regards the heart, and dispenses with the imperfection of the outward man.
To which purpose Saint Paul says: Phil. 3.13.14. I forget that which is behind
and endeavor to that is before, and follow hard toward the mark for the price
of the high calling of God in Christ. In which observe three things: First, we
must know our mark at which we must (...), that is, Christ, and unto the
coming of this mark we must be absolutely resolved: Secondly, we must not
look behind us (not forbidding us to look back unto our former estate) but
nothing must hinder us from going to this work, as whoredom, usury, flattery,
deceit, idolatry, and such like gross sins: Thirdly, we must so strive, as
in the end we may attain this mark, which is Christ; and so we come thither,
it skilleth not whether we creep or go by steps and degrees; answerable to
that 1. Cor. 9.24. So run that ye obtain, that though we have many stops
in the flesh, yet if our eyes be still upon God it suffices.

Lastly, that we may be abashed at the shaking of sin, and may grow into
perfect hatred and detestation of it, we see here the miserable estate of them
that are subject to the prince of the world, and are at league with hell, that
howsoever their life is varnished over with a little temporal prosperity, yet
they feed themselves but for their slaughter, for being out of Christ, and
disclaiming holiness of life, their glory shall be their shame, and their end
is but damnation, it being impossible as Solomon says Prouer. 12.3. for a man
to be established by wickedness. If therefore thou see his barnes full let
not thy soul envy it, for in the revenues of the wicked there is trouble,
because they tend to sin, and the Lord casts away his substance. If thou
see him tall and proud, as the Cedar, bless thou thy self in thy humility,
for the curse of the Lord being in his house, though his excellency mount up to
heaven, and his head reach up to the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like
his dung, his roots shall be dried up beneath, and above his branch shall be
cut down. If thou see him seated and waxing old in his outward happiness; let
it nothing trouble thee, for his bones are full of the sins of his youth, and
it shall lie down with him in the dust, at length his eyes shall fail, and
then shall his candle be put out, his refuge shall perish, and then
fearfulness shall drive him to his feet. If thou see him eat and drink
and rise up to play, desire not thou to taste of his joy, for his reioicing is
short and but a moment, and though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, yet God
shall draw (...) out of his belly, yea affliction follows sinners, and fear
shall be for the workers of iniquity, such a one consumes like a r^^^ thing,
God shall run upon him and his arm shall be broken, (...) shall destroy him,
as the vine her sower grape, and cast him off (...) the olive does her flower,
for he that is not planted in Christ his branch cannot be green, but brimstone
shall be scattered in (...) habitation, and his hope shall be indignation and
sorrow of mi^^.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 2.


IN this verse the Apostle insisteth to prove, that there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ, which he does by two arguments: First, because we are
freed from the law and dominion of sin: Secondly because we are freed from
the law and domination of death. Against these t^^o the conscience opposes two
things. First, how are we freed from the law and power of sin, since we have
so many unclean thoughts, so many raging affections, and so many vile and
naughty actions that pass from us in the course of our lives? secondly, how
are we freed from the law and sting of death, since we die daily and suffer so
many afflictions and miseries in this life which are the merits and deserts of
sin? These two objections that might skare and trouble ^^e tender conscience
and inward peace of a Christian, he answers to the end of this chapter. In
this verse to the end of the (...), he shows how far we are delivered from
the law of sin, (...) from the 19. verse to the 17. how far we are freed from
the law of death, which was the first punishment for sin, as appea^^th, Genesis
2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die (...) death: and from
the 17. verse to the end of the Chapter, he ^^eweth how far we are freed from
the miseries and calamities of (...) life.

Now in this verse as it deuideth it self we are to consider two ^^^ing:
First, how and by what means we obtain this free^^me, ^^^ly by the spirit of
life which is in Christ: Secondly, ^^things from which we are freed, which be
two, first from the ^^^son of sin, secondly, from the power of death.

For the first, we must learn to make a difference between the spirit of life
which is in Christ Jesus; and the spirit of life of Christ which is in us; the
one being absolute and inherent in Christ, the virtue whereof imputed unto us
brings perefect absolution from the tyranny of sin, and bitterness of death,
the other being but poured into us through the grace of Christ's spirit abiding
in us, does but qualify and temper the heat of sin and the violence of
death, which otherwise would rage over us. And therefore if we speak of the
spirit of life which is in us we may well cry out with Saint Paul Romans 7.24.
O wretched men that we be, who shall deliver us from the body of this death.
But if we speak of the spirit of life which is in Christ, then may we boldly
say we are already delivered from it. That this may be made more plain^; Paul
Romans 7.18. said; he knew no good thing dwelling in his flesh; and here he
says: he is freed from the law of sin and of death, so as it may be thought
these two places and speeches do not agree. The answer is, Paul was carnal,
sold under sin, and thereby made a slave to Satan, even as a slave that is
sold in the market is to his master; but this was only in respect of the
spirit of life which was in himself; but now he speaks of the spirit of life
which is in Christ, and applied unto him by the union between Christ and him,
and so may boldly say, he is now no flesh but all spirit, and does the good he
would. To make it plainer, 1. Ioh. 5.6. it is said, that Christ came by blood
and water, signifying thereby that as his blood washes away the guiltiness of
our sins, so his water washes away the filthiness of our sins; and that
as his blood does justify us in heaven, so his water does sanctify us here
on earth; with which water of his, because it answers to the spirit of life
which is in us, we had need daily to be washed; for as the skin cleaves
fast to the flesh, and the flesh to the bones, so does sin to our corrupt
nature, that we have need continually to be cleansed by the holy Ghost, which
is the spirit of life of Christ in us. And this is that water spoken of, Ioh.
3.5. Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit he cannot be saved;
meaning thereby our regeneration: and so Ioh. 13.10. where Christ alluding to
them, that coming out of Bathes had need wash their lower parts because the
filthiness descends to the feet, persuades us thereby to a daily increase
in a sanctified course, because some corruption will hang at least at our
singers end, according to that, Job 9.30.31. If I wash my self with snow water
and make my hands most clean, yet my own clothes shall make me filthy; so as
though we have the spirit of God in us, yet our best actions are sinful; for
as it is said Esa. 64.6. our righteousness is as filthy clouts, the original
signifies, such clouts as come from children newly borne, or such as Surgians
use to make clean ulcers, or such as beggars find upon dung hills to patch
their ragged cloakes withal, or such as are not once to be named, as the
Ancient writers of the Jews do make mention; to whom this was chiefly
spoken, the Prophet in that place alluding to the manner of purifying in the
ceremonial law. For we read Leuit. 15.19. that unclean things were separated
both from the service of God, and from the use of man, which being then but
ceremonial, both in body and soul; and thereby unfit for Gods service, and
is really and morally in us* for we are vile and polluted not worthy the
society one of another, for fear of infecting each other, and yet these are
our best actions, as Esaias speaks, meaning thereby both the greatness of the
number of them, and the greatness of the excellency of them, for they are all
accursed before God, I mean in respect of the spirit of Christ, which is in
us, not that the spirit causes this uncleanness, but through the lust,
sensuality, and corruption of our natures, even as fair water from a clear
fountain is made filthy by running through unclean channels, the cause whereof is
that concupiscence which through the serpents temptation entered into our first
parents when they transgressed, this being the first sin that lives, and the
last sin that dies, even as the heart is in the body of a man, and this lust
causes and forces us to commit the evil we would not, and to omit the good
we would; and if it cannot prevail this way with us, then it will entice us
partly to commit the evil, and partly to omit the good by the consent of the
heart only; and if it ^^^le in this, it will cause such a crossing and corrupt
thought to come in the way to poison the good we do, that though we do it, yet
it deserves death, because we are commanded to love God with all our
thoughts, which if any one be ranging we do not. This is urged the more that
we may see and acknowledge how far our best actions which are in highest price
and estimation with us, and which run from the cleerest part of the welhead,
are from deserving any thing; which we may yet see as in a glass more
plainly, Genesis 6.5. where it is said concerning the natural man; that the
mould of the desires of the thoughts of a man's heart are evil, only evil, and
evil every day, and for ever, (...) may be spoken of the best child of God,
leaning out but this word (only). For the spirit of Christ which is in us
begets some good thoughts, and brings forth some good fruits that they are
not (only) evil, though in respect of our corruption and that they taste of
the unsavory saltnes of our nature they may be said to be nothing but evil,
for in the choicest child of God there is the seed of the sin against the holy
Ghost, and of apostasy and of all sins, but that by the working of the spirit
they are so choked and weakened, as they are not able to break forth, hobeit
by the remainder of sin abiding in us, all our actions are so infected and
poisoned as they are loathsome in the sight of God; which must teach us to
humble our selves before him, and to crave pardon even for our prayers which
are polluted with many by-thoughts, and then will he, as Mal. 3.17. spare us as
a man spares his son that serves him, for the Lord regards rather the
good affection, than the good action, the holy fountain from whence it
proceeds, rather then the effects of the fountain that it runs through, some
corrupt vein of this earth and flesh of ours, and this is in respect the
spirit of life of Christ is in us. But now if we speak of the spirit of life,
which is in Christ himself, then we may boldly say we are all spirit and not
flesh; that Christ by his satisfaction has taken away the accusation can come
against us for any sin, and the imperfection can be laid against us for any
action, for all we do is accepted of God in him, and we can be charged with
nothing, for Christ makes intercession for us, and as Ephesians. 2.1. God in Christ
has quickened us that were dead in sins, and as Heb. 2.9. Christ has tasted
death for all men. So as if we speak of the spirit of life which is in Christ's
person we may well conclude we are freed from the law of sin and of death.

Secondly, observe hence that they that will take comfort by the life of
Christ, must be able to apply the power of his death to the crucifying not
only in general, but even of every particular sin in them, as the Apostle
says here, he was freed from the law of sin: for Christ's body was not only
crucified for our sins (our sins being the very cause of his crucifying)
but he was also crucified to sin, that is, to crucify and kill sin in us
which are his members, so that except we find the spirit of God daily working
and striking at the root of sin to weaken it, and at the branch of sin to
cut it off at the first blossom, we cannot conclude he was crucified for
sin, because he is not crucified to sin in us, so as we must measure the
life of Christ in himself no further to pertain to us then we find the power
of sin abated in us. And therefore if we walk after the Prince that rules
in the air, and that works in the children of disobedience, and have our
conversation in the lusts of the flesh, then has not the life of Christ freed
us from the law of sin, and then are we in the state of condemnation, if God
be not rich in mercy to us hereafter. For howsoever the Lord is contented so
far to dispense with the rigor of his justice, as to suffer ^^e Sun to
shine both upon the just and unjust, yet does the So^^e of righteousness never
arise upon any that is holden with ^^e cords of his own sin, making as
Solomon says, Prouerbes^^. 12.13. a sign with his eyes, signifying with his
feet, and instructing with his fingers, to have those leude things which lu^ke
in his heart, countenanced and performed both by himself and others by his
entisement. Let us therefore labor to have our spirits raised up from the dead
in the body of Christ, or through the life of Christ, till when we are not
freed from the law of death; for so long as we remain natural men, we are
dead both in the punishment of sin, and also in the pollution of sin; of
the latter we (...) in this life, as 2. Cor. 5.15. If one be dead for all, then
were we all dead. The other is reserved for the life to come, and is called,
Reave. 20.14. the second death, when carnal and fleshly minded men shall be
cast into the lake of fire. We must know then, that until the spirit has
raised us from the dead, we are but dead men though we seem to live; and so
long as we are thus dead, we are separated from the grace of God, that is, the
grace of God is dead in us, and we are living unto all sin, and so not freed
neither from the law of sin, nor of death. Our spirits then are said to be
raised from the dead two ways: First, when it reuiueth and renueth that which
is dead in us: And secondly, when it slaieth and mortifieth that which is
quick in us; that which is dead in us is the grace and favor of God; that
which is quick in us is sin, as concupiscence, lust, sensuality, and such
like: so that till this springtime come that the grace of God be seen to
flower and bud forth in us, our estate is no better then that of the damned
souls; for as they at the last day shall be separated for ever from the
presence of God, so as long as we remain carnal and unsanctified men, we are
at this day separated from the favor of God, and as the damned in their
separation do live in torments for ever, being dead in the punishment of sin
so are we carnal men inwardly tormented in conscience for being dead in the
pollution of sin, that is, we commit those sins, for which the damned are
tormented; and in some respects the damned are better then carnal men, for
they can sin no more, though the^^gnash their teeth and s^et at the justice
of God; whereas the wicked and unjust do still commit sin, adding sin to
sin, whereby heaping the more dishonor upon God, they draw the heavier
condemnation upon themselves.

Further where the Apostle says, He was freed from the law of sin, we must
not understand it, as if there was any law or commandment to sin; but, as
Romans 7.11. that sin took an occasion by the commandment to deceive us, and
to slay us, there being accompulsary, and an unchangeable necessity in us to
sin, as long as we are holden of the flesh, that will we nill we, we cannot
but sin, we being by sin deceived five ways: First, by concupiscence and
lust, as was Euah: Secondly, through infidelity: Thirdly, by blindness of
judgment: Fourthly, by particular ignorance: And lastly, by the malice of the
heart, and if the heart come once to be little worth, as Solomon ^^^^^eth, Pro.
10.20. and as it is in all carnal men, then is the ^^^^^antiall law of God,
which otherwise in it self is holy, just, and righteous, to such men, but a
law of sin, that is, sinning the more because the law forbids it, and a
killing letter, as 2. Cor. 3.6. First, in respect natural men are but flesh
sold under sin: Secondly, in respect he reading it reads his own
damnation; and a seducing letter enticing them therefore to sin because they
are restrained from sin; yea to them, as Romans 3.20. it is the power of sin;
and as Romans 4.15. it is the law of wrath; and as 2. Cor. 3.15. it is as a veil
laid over their hearts to blind them; and as 1. Tim. 1.9. it is said not to be
given to the righteous, but to the disobedient; and as Peter calls it, Act.
15.10. a yoke which neither they nor their forefathers were able to bear:
meaning thereby what it is to the carnal man, and what it was then made by the
Scribes and Pharisees, who preferred the law before Christ, which being but a
schoolmasters to bring us to him, was by them made a master above him and to
teach him. (...) it is no marvel though to such as would live by the law
without the life which is in Christ, that it prove to them a law of sin and
of death, for by the law shall never any be justified, but through faith in
the life of Christ must we attain salvation.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. ^


Here the Apostle proceeds to make the matter formerly delivered more plain
and easy, wherein observe two material points: First, that he takes away all
the power of the law to save: Secondly that this power is given only to
Christ, who took upon him not the similitude of flesh, but of sinful flesh,
to condemn sin in the flesh, by whose grace we are only saved, without the
works of the law. For the first observe two things: first, that it is
impossible for any to be saved by fulfilling the Law, because none can exactly
and perfectly do it: secondly, from whence this disabilitie proceeds, not
from any defects in the law, but from our corrupt nature.

For the first of these, the Papists say it is meant that none can be saved by
the works of the ceremonial Law, and that it is not to be understood of the
moral law. Which is most false, as is proved Romans 3.20. By the works of the
law shall no flesh be justified, for by the law comes the knowledge of sin.
He does not say by the knowledge of the ceremonial law: and 2. Cor. 3.7. where
he calls the law the ministration of death written with letters and engraven
in stones, we all knowing there was no law written with the finger of God, and
engraven in stones but the law of the ten commandments; and Gal. 3.21.22.
the Apostle makes an opposition between the law and the promise; that if life
should be given by the law, and by that means should justify, then should it
abolish that justification promised to Abraham and ^o his seed by faith, which
cannot be understood but of the m^^all law, and Romans 7.7: He had not known
sin but by the la^^, for he had not known lust, except the law had said,
Thou sha^^ not lust; and this is the law of the ten commandments.

Howbeit the ^uestion between the Papists and us, is not whether we performing
the precise rule of the law, may challenge eternal life as merit; for there is
no question but we may, the commandment being, as Romans 7.10. ordained unto
life, as appears, Deuteronomy. 5.33. If you walk in all the commandments of God ye
shall live; and Mark. 10.17.18. upon the question asked how he should possess
eternal life, answer was made by Christ, by keeping the commandments: but the
question is, whether any child of God, even in the highest degree of
regeneration, can do it in that manner and measure as he ought. And this can he
not do, and that for two reasons: First, because of the singular purity of the
law: Secondly, because of the extreme impurity of our nature. For the first,
consider that the law is proportionable to the lawgiver, which binds not
only the hands from petie larce, the tongue from ribauldry, and the life from
incontinency, but commands the eye, and speaks to the heart: And in the
nine first commandments, whersoeuer there is an affirmative expressed, there
is the negative implied, and where the negative is expressed, there is the
affirmative implied, that is, where any duty is commanded, there the contrary
vice is forbidden, and where the sin is inhibited, there the contrary duty is
required; for if we must not kill our brother, then must we by all means seek
to preserve his life; and if his life must be precious to us, then must we not
hate him, for this is a sin that will beget murder. But the tenth
commandment is the key that is able to discover the cabinet of the heart, this
enters between the marrow and the bones, and howsoever we may refrain in
action, and may be stayed in affection, yet this strikes dead extending but
to the motion, though the heart impugn it; and this is the sharpest corasiue
to eat forth our proud flesh, when we shall see our selves arraigned but for a
thought, which we would have withstood: and if any man will look himself in
this glass, he shall see as foul and filthy an Ad^^^ as can be. And this was
that awakened Paul out of that dead ^^eepe wherinto he was cast by nature,
namely, the knowledge of concupiscence to be sin, for he knew the action and
the resolution of the heart to uncleanness to be sin as well by the law of
nature as by the law written; but that the thoughts should be hedged in and
enclosed so precisely, he did not conceive before the excellency of the tenth
commandment had revealed it to him; howbeit, though not to extenuate and
lessen any sin, whereby the majesty of God is violated and so offended, we
must not imagine the thoughts conceived by a sudden motion or sight, and
quickly suppressed again to be so sinful, for the thoughts meant here are
those of the heart, which have an inclination and pronenesse to sin
proceeding from corruption of nature, suffering them to rest with us for a
time, though they be after pressed down by the special work of God; and if
we could but register the thoughts of this kind do pass from us in one day,
we should find them abominable in Gods sight and only pardonable in Christ.
For though they be hid from men; yet do they appear before God the searcher of
the heart, and shall receive their reward, which is death, if they be not
passed over in Christ. And though some have thought that thoughts without the
consent of the heart, are not sinful, yet it is certain they be so; for
Solomon, Pro. 24.9. says; The wicked thought of a fool is sin: and so may
it likewise be proved by three special arguments; First whatsoever hinders
the absolute and perfect conformity of the power of the soul to the lively
image of God wherein we were at first created, is sin: but thoughts without
consent of the heart do hinder this our conformity to the image of God,
because the thoughts being admitted in* there must needs be excluded therefore
they are sinful: Secondly, Adam in his innocence could never have any such
by-thoughts being created to the absolute image of God. Since then we have lost
this perfect image by his fall, and have such thoughts arise in us, they must
needs hinder us from coming to that perfection again, wherein he stood at
first, while he walked with God in paradise; and therefore they are sinful.
Thirdly, God has redeemed all the parts both of our body and soul, and
therefore we ought to honor him with all parts, and the thoughts are some parts
which he has redeemed; therefore we must honor him with them: but many one
thought be wandering and ranging out of the way, there ^ants the honor of that
thought to God; therefore they are sinful: for where it is said in the law, we
must honor God with all our heart, with all our mind, with all our soul,
Christ Luke 10.27. expounds it, we must also love him with all our thoughts*
then so many thoughts as tend not to love God, must needs be sinful. Now as
concerning (thoughts) ther^^^ four degrees, one more sinful then another, but
the least damnable in the reprobate, pardonable in the elect. The first are,
when a man thinks on some childish toie, or on a thing that is not, which often
comes into a man's mind by some occasion or other off^ed to the sense, and
represented to the fancy, but soon vanishes away; although the thing offered
to the imagination be not sinful, yet the very thought of it is sinful,
because it possesses us for the time, and being idle and unprofitable; for
that time, be it never so short, so much of Gods image was thrust out of us,
and the whole man was not taken up for him as it ought; and therefore, Genes.
6.5. it is said, all the thoughts of a man's heart are sinful, and not sinful,
but only sinful, and not only and altogether sinful, but sinful every day,
and continually: in which place Moses speaks of the natural man, therefore
the former being the thoughts of nature are in themselves sinful, and
damnable. The second degree are those when a man by a certain pronenesse and
readiness to sin has some corrupt thought in his heart, but it is presently
suppressed: and this is more sinful then the other. The third degree is when
the heart has hatched some sinful thought and suffers it to rest with him
for a time, pausing upon it, and pleading with himself on both fides whether
he should call his heart to consent; and yet at length by the special work of
God it perishes: and these are more sinful then the other. But the fourth
degree are woorst of all, when a man not only casts forth a wicked though^
but dandleth it in his breast, and not solliciteth the heart alone, but upon
advice presses and importuneth the soul to join hand in hand, that they may
with greater strength break forth in^^ the members: and this is the high way
to bring us to actual ^^nne.

Now notwithstanding all this, some of the Scho^^e-men hold these thoughts to
be no sin except the heart ste^^s to consent; defining sin to be a
voluntary thing, done wit^ consent of the ^eart, and with a resolute purpose to
bring it in^^ action against the law and commandment of God; alleging for
proof of their opinion, James 1.15. where it is said: But every man is tempted
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised, then when
lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. But that these thoughts are sin of themselves without
the addition of the heart, is proved by the definition of sin in the
scripture, for it is said, 1. John 3.4. that the transgression of the law is
sin, then the law commanding continual purity, and thou having a thought
whereby God is not honored, do therein transgress the law, and therefore in
that thou sinnest. And for the place cited out of Saint James, the Apostle
there speaks not of the sin in the heart between God and man, but of the
actual sin between man and man, because one man knows not the heart of
another, as God does, who searches the reins. Howb^^t to answer them with
their own place, the Apostle verse 14. speaks of the original sin, from
whence this actual sin, which is the monster, does proceed, he speaking
there first of the concupiscence of the heart, for from hence, which is foetus
peccati, the first birth of sin, proceeds fomes peccati, the nourishing of
all sin, and out of which lust does conceive, and when it is conceived it
must needs bring forth sin, and then sin when it is finished draws on
death: not meaning hereby that no sin deserves death but actual sin, for
all sins besides deserve the same, as Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.
So then to clear the former place, let us go by degrees backward: What
brings forth death? Sin when it is finished. What is the cause of sin
which is finished? The lust that conceaueth. And what is the cause that lust
conceiueth? The concupiscence of the heart. So as all proceeds from original
sin; and the rest that branch from this root are sins of sin; for as a
woman enter^ining a thought of her desire to strange flesh, sins so long^s
it receaueth entertainment; even so is it with the thoughts of men, swerve
they never so little from the service of God. Since ^hen the law ouerwhelmeth
us with the full rigor of Gods wrath by the excellency and purity of it, which
binds us his creatures ^o be like our maker, exacting herein of us no more
then to be answerable for that we first received, not seeking advantage herein
by increase, but yielding him only the same talent of hol^^esse, honor and
obedience wherewith all we were trusted in ou^ creation, and we have exceeded
the impiety of that unfaithful servant condemned in the Gospel, not only not
hiding i^ where we might have it again, as he did, but corrupting and wasting
it, that the Lord cannot now know us to be his come we have so defaced his
stamp and superscription which he set upon us, sending forth in few hours so
many legions of unclean cogitations and polluted actions; what harbor think
we can we find under this covert of the Lords law to rescue us from damnation?
Nay if we appeal to it for succor in this strictness, preciseness and
purity of it, it will be the first to arrest and draw us before the seat of
justice, and so much the sooner and the sharper by reason of the second points
which hinder us from this perfection in obedience, which is the extreme
impurity of our nature: for such is the frailty of flesh and blood, and we are
so far from being able to perform the law as it is rather a provocation unto
us to greater sin, doing it the more eagerly because the law forbids it,
even as the prescript of the Physician is to the impatient patient who more
greedily desires that would breed him most danger; which appears 1. Cor.
15.56. The law is the strength of sin; and Romans 7.8. Sin did turn the law to
an occasion to sin. To persuade this by natural reason of contraries, active
and passive; we see the fire environed by the cold air in the winter, so that
the operation of the fire cannot pass out by the resistance of the cold,
hereupon there is made a reflection of the heat which is beaten back by the
cold that it will not suffer it to come forth, whereby the heat is doubled by
the opposition of the contrary, as experience teaches us, the fire scaulding
more in winter then in somer; even so is it between the law and the heart of
man, which is a fire of lust, and the law of God beating it back into the
breast which would feign come forth in action, it goes into the heart again
and is there more forcibly inflamed then before, whereupon there grows such an
enmity as what Gods loves, man hates, and what is highest in estimation with
him, is basest in opinion with us, and our nature takes occasion to be more
sinful by the restraint of the Commandment: and as in diseases men seek
what most hurts them, as in a plurisie, wine, in a frenzy, to watch, in a
lethargy to sleep, so falls it out with us, that what is most wholesome to
cure our corruption we refuse, and the oil that will soonest set it on fire we
embrace, which experience can teach us better than the voice of an Angel,
every man's conscience being privy to their several and special infirmities.
And to illustrate this by the example of the diamond and best Saints of God,
Job. 39.37. makes protestation, O Lord I am vile, once, yea twice, have I
spoken, but I will speak no more, for I cannot answer one for a thousand; and
Chap. 9.15.20. If I were righteous, yet would I not plead with thee, but make
supplication to my Judge, for if I would be perfect he shall judge me wicked;
and David often confesses his unworthiness by entering into the meditation of
the law of God, and Easay 64.6. says our best actions are but as a menstrous
cloth, the Hebrew word signifies a filthy clout used by the Surgians to take
up the rottenness of the flesh; and Paul Romans 7.23. by his own confession was
a captive to sin, which shows it impossible to challenge eternal life by
the observation of the law, and to this end is the song of the Angels in the
Revel. 19.1. which gives all glory to God and none to men, for our best works
sway nothing in the balance of desert, nay the grace of Christ makes not the
work perfect* because it is defective by concupiscence, and is accepted only
in mercy; for justice can accept of nothing as merito^^^^ which is not as
perfect as Christ himself.

Here then may be demanded why God gave the law, since there is no manner of
proportion betwixt our abilities to perform, and the straitness of the law to
command, and he that lays a condition of impossibility commands
unprofitably. This we answer four ways: First, by our creation we had power
to have done it, and we are only by our own disobedience disabled, for Adam
in his integrity might have fulfilled it, and therefore it is no injustice with
God to give us this law which we had strength to bear, and have now made
burdensome to our selves being weakened through corruption: for when he that
can see perfectly pulls out his own eyes, who is to be charged with his
blindness but himself? or if he that is rich wastes his goods with the
prodigal son, none can be blamed for his poverty but himself. Or if he that
knows by climing he must fall, will yet clime so high till he fall and hurt
himself, he can cry out of none for his hurt but himself; or if he that is
comely become misshapen by lewd company and diet, is any to be found fault
with for this deformity but himself? So who can charge this law to be become
impossible, but out selves? and how came it thus to be, but through our sin
in Adam? and if we had been in his stead we had done as he did, so as we are
the cause of our own blindness, nakedness, weakness and deformity in
climing to the fruit of the forbidden tree, whereby we lost the power and
comeliness of Gods image after which we were made: And shall a Prince
therefore lose his just right and power to command, because a company of wicked
rebels will not be drawn to obey? God forbid. Secondly, this law thus
delivered, is not simply impossible, because all the elect have fulfilled it in
the person of Christ. Thirdly, it shall not be always impossible in our
persons, partly by our obedience to it in this life, and when sin shall be
abolished and our sanctification finished by our absolute performance of it in
the life to come. Fourthly, if God had proposed no other end in giving it, but
the observing of (...) in our corruption, then had it indeed been impossible,
but it was given of the Lord for four ends: first, to be convinced of our
shame and filthiness by looking into the law as into a mirror which shows
us our infirmity and deformity: secondly, that when heerby we were all shut up
under damnation and the conscience convinced of our Apostasy we might then be
stirred up to seek remedy in Christ: thirdly, that being brought to Chrst we
might in deep meditation behold the excellency of the Lords righteousness,
that this might be a great provocation to make us strive to come as near the
perfection required as may be, the first being before our conversion, the last
after our conversion to keep down the rebellion of our flesh, and to shake
off the sluggishnesse of our nature which is most unapt to enterprise any thing
might please God: fourthly, it was given for the reprobate that they should
absolutely fulfill it or else be damned, for it lays open their sins and
the torments of hell ready to seize upon them, with a despair of all grace, the
Lord justly leaving them in their blood, so as the fire that burns by the
breath of the Lord, begins in them in this life, and though they seem to
men to have quiet consciences, because they sleep as it were in the top of the
mast, yet they have the flames of Gods wrath, scorching them within; whereas to
us that be elect it lays before us our hurt, our debt, our leprosy, our
poverty and our nakedness that we may run to Christ to have our wounds
healed, our debt released, our leprosy cleansed, our nakedness covered with his
fine linen, Reu. 3.18. and our poverty enriched with his refined gold and
graces: so as we see it was not given in vain, though it be vain for us to
seek life in it.

Now for the second point, namely from whence this disability in the law to
save us does proceed, and that appears in the text to be, through the
weakness that is in our flesh, and not through any imperfection in the law.
Oh, say the Papists, but there is no man so weak but has some strength,
neither is there such weakness in the law, but it has some strengh to save.
We answer by Scripture, 1. Cor. 15.43. The body is sown in weakness; where
the Apostle speaks of a dead man in whom is no strength, no more is there in
the law: besides the word signifies such a weakness as is utterly deprived of
all strength, so as the reason why the law is thus disabled, is through the
deadness that is in the flesh of man, whether we speak of a mere natural
man, or of a regenerate man, as long as there is flesh in him. And in this
respect the world is said to be dead three manner of ways though they know the
law: for first, some do know their sins by the knowledge of the law, and yet
are they dead because they know only the law and not the true use of it:
secondly, some by the law, do know only their sins, which brings them to
despair and they be miserable dead men: Thirdly, some by the knowledge of the
law do know their sins and also grace for them in Christ, and yet said to be
dead, as Paul Romans 7.13. confesses himself to be in respect of the
greatness of his sin which wrought death in him by that which was good,
meaning the law. Make it plainer by similitudes: when the sun shines the
blind cannot behold it, the fault is not in the sun, but for want of sight in
the party; so when it thundereth, the man that is dease cannot hear it, which
is no defect in the thunder, but through his defect of hearing; so if the rain
fall on the rock it moistneth it nothing at all, neither softneth it, and this
is only through the hardness of the rock: even so fares it betwixt the law
and us, for that the law is deprived of the power to save, is not for any
defect in it self, for it is holy, perfect, righteous, just, heavenly,
spiritual, eternal, but the fault is in our flesh, for we are all weak,
blind, deaf, stony-harted, not able to receive any impression of obedience at
all. Again the scripture speaks of the law two manner of ways: First, either
as given by the hand of God, wrote with his finger in tables of stone which is
the ten commandments. Secondly, or else it speaks of that is proper to the
law, that is of the effects of the law. The first, which is the ten
commandments, it is double: For it commands the good and forbids the
evil; for the second the effects are also double, for it rewadeth for the
good, and condemns for the evil. So as the law has these four things, it
commands, and forbids, it rewards, and condemns: he then that is not
able to fulfill the law is a dead man: I speak in respect of the law only,
and not of Christ, for Christ himself said, speaking to one that sought life
by his works, If thou will have life everlasting keep the commandments,
which is not possible for man to do, no more is it possible for the law to
save, yea it is not only unable to do this, but by reason of the law we are
made more sinful; for as Romans 3.20. By the law comes the knowledge of sin;
and chap. 4.15. The law causes wrath: and 1. Cor. 15.56. The strength of sin
is the law. So as first it conuinceth us of the good we do, our hearts being of
themselves rotten, and the root being unsound, so must the tree be; the body
being corrupt, so must the members be; and the fountain being unclean, so must
the streams be. Secondly, it conuinceth us for not doing good; and in one
thing is straiter then all the laws of nations, condemning our straying
thoughts, and charge us not simply of sin and transgression, but of voluntary
treason and rebellion against our God. And thirdly, it discharges upon us not
only all the curses of this life from our conception to our death, but also of
damnation in the life to come, so as in respect of the law only we have
already the sentence of death pronounced against us, and do eat, talk, buy,
sell and such like but as prisoners repriued and stayed a while from execution.
And this is the quality and condition of the ten commandments, inse, and
perse, in it self, and by it self, separate from all other things; for I
speak not of the whole doctrine of the law, as it was taught by Moses, for
that as David says, Psalm. 119. is perfect and conuerteth the soul and gives
wisdom to the simple, and teaches us faith to lay hold on Christ, when we
are ready to sink in our selves, and draws us to repentance by commanding
the good and forbidding the evil, by rewarding the good, and threatening the
evil. But the law as it is a bare letter bidding us do such a thing, and
giving us no strength to perform it, losing it strength by the strength of our
corruption, shows in what a desperate case they stand that depend upon the
Law for their salvation, for weighing our selves in this balance we shall be
lighter then the shickles of the sanctuary; if we look in this glass we
shall be wretched and deformed; and trying our selves by this touch stone, we
shall be no gold but dross.

To make this plainer, and that our blood may be upon our own ands and the
law remain unblameable, we must (...) stand there are two sorts of laws. The
one is the substantial and natural law, the other is an accidental or
occasional law, mentioned by this Apostle, Romans 7.8.9. where we must observe,
that sin received no occasion from the law, for then occasion had been
given, but took an occasion not of the law, but by the law, that is, because
the law forbids, therefore we will do it. Now between a cause and occasion
there is great difference: The substantial law of God, which is the moral law
of the ten commandments, has two parts, it forbids impiety and
uncleanness, and commands sanctification and holiness; but the law
occasional, proceeds out of the first, which is substantial; for if the law
had not said, Thou shall not lust, thou would not do it; but being by the law
restrained, thou art in thine own corruption provoked unto that sin: so that
here are two flat contrarieties met together, the law and our nature, the one
commanding, the other rebelling, the one forbidding, the otherser that cause
embracing; so as but for the law our sin would not so much appear: for
example, we are able to eat more in winter then in summer, by reason in
winter there meets two contraries, the outward cold, and inward beat, which
being driven into the body increases the appetite; which is not so in summer,
for then rather heat meets with heat, which abateth the stomach: even so the
Lord has set his law as a bull-worke to keep in sin that it break not forth
of the breast: Now, when sin finds such resistance as it cannot rush
through this law, then it reboundeth back again into our bosom, and there
kindles a greater fire of concupiscence then it did before; yet is the law
holy, pure, righteous, heavenly and spiritual, the rule of obedience and of a
sanctified life; but out nature is impure, unrighteous, corrupt, and from the
earth earthly, the law proceeding from God, and our nature from the devil,
who powers this poison into our hearts; for even the law of nature, which was
the book for all men, and whereby the eternal power of the Godhead was
discerned that he might be glorified, we see how, Romans 1.20. he was thereby
dishonored, they turning the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude
of a corruptible mam, which proceeded only from their vain thoughts and
foolish hearts full of darkness; but their end was reprobation: so for the law
written; where it pareth off the dead flesh, that we may see how sorely we are
smitten by sin, that by this means we might run to Christ, who is a ready
Physician skillful and pitiful in healing all wounds, we still keep at home
and run back into our selves, as if thereby we could be cured, where in truth
our disease by this negligence is the more increased, nothing being able to
heal but the blood of the son of God: so for the Gospel, whose end is to make
peace between God and man, and between man and man, showing there is but one
God, one spirit and one faith, thereby we but one man's children, even Gods,
which should be the power of salvation to us, and the bond of love among us,
through the malice of satan and the profaneness of our minds we make a
savor of death, and as it were a trumpet of debate and sedition to consume
each other; yea Ioh. 6.66. we see how diverse of Christ's disciples went back
from him when he preached a long sermon touching the sacrament of the supper
which is a badge of our friendship with God and with our brethren, which
proceeded not from the sacrament, but from their rebellion, that their sin
might be made more sinful; yea such contagion is there in our nature, as we
make Christ himself the author and finisher of our hope, to be our
condemnation, a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, 1. Pe. 2.8. the
cause not being in him who is the light of the world, but in our selves, making
him an occasion of our darkness, John 3.19. which by this light shall be made
in the end far more sinful and damnable. Since then the power of our
corruption is so forcible, as it is able to pervert all the means ordained for
our salvation, as to make the commandment of God in his law, the promises of
God in the Gospel, the seals of God in his sacraments, and the love of God in
his son, to be vain and of no value, this must teach us to humble our selves
in the lowest degree, in a hatred and detestation of our flesh and sinful
faculties of our soul, which are as the poisoned soil, that either casts us,
or corrupts all the seeds of fruitfulness or wholsomenes, that we thrown into
it; whereas our sin being disclosed both by the law and Gospel, it is the more
to be hated and abhorred, because it turns the edge and benefit of both
these to our destruction. For what could the Lord do more to preserve our
first parents in their innocence than to set as it were a double fence about
his commandment, forbidding not only the eating of the fruit, but the
touching of it, binding the hands that they should not convey it to the mouth?
and yet more has he done for us, taking us out of the fire by casting as it
were his Son in the fire; though as if we had never been scorched, or else
being past sense we carry still the coals in our bosom, and will not have
them quenched with the water of the spirit, to newness of life: But let us not
be so wilful and perverse, so strong headed and stifnecked as not to be
turned into the way by the rod of the law; but having spent the portion of the
flesh, and wasted the lusts thereof, let us grow in love with our fathers
house; for what fruit can we have in those things whereof we shall be ashamed,
or which at length shall bring shame on us? Let us therefore shake off the
sins we have delighted in, and then have we suffered in the flesh, and then
has Christ suffered in the flesh for us; which if he have, then is our flesh
destroyed in us; which if it be, then shall we cease from sin; which if we
do, then shall we live after the will of God, though not in perfection, yet
reformable to the perfection of his will; and then to us that are sanctified
shall not the law be grievous nor burdensome as Saint John says, 1. John 5.3.
but it shall rejoice the heart, giving light to the eyes, and sweetness to the
taste, as David says, Psalm 119.7.8.9.10.

God sending his Son, etc. This is the second general p^n spoken of at
first, namely, that what was impossible to the law is made possible in Christ;
wherein observe four things: First, the person which sends: Secondly, the
person which is sent: Thirdly, the manner how he is sent: Fourthly, the end of
his sending: For the first, which is God, consider the cause moved him to this
mercy, not any thing in us, but his own love and compassion toward us, as it
is expressed, Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he sent his son: and
Ezekiel. 16.3.4. It is said concerning the Church of God, that at the beginning
she was born and begotten of the heathen, her father an Amorite, her mother an
Hittite, at the day of her birth she had no midwife, neither was she washed
but remained filthy, she had not so much as a swaddling clout to cover her,
neither did any that passed by pity her, but she was cast out in the open
field, lay polluted in her blood and ready every hour to perish. In which
words the meaning of the holy Ghost is to set forth our unworthiness, our
shame, and our nakedness. If now an honorable person shall pass by, and open
his compassion on her, and bring her home, and spread his own skirts over her,
feed her at his own table, make her beautiful, and advance her to great
honor, whereby she that was despised comes to be beloved of all nations, and
yet she should again fall to her pollution and become a common strumpet; if
notwithstanding this unthankfulness and apostasy, he should draw her home
again, and renew his former favors toward her, no reason could be given of
this but the free mercy of him that did it: even so has God like an honorable
person full of all power and riches, strength and majesty, mercy and compassion
seen us polluted in our blood before our birth, borne of corrupt parents,
brought forth into a more corrupted place, which is this world; yet has he
said, we shall live, he has caused us to bud as the flower of the field, yea
our time has been as the time of love, he has spread the skirts of his
protection over us, entered a covenant with us, and we are become his: now for
us to enquire the cause of this, we can find none, but his willing love to
have it so; but let us strive by the fruits of our lives to honor him, and with
the calves of our lips to praise him that has thus advanced his mercy on us,
and let us not do the work of a presumptuous whore either in giving rewards
to the flesh, or taking rewards of the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof,
lest the Lord diminish our ordinary, as Ezekiel 16.27. and feed us with the blood
of wrath and lealousie.

Again here note, that the Lord never works but when it is impossible and
the cure desperate in the eyes of men; for when the Law could not save us, then
rather than he would want a people and lose the glory of his mercy he sent
his son to save us. The woman, Mar. 5.25. that had her issue of blood twelve
years, and had spent all her substance among Physicians and auailed not: when
man could not heal her then Christ did it; when he that had been diseased 38.
years and had line long at the poole of Bethesda, Ioh. 5.6. and could get none
to help him in when the water was troubled, then did Christ bid him take up
his bed and walk: when, Ioh. 11.39.42. Lazarus had been in the grave four
days, that it was impossible for man to restore life, yea scarce possible to
abide his smell, then Christ by the speaking of a word could do it: when, Luke
15.20. the prodigal son had wasted all and was rejected of all, then the
father receaueth him home again: when Jonas was, Jonah 2.2. in the whales
belly, and, as the text says, in the belly of hell, that he thought himself
cast out of Gods sight, then did the Lord bring up his life from the pit and
delivered him: when Daniel was put into the Lions den, Dan. 6.22. to be made a
pray for beasts, then the Lord showed his power by stopping of the Lions
mouths that they hurt him not: when the three children, Dan. 3.23. were cast
into the furnace seven times hotter then it was wont to be, because they would
not consent to idolatry, then did the Lord restrain the nature of the flames,
that it rather cooled then scorched them: when David, 1. Sam. 23.26. was
compassed on every side by Saul and his company that he had no way to escape,
then God sent a messenger to the King to tell him of a power coming against
himself, whereby they left persuing him: when the Isralites had the red Sea
before them, the mountains on each side them, and the Egyptians behind them,
Exodus 14.21. then did the Lord by a means, to man impossible, provide for
their safety. The use whereof is to our exceeding comfort, that if we be
closely imprisoned the Angel can unloose us, when all do forsake us then will
the Lord gather us up, Psalm. 27.10. If we be ready with Peter to sink into
the sea, if we cry but Lord save us, we shall be safe: if we be as dead as the
dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.4. the Lord can and will put life into us: the slavery that
the Pharaohs of the world can put us to, nor the bondage they can hold us in,
is nothing to the Lord, with whom nothing is impossible; which if we could but
once believe we would be lifted up in what misery soever; for the Lord (...) ^s
from ^ell it self: so as we are the cause of our ^^ne miseries, and of our
discomforts in our miseries, because we are so incredulous; therefore let us
pray to the Lord to increase our faith that we may never distrust in his
power: for that he works not till it be impossible, he is moved thereto by
our pride, lest if he should do it by means, we might attribute it to the
second causes, and not to his providence, and so rob him of his glory: and on
the other side, if we have no means, then we distrust his providence, and so
despair as men without God in the world, whereas our affiance in him should
drive out all trembling distrust whatsoever, for he that has thus provided
for our souls when they were mouldring away in our sins, how can we fear,
but our bodies, which with the soul make the whole man, shall be as dear and
precious to him also?

For the second, which is the person sent, it is the son of God, wherein our
unworthiness appears the more, that unless Christ had been sent, we had
not been saved; and this will the more appear by considering what we are
without Christ, even heirs of condemnation, subject to everlasting curse: and
if we would have a description of our selves without Christ; before we were
borne we deserved that the mid-wiues should tear us and rend us out of our
mothers womb, and cast us not into water, as Pharaohs mid-wiues should have
done to the Israelites, Exodus 1.17. but into the fire which might in some sort
prefigure the heat in hell; and that the first swathing-band should have been
the chains of darkness to bind us fast to the devil; and that the first fire
to warm us at should have been that that burns by the breath of the Lord
and that the first milk to cherish us should have been poison to choke us;
and that the first garment to cloth us with, should have been the wrath and
vengance of God; for we are so deformed in our conception as the Lord cannot
discern that ever any part of our image came from heaven, so polluted in our
lives, as if the Devil were let loose among us, yea for our sakes all the
creatures both in heaven and earth are accursed (except the Angels elect; and
the devil who was accursed from the beginning) and that ceremonial leprosy
in the law, Leuit. 15. prefigureth, and (...) moral uncleanness and leprosy
of our souls; for in the law the chair he sat on, the bed he lay on, the
basen he washed in was unclean, the meat he eat, yea the company he kept was so
also: now in regard hereof God sent his son to make that possible, which was
in us impossible, to make his worth answer our unworthiness, that since his
eye could not endure the sight of our uncleanness, it might delight in the
beholding of his holiness; and that the hand that could not be stayed from
being avenged on us, might through the obedience of his son be tied and fast
bound from striking us; and that the violes of vengeance which were opened to
be powered forth on us, might through the pleasure he took in his son be
stopped and diuerted from us. Secondly, it was necessary Christ should be sent,
for our sins being against the majesty of an infinite God, deserve justice of
the same nature, which justice must have either infinite satisfaction, or
infinite punishment; therefore God being both infinitely just, and infinitely
merciful, there must be presented to him one of the same nature, who by being
infinite, may reconcile both these; if we should present our selves, besides
that we are but finit, we must needs taste of justice, for what have we but
figge-leaues to cover our shame? If we could offer the Angels for our
attonemet, it were too low a price, for they are in themselves finite, being at
the first created, and for this their creation they stand indebted to the Lord;
and the satisfaction they can give is but their obedience, which is their duty;
therefore the price of reconciliation must be the Son of God, who is
infinite as well as God himself, equal with him in majesty, in power, and in
purity, and he has infinitely satisfied his infinite justice, and joined him
in infinite mercy to us, that as David says, Psalm. 32.10. we are now compassed
about with mercy, and we know whatsoever compasses a man, there is nothing can
come unto him, but it must first come through that does so compass him; so as
we being through Christ compassed about with the Lords mercy there can no
sorrows come near us, but either mercy will keep them out, or if they come
in, they must come through mercy, and proceed from mercy, and not from justice
nor displeasure.

(...) ^^^rd, in what manner he was sent: In the similitude of ^^^^full flesh.
Out of which learn, that God could not be satisfied for sinful flesh but by
flesh; not by the similitude of flesh, but of sinful flesh: wherein we are
to believe, that Christ is the natural son of God, and the son of David,
but not natural, for he was not begotten of man, his seed being unclean, but
he was conceived of the holy ghost, and so became man like unto us, sin
excepted; therefore it is here said, in the similitude of sinful flesh, not
in sinful flesh; and in this similitude he was both in the sight of men, and
of God: in the sight of men, for all the while he was on earth, he was seen to
be subject to the miseries of sinful flesh, both in his life and death; to
hunger, for he was often so; to poverty, for he had not whereon to lay his head;
to persecution, for he fled and withdrew himself from much violence intended
against him; to grief, for he wept and sighed for the death of Lazarus, and
the destruction of Jerusalem; to slanders, for they vpbraided him that he
wrought by the power of the devil; to temptations, for he was carried by the
Spirit into the desert for that purpose; to accusation by false witnesses to
color the sentence of death against him; to scourgings, to scoffings, to
reuilings, to the cross, to death it self; all which was seen to men, by
some that grieved at it, by most that iested and rejoiced at it. He was also
seen in this similitude by God himself, for though he was delivered and
tossed as it were from pillar to post, from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to
Pilate, from Pilate to the Soldiers, from the Soldiers to the City, from the
city to the Judgment seat, from thence to the inferior officers to be beaten
with reeds, and from thence to the gibbet; and though all cried by the
persuasion of the high priests, Crucify him, doubling it in the air with a
most damnable echo; yet was all this done as Peter says, Act. 2.23. by the
determinate counsel of God, the heavens having decreed that the earth should
open as it were to swallow him, because he represented our persons more lively
then Jacob did the person of Efau, Genesis 27.21. so as for the time he was
heavily crushed with the weight of Gods indignation, which appeared by the
conflict he had with the wrath of God, sweating drops of blood, and by the
baseness and deiection he felt in himself, crying out that he was forsaken,
an (...) does prove he was in the similitude of sinful flesh in the sight of
his father, and that it was necessary it should be so, being man to satisfy
for man, and God to get the conquest of death, hell and condemnation.

For the fourth, which is the purpose he was sent for: It was to abolish sin,
and to condemn sin in the flesh, speaking metaphorically or in a borrowed
speech; meaning hereby that there was great pleading in heaven before the seat
of God between Christ and the devil, the seed of the woman and the serpent,
the devil challenging of us to be his: first because in our first parents we
gave more faith and credit to him then to God; for when God had wrapped up
condemnation in the forbidden fruit, we thought it to be the hidden treasure of
divine knowledge; when he had sweetened his inhibition of this one tree, with
the free use and liberty of all the rest, as if we should starve for meat, our
appetite must be enflamed to this above the rest; and when he had enjoined a
law upon our fingers, as not to touch it, then do we through the strength of
suggestion prefix our eyes on no other mark then to gaze on it, thereby to
ensnare our hands to snatch at it: Secondly, whereas Adam had his birth and
creation in innocence, which was but a particular allegation for him, yet we
that are his posterity have our beginning from corruption, as if in our
generation we vowed a course of uncleanness, and do perform this vow by
plunging the whole man into the lake as it were of impiety, and therefore in
our lives resembling his likeness by walking in the works of darkness he
impudently would have faced out the matter as if heaven had been but the hall
of justice, fit for the majesty of God to sit there, and not for us to abide
there longer then while sentence is in giving: But when Christ against this had
truly alleged the eternity of his generation in respect of his Godhead, the
cleanness of his conception in respect of his manhood, how in this person of
ours he was ever sanctified, in this flesh of ours had vanquished the fierce
temptations of the devil; and how we in our own persons by the water of the
holy ghost are daily washed; when by this hard pleading of Christ on our side,
we were by the sentence of God vnshakled, as prisoners unjustly detained, and
had our absolution written in our foreheads that the damned might see it to
their discomfort; then the son of God having by this his travel o^ened the
insearchable riches of his fathers mercy toward us, he condemned sin in this
flesh, and purged as it were every vein of the hidden filthiness lay in it,
and made us members of his body. So as from hence learn to measure the benefit
thou have by Christ, that he is no further sent to thee then he has destroyed
sin in thee; for if thou set up a seat for profaneness in thy heart,
sowing thy fruit to the flesh and living to thy self, then, as 2. Cor. 5.15.
Christ died not for thee, and he was sent to die that by his death thou
might live to him; beware therefore thou do not examine thy self too
slightly in this matter, for it was easier for the Lord to create a new heaven
and a new earth, then to raise thee from the dead, and to abolish sin in
thee, which kept thee under the dominion of death, he having no resistance in
the one, and in the other having the rebellion of thy nature to hinder him; so
as thou must not measure the death of sin in thee by the avoiding of gross
sins, which the sun hates to shine upon, but even by thy practice and
delight in smaller sins, for if these do keep their course in running
privately through thy life, as the blood does in runnig secretly through thy
veins, it keeps out the spirit which should raise thee from the old Adam to
the new, from rebellion to obedience, from darkness to light, from hell to
heaven. Strive therefore as in thy ignorance to please the flesh, so by thy
knowledge to content the spirit, that as pride pleased the flesh, so
humbleness of heart may please the spirit, and that for the assurance of
Christ to be thine, thou may do every thing contrary to that thou did
before, after the example of Domitian the Emperor, who was answered if he
would govern uprightly, he must do contrary to that the governors had done
before who ruled with cruelty and tyranny.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 4.


THis verse has reference to that which went before, amplifying the reason why
God sent his son in the similitude of sinful flesh; that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us; and stands on two parts:
First, by whom: Secondly, for whom this righteousness was fulfilled.

From hence observe that there be two kinds of righteousness: first, a
righteousness whereby God does justify: secondly, a righteousness whereby
man would justify himself: The first is so called in two respects: First,
because it proceeds from God: Secondly, because it is in God, and not in us;
and this appears by opposition of the contrary, 2. Cor. 5.21. Christ was made
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; where
that sin, and this righteousness are opposed, that as there dwelt no
uncleanness in his flesh, but our corruption was imputed unto him because he
appeared in our likeness, so is there no righteousness in us, but that of
Christ is imputed unto us, we being made one flesh and one spirit with him.
Therefore erroneous is that of the Papists, that say, this justifying
righteousness is not absolutely of God, but partly of nature and the faculty
of free will, and partly of grace concurring with free will. Again, the
second, they deny that it is only in God, for Gods righteousness, say they,
is that wherewith he indueth them that shall be saved at the moment of their
regeneration, but after is abiding in them, called (his) because at first he
does justify the wicked, but after it is man's, put and infused into him as a
quality by God, which is mere contrary to this place that we must seek to be
righteous in Christ only, because he only has fulfilled the righteousness
of the law; and this was the end why Christ was sent, namely to supply our
wants, and was performed by him only by the spirit of life which was in
himself: for by the spirit of life of Christ which is in us, it cannot be: For
first, unless we be able to do it as exactly as Adam in his integrity
before concupiscence entered into his heart, we cannot do it as we should;
and this none can do but Christ; therefore in our own persons we are damned:
Secondly if we could attain to the perfection of Adam, yet is out case in our
selves desperare, because it suffices not that we now fulfill it, but we must
make up that breach, and cure up that wound was made at first by the sin of
Adam, else is the law in the strictness of it unsatisfied; and this no flesh
can do, but the flesh of the son of God; howbeit he by the spirit of
sanctification has made us a holy people set at liberty in him, and as highly
in Gods favor as ever Adam was: For first he has absolutely performed it:
Secondly, he has infinitely satisfied for our breach of it: And thirdly he
has mercifully washed away the filth of our sins by the water come forth of
his side, which is his spirit.

We must therefore beware our judgments be not corrupted with this error of
the Papists, to think we are justified partly by works, and partly by grace;
for we are saded by grace only, and without works, for who can tell when he
has wrought well that he deserves salvation? nay look Mark. 10.17. and we
shall see one through the hypocrifie of his heart brag he had from his youth
observed the whole law, and yet asked what he should do more to obtain
eternal life; so as no man can tell when he has done enough: besides that,
when all is done to the uttermost, even then are we but unprofitable servants;
for the most righteous in his works does either sin in the matter, or in the
measure and manner, or in the end, or in all three, and therefore he that
labors to build a tower with his works to clime to heaven, builds Babel
to his own confusion. And if thy salvation should be thus divided between the
works of thy hands, and the works of Christ's flesh, then make thou Christ
but in part merciful, and in part a Savior, who is altogether merciful, and
a perfect savior, there being no name under heaven but his by which we can be
saved, as the scripture speaks, he being the escape goat mentioned Leuit 16.
that carried our sins into the wilderness, for which otherwise we had been
slain, if the wrath of God by that means had not been stayed; for there is
not so much as a weak disposition in us to do good which may be made
sufficient by grace as the Papists would persuade us, but our natural will is
not only weak to do good, but willing to commit all kind of sin, needing
not only furtherance but alteration and change, not in substance, but in
qualities and corruption; for as Jeremy says cap. 10.23. The way of man is not
in himself, neither is it in man to walk and to direct his steps; and Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart (says the Lord) will I give you etc. the old heart in a man
being no more able to receive goodness then a stone is to receive softnes. Nay
we say first that God offers not grace generally to all men, but to such
only as shall be saved: and whereas they leave this grace in a suspension, in
saying it lies in our wills to receive it or not; we say, naturally we have
no such free will to choose good or evil. True it is our will has this
freedom, of two sins to choose the less, as some choose to be covetous, some
to be idolaters, some to be usurers, some to be flatterers, some to be
Atheists: but to have the choice of good or evil is not in our wills, for that
liberty was only in man's integrity, and taken from us when Euah took of the
fruit of the forbidden tree: so that all the power of all the creatures of
heaven and earth is not able to cause the will to like of that which is good,
nor keep it from that sin whereto it resolutly inclines. But now if we regard
the will as it is changed, and partly renewed to the will of Christ, yet for
all that it has not any such freedom as to choose betwixt good and evil; for
this belongs not to the nature of the will, otherwise the Angels in heaven
should hang in the same suspense with us, whereas we know they do absolutely
the will of God in heaven, as we pray we may on earth; and so with as much of
our wills as is renewed we do the will of God willing lie without any such free
election; and this is wholly wrought by God, as Phil. 2.13. It is he that
works both the will and the deed, and Ioh. 6.37. All that the father gives
me shall come unto me: he does not say, shall come if they will: and Ezekiel.
36.26. the Lord does not say, this will I do if ye will, but speaks
absolutely and powerfully, A new heart will I give you, and I will take away the
stony heart: For howsoever it is meet Adam should have this free election being
made a perfect resemblance of the image of God, yet is it not meet for us in
this second creation, lest hereby we should make the death of Christ of no
effect, neither his grace nor spirit; for if we had it, then should we fall
from Christ, because of that flesh and infirmity that is in us; and therefore as
the Lord does begin with us by his spirit to convert us, without any thing in
us to further it, but altogether to withstand it, so does he proceed with us by
his spirit, and end with us by his spirit, that he may be all in all in our
weldoing and in the work of our salvation. And yet notwithstanding this, we
have need of exhortations, threatenings, prayer, and such like, to strengthen
and stir up our dull and senseless wills; for the inward working of the
spirit, which frames our wills to will good, does not abolish the isntrumental
causes, but we have need of these means: first, because they are sanctified of
the Lord and ordained to make us lay hold on the spirit: secondly, because
without these the spirit and graces of God would soon perish; which counsel
is given, Heb. 3.13. to exhort one another daily lest we be hardened through
the deceit of sin: for though God could do this only by his spirit, yet he
will have these means used, that we be neither high minded nor idle, for since
we cannot do good, why should we be proud, and since we so hardly keep good
we must not be idle, but, as Phil. 2.12.13. end and work forth our salvation
with trembling; for as one holds a great mass of lead or other unremovable
weight, not to remove it, for he knows he cannot, but only to try his
strength, so though we cannot, nor need not perform the law, (because Christ
has done it) yet must we make it the rule of our obedience and of a sanctified
life, that herein we may resemble Christ who alone has sanctified us.

We are then to consider how Christ has fulfilled the righteousness of this
Law; and that he has done two ways, partly by abrogating it, and partly by
establishing it; he has abrogated the law in two things. First in the power of
separation between man and man, which was the law of ceremonies, so as what was
enmity between Jew and Gentile, that has Christ abolished, and therefore as
it is said, Ephesians. 2.14. Christ is our peace which made of both one, and has
broken the stop of the partition wall through his flesh in abrogating the
hatred, that is, the law of commandments, which stands in ordinances, for to
make of two one new man in himself: Secondly, in the power of malediction
between God and man, whereupon it is said, Gal. 5.23. There is no law against
us, that is, the curse of the law for sin is not due to us, because Christ
has taken it away, and therefore it is said, 1. Tim. 1.9. The law is not given
unto a righteous man, that is, against a righteous man there is no law, the
curse of the law belonging only to the reprobate, and not to the elect;
howbeit we must not think we are so delivered from the condemnation of it as
that we are freed from the obedience of it; Christ therefore has likewise
established the law, and this two ways: First, in the doctrine: Secondly, in
the obedience to the doctrine. For the first, that not any thing of the
doctrine is abrogated but perfectly taught by Christ, as appears, Mat. 5.22
2^. That the least evil thought is damnation, That anger in heart is flat
murder. That he that lusts but in heart after a woman commits adultery: and
Saint Paul says Romans 7.7. he knew not what lust was, till he knew the
righteousness of Christ. Again, as was touched before, Christ came but for
these two ends: first, to make peace between man and man: secondly, between
God and man; now the moral law made no enimity between Jew and Gentile, but
the ceremonial law, for that was the wall parted us and them, and that only
is broken down by the coming of Christ; and for the other, the curse of the
law made all the war between God and us, and the rigor of it Christ has
satisfied; but the doctrine of the law made none; for we yet in the precise
keeping of it challenge life, Christ having fulfilled it in us and for us, so
as Christ gives us no new righteousness but that we our selves could not
perform, and yet we claim it as done in our person by the righteousness of
the law, that Christ in our flesh performed: for the second, he does also
establish it in the obedience to the law, and this two ways* Fi^^t, b^^ ^he
person of Christ, for by his inherent holiness was fulfilled all the law,
which is imputed to us: Secondly, as by righteousness inherent in him, so by
his spirit of sanctification dwelling in us, having the whole man in part
changed, that we are able to do what God will, and in judgment to allow, in
affection to embrace, and in action to execute what he commands; so as if we
consider our filthiness we have the blood of Christ to bathe in; if our
nakedness, we have the robes of his righteousness; if our beggary, we have
his riches filled with all graces; yet must we always join blood and water,
faith and works, in the person justified, for they are notes of our religion,
signs of our conversion, seals of our election, fruits of our justification,
testimonies of a good conscience, in their end they are referred to the Lords
glory, they are causes to stir up others to the serving of the same God, and
they are of the Lord accepted and recompensed in the mercy of the rewarder, and
not at the merit of the worker, for he can accept of none by desert but that
which is according to the precise covenant of the law; but water is to be stood
upon as a sign that blood has gone before, and the writing of his law in our
hearts by sanctification of life is a proof that our sins are purged in the
blod of Christ, and pardoned through the mercy of God. And in respect of these
several operations and works of Christ in aboli^^^^ the law in the curse, and
establishing the law in the obedien^^ (...) it, we that are elect are said to
be dead to the law, Romans 7.4. and also living to the law; we are dead to the
law in three respects: First to the condemnation of it, because being justified
by Christ we cannot be condemned by the law, for the wrath of God is taken away
through the imputation of his righteousness: Secondly, to the constraint of
the law, for it does not constrain us which are Gods elect, as it does the
reprobate, because Christ by the work of his spirit does bend our wills to the
obedience of the law in some measure, and stir up our affections to a delight
in it: Thirdly, we are dead to the power of provocation which was in the law to
urge us to sin, because our sins being taken away in the passion of Christ, the
law bringing us as it were upon the scaffold and showing us hell gates, and
heaven a far off, not able of our selves to make passage to it, teaches us
to avoid all sinful occasions whereby our feet might be found slipping, and
to lay the better hold upon the bridge the Lord Jesus, by whom the conscience
is so pacified, as we are ever directed in the right way; so as we are dead to
it in the curse of it, and alive to it, as it is the rule of our direction; we
are dead to it in the bondage of it, and alive to it in the obedience of it,
Gods spirit directing our hearts to do that willingly which the law requires.
Since then there is this necessity laid upon us, to be dead unto sin, for
which sin the curse of the law is due, and to be living to newness of life,
though we see this rich benefit of having the righteosnesse of the law
fulfilled, to be performed by Christ only, and that for us, we must beware we
fall not either into profane security, or else into presumptuous hypocrisy;
the one thinking the favor of God not greatly requisite, the other that it is
easily obtained; the one running on still to sin, the other covering their
nakedness with fig-leaues, which are not broad enough to cover all, nor thick
enough to hide them from his eyes, that pierces into the deepest darkness;
for these may have a knowledge of the law and subscribe unto it, a glimmering
sight of Christ in the Gospel and rejoice at it, and yet not have sin
condemned in their flesh, but their flesh damned for their sin, whereas if we
straightly try our selves by the law, and see our sins as sores runnig full of
corruption, and damnation to be awaiting upon the least sin, then is the
commandment come unto us, and then sin being revived we know to what
Physician to go, and what eye salve to crave, for we cannot look into the
bottom of our hearts, unless we look into the bottom of the law, and if we
fail in this we shall know no sins, and so consequently no Savior for
sins: for God being a fearful Judge, and a consuming fire, we cannot stand
before him without peace of conscience; nor have this peace without grace from
Christ; nor partake of this grace without acknowledgment of misery; nor come to
this acknowledgment without a through sight of our sins; nor attain to this
sight without a sight of damnation due for them; nor see this damnation without
a trial of our selves by the commandment; so as Christ has not by his virtue
abated, but advanced the power and excellency of the law in the right use of
it, for which it was ordained, namely, to set our hearts on God, and our ways
in the trade of his commandments; and therefore let us by all means shun two
extremities: First, a restless desire to perform the law so precisely as to
seek life in it, which is harder for us to do then to remove mountains, or
to clime up to heaven to see the seat of God: Secondly, rechlesse impiety to
live profanely because we cannot live so precisely as we ought, for the law is
the goal we must time at, and the perfection we must strive to, and though in
our best works we are unprofitable, yet must we work, lest we be abominable.

Now for the second part, namely for whom Christ took this pains to establish
and fulfill the righteousness of the law; it was for such as walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, which teaches us to know a child of God from
a reprobate, the life of the one being like the darkness of Egypt, gross and
palpable, the other like the Sunshine, clear and comfortable. And this life
in the elect may be discerned by two marks: First, by a spiritual, invisible,
internal testimony: secondly, by a real, external, and visible. The first is
discovered two ways; first by the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry in
confidence to the Lord as to a father; secondly, by the spirit of
sanctification, whereby we live in obedience and subjection as to a Lord. The
outward evidence of a Christian is likewise known two ways: first, by an
outward profession: secondly, by walking in that profession. Now lest we be
deceived in the inward signs; first, through pride in our selves, and the
policy of satan, to make us think we have them when we want them, as Matthew.
7.23. Many by doing great things in the name of Christ, will entitle themselves
to heaven which is a purchase for the elect only, but he will profess he never
knew them: secondly, through the secrecy of them, they being known only to
God, as 1. Cor. 2.10. The spirit searches all things, and no man knows the
heart but he that made it; therefore an invisible faith must be discerned by
visible fruits, and who can tell that the powers of his soul be reformed, if
it break not forth into his life, for which cause the badge of a renewed
Christian is; first, a proclamation as it were, whose he is and under whom he
serves: secondly, a blameless course in conversation: the first of these is
communicable to hypocrites, who will seem to carry a weapon for the Lord, but
with weak hands, and false hearts, making a flourish as if he would defy the
devil, yet secretly and covertly feeding on him, and defending him in his
desires; and therefore he that is truly elect must be measured by his life,
and we must not look into the spirit which is in him, but into the fruits of
the spirit which hang about him; not to his invisible faith, but to his visible
works of faith; not to his outward profession, but to his walking according to
his profession, as Gal. 5.25. If we live in the spirit, we must also walk in
the spirit: so as men are not to be judged by their tongues, but by their
steps; and since we must judge them this way, if we see one live inordinately,
swear outragiously, blaspheme mightily, oppress cruelly, haunt wicked
company, and such like, we may well say he is wicked: and if he reply, judge
not, thou may answer; thou may safely judge the root by the tree, and
the tree by the fruit, a fountain by the streams, and the streams by their
cleerenesse, a sick man by his weakness, and the danger of his weakness by
the nature of the disease, and what is in the heart by that comes out of the
heart, Mat. 15.19. for how could such a sea of sins swell over their banks
if thou were stable minded? those hauty looks could never so transform thy
countenance, if pride did not possess thee; nor thy usury and oppression, so
rage and some out in thy purchasing and possessions if covetousness did not
delight thee; nor profaneness and cursed speaking so please thine ears, if
ignorance and contempt of God did not so seal up thy conscience as thou can
not see thine own deformity. Hobeit in this thy judgment of others, observe
3. rules: First, judge thy self first, lest while thou reprouest others, thy
self may be condemned: Secondly, give thou no final judgment, for that
pertains to God alone, before whose eyes all things are open: Thirdly, judge
not according to the inner man, but by the outward, that every man may see as
much as thy self, though they want that heavenly wisdom to mislike, for what
sow did ever find fault with other for wallowing in the mire: secondly,
consider the phrase or metaphor used by the Apostle, borrowed from travelers
or those that undertake dangerous iournies; for as one is subject to fall if he
walk in slippery places, or to be hindered in his walk if blocks do lie in
his way; so fares it with the child of God, he walks through slippery
places, and gets many falls, but rises immediately because he meets with Christ
in the way, he trauaileth over mountains as it were in the wilderness, and is
much wearied, but refreshed by Christ, who is unto him the water of life; yea
he has many stones laid on purpose to stumble at, but through the strength of
Christ he creepes over them and comes at length to his iournies end, which is
his rest in heaven. Thirdly, mark the difference between the way of the
elect, and of the reprobate, the first, as Mat. 7.14. is strait and narrow, the
other broad and wide; now though the labor be greater to crowd into the narrow
way, yet herein is the benefit greater also, that being narrow when thou art
once in thou can not lose it; and being strait, thou may go on as by a
line and cannot miss it, yea if thou fall, as needs thou must through
frailety, being in the way that God prescribes thee, thou have, Psalm. 91.11.
the Angels to protect thee, so far as thy fall shall not hurt thee; whereas
now the wicked that take such elbow room in their walks, they may and do
easily wander, and being once out of the way, the further they go, the further
they are off the end they desire, nay they have such windings and turnings in
the lusts of the flesh wherein they live, as it carries them at length among
the wolves of their souls, that will devour them; and though as Job speaks,
cap. 15.20. The wicked man is continually as one that trauelleth of child,
being ever conceived with some mischief, as Esa. 59.4. yet God so
disappointeth them as it were of their midwiues as they bring forth but a lie,
as David says Psalm. 7.14. And therefore it fares with the children of God, and
the wicked, as with two setting forth together, the one going strait toward the
place appointed, the other turning backward from it, the first will come to
his iournies end at the time appointed, the other never; even so will God in
his due time bring us whom he finds watchful and vigilant, to that place
that Christ has prepared for us in his house, and shut the doors upon them
that wandered all their life as in the dark, that since with darkness they
were delighted, in darkness they shall be tormented. Fourthly, observe the
manner of the hypocrites walk. For as the Hare when she is started by the
hounds, by reason of that natural instinct and sagacity God has given her,
runs toward the market way, not for any desire she has to the way it self,
but that the hounds might lose her tract by the continual passage of the
people; even so do the hypocrites walk in the tract of Gods children, as,
come to sermons, join in prayer, reprove swearing, lispe out something for
reformation, and such like; but why do they this? only because we should not
trace them like foxes into their form whither their carriage for the flesh is
gone before, so as they are but clokes to cover their filth withal, that
looking into their profession they will deceive us; but if we cast our eye but
upon their feet, we shall find their steps tend to death. And whereas policy
has divided the state into three branches, the King, the Clergy, and the
Laiety, the scripture affords us examples of hypocrisy in every one of
these: Herod for a King, Mark. 6.20. will grace the doctrine of John Baptist so
far as he will hear him gladly, and favor his person so much, as he will
yield to many things at his request; but yet he had a swing in the flesh he
could not be turned from, for you might have traced him home to his brother
Philips house and have seen a most filthy nest he had there made for his walk
in the flesh. Look upon Judas a Disciple, a follower and preacher of Christ,
he pretends a work of mercy and a religious care of the poor, Ioh. 12.5.
there is too much ointment wasted on Christ, that might better have been spent
and bestowed in money upon the poor; here are good words and fair shows, but
the Lord vneaseth his hypocrisy and discovers his privy way to be but for
the filling of the purse which he c^^ied, that he might spend it on his lusts,
for faith the text, verse. 6. He was a thief. Lastly steps in Ananias and
Sapphira, the foundation of a family, being man and wife, they, Act. 5.1.2.
will be such hot followers of the Apostles as none shall go beyond them for
the relief of persecuted Christians, they will sell a possession and pretend to
bring the whole price of it and lay it at the Apostles feet; but mark, they
have a secret chest they thought no man should see, one corner of covetousness
in their heart must be filled, by keeping part of the money to themselves: which
dissembling of theirs was suddenly and severely avenged, that we may beware by
their destruction. After this sort does the Lord in all ages discover the
skirts of hypocrites, that if they be but watched over in a holy wisdom they
have ever some backedore which we shall at length epsy, whereat the lusts of
the flesh do enter, which heapeth but heavier desolation at the last, because
they thought to have mocked God, who in truth will not be mocked. Now some will
say, if they walk in the right way at any time it suffices, alleging for
their example the thief upon the Cross, Luke 23.40.41. who made but a short
confession, for that long happiness he has in heaven, and therefore think thy
need not take so long a journey as Abraham and the rest of the saints of God
have done. But how can he that sets forth in the evening finish the same
journey he does that went out in the morning? It is true, God calls at all
hours, yet must we not look for such miracles at the moment of death as the
conversion of the thief was, for if we defer the time we may fail of his
promotion, there being but one particular flower of that kind in the whole
garden of God; besides he had no such means of faith offered him till he was
upon the gallows, whereas we have had and do still enjoy great store, both for
our present use and for to lay up against a dearth hereafter: and again, by
this our deferring and shufling off the time of salvation we sin three ways:
against God, against the saints of God, and against our own souls; against
God, because we dally with him and abuse his patience, putting that day far off
which may come at the least to thee in an instant, if the Lord withdraw thy
breath but a while from thee: against the Saints of God, because thou depriuest
them of that company, comfort, and profit thou might have each of other, for
herein stands the communion of Saints in a fellow-feeling one of another
miseries, comforting them in their griefs, strengthening them in their
infirmities, supplying them in their wantes, and encouraging them in the faith
and power of grace which they have received: lastly, against themselves in thus
hazarding their souls; for it is not enough to say, Lord have mercy on thee
when thou art on thy death bed, when rather sense of thy pain then feeling of
thy sin does drive thee to that extremity, but thou must seek for mercy
before thou art thrust into those straites, else may thy conscience then fly
in thy face, and the remembrance of thy former negligence stop thy mouth as a
just revenge for thy sin of delay, which was before committed. Again, here
all lithernesse and laziness is removed from them that are ready to find
excuse for not walking so cheerfully, boldly, and constantly, in the right way
as they should; for assure thy self there is no cross can fall upon thee of
that force as to cross the working of Gods spirit in thee, if thou thy self
be not a means to quench it, for if thou will hide thy talent, it is true it
can turn thee to no advantage, and if thou do not stir up the graces in
thee and varnish them as it were with a continual use of them, no marvel
though they decay and thou too, for the kingdom of heaven is taken only by
the violent that strive and sweat, and labor even as he that is famished does
for meat, so that if thou entertain the spirit with diligence in prayer, in
hearing, in meditation and such like holy duties it will awake thee from thy
sleep, and remove all impediments that may either turn back thine eyes from
beholding thine anointed Christ Jesus, or with draw thy heart from buying that
hidden treasure that is sealed up for thee in the book of the promises of God.

Lastly observe the manner of the Apostles speech: beginning with the negative:
We must not walk after the flesh, as a matter of greatest weight, before he
comes to the affirmative, to walk after the spirit; for where there is the
absence of good, there must needs be evil; but where there is the absence of
evil, it follows not that there is good: therefore we must not only not do
evil, but we must do good, as David says, Cease from evil, and do good; so
as the flesh must first be shaken off, before we can shape our actions or
affections after the spirit: and to this purpose Esaias says, cap. 1.16.17.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well: and Paul Romans 13.12. Cast away the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light: and Ephe. 4.22.23. Cast
off the old man which is corrupt, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind:
and, as Tit. 2.12. we must not only deny ungodliness, but we must live
religiously: and 1. Pet. 4.1. There must be in us a sign not only of Christ's
suffering, but also of his resurrection, to live not after the lusts of men,
but after the will of God: and as Romans 7.4. We must not only be divorced
from our first husband the flesh, but we must be married to our second husband,
which is the spirit: so as for thesound cure of our corruption, the rotten
flesh must first be pared away that the right plaster may be applied, and
when thou art healed thou must sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee; but as having the sore running on thee, the Lord dispensed with thy
untowardness for that time; so now having the wound stopped, and thine eyes
opened, by a second laying of Christ's hands upon thee, thou must perform such
actions of life only as are derived from the spirit of God working in thee.
The usurer therefore must not only leave his usury, but he must lend freely;
the oppressor must not only cease from grinding the faces of the poor, but
he must relieve them liberally; the proud man must not only forget to wrinkle
his face by looking austerely, but with meekness and humility he must embrace
his brethren; the profane man must not only forsake his jesting and scoffing
at religion, but he must set himself in the same rank to be railed at for
the name of Christ, knowing that by this means, as 1. Pet. 4.14. The spirit on
his part is glorified. And this may serve to stop their mouths, that think
him an honest man that does no harm, whereas the not doing hurt is but as a
tingling and pricking in the flesh after a great benumnednesse, but it must be
the action of good that must show the life of Christ to be in thee; else
may thou as well think it a causeless curse upon the fig tree, that
having but leaves wherewith she did no harm, was yet dried up because she bare
no fruit.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 5.6.




HEnce the Apostle proceeds to prove who those be who are ingrafted into
Christ, and who are not but continue in the wrath of God, and this he does by
following the opposition first made between the flesh and the spirit, showing
in these verses what the several natures and dispositions of them both are:
And secondly what are their several ends; they that are after the flesh think
nothing sauoury but what comes from the flesh, but their fruit and end is
death, that is, damnation: but they that are guided by the spirit taste nothing
but what is spiritual, and the fruit and end of them tends to a double
comfort for their souls, first, bringing peace of conscience, which is a
continual feast in this life; secondly, eternal felicity in the life to come;
so as in sum his meaning is to show, that as many as are not in Christ shall
be damned, and as many as build upon Christ shall be saved.

Then we must first know, what is meant by flesh, and what is meant by spirit:
for the first, what is meant by flesh Christ tells us, John 3.5. in his answer
to Nicodemus, saying, That except a man be borne again of water and of the
spirit, he cannot see heaven; meaning thereby, that before a man be regenerate
he is nothing but flesh, soul and body and all, for that is borne of flesh is
flesh, and a clean thing cannot be drawn out of corruption: so Paul 1. Cor.
15.50. says, that flesh and blood cannot inherit heaven, not meaning thereby
that flesh wherein we are enclosed, for the very substance of it shall see God,
but the old man the corruption of nature which is our mother wit and will;
howbeit what this flesh is, is more amply set down, Genesis 6.5. where it is said
in the original, that all the very mould of the devising thoughts of a man's
heart are, not inclined to evil, but simply evil; and not evil, but only
evil; and not only evil, but evil in all things; and not only evil in all
things, but evil in all things every day: and Saint Paul, Romans 3.10. makes a
full description of a fleshly man, showing what every one is by nature: There
is none righteous, no not one; the reason is, because there is none that
seeks God; and for not seeking him they are all become apostats; and by this
their apostasy are become unprofitable; and being thus of no value their
throat is an open sepulcher; and being thus enlarged like hell, they use them
either to deceit in that poison is under their lips, or else their mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, which are two contrary sins; their feet
are swift to shed blood, and destruction and calamity are in all their ways,
and the way of peace they have not known: and last of all, they have not the
fear of God before their eyes, which is the true cause of that cursed brood
and chain of sins that hang together. Now for the second, what is meant by
Spirit, and that is a divine, heavenly, invisible, and supernatural working of
the holy Ghost in the hearts of Gods children, in begetting them anew into the
glorious image of Christ, by changing into another quality and condition all
the powers of their souls and affections of the heart, which is done by faith
in the outward man, and by peace of conscience in the inner man, by reason
whereof the elect are said even in this prison of theirs to be spiritual.

From hence observe first, that the world is divided but into two kinds of
people, fleshly and spiritual, for there is no mean between them, and
howsoever the enemies of God are distracted into several and sundry factions;
some denying the power of godliness through porfanenesse, some dividing the
power of it through opinion of merit, some thinking there is no God at all, and
some imagining he sits idle in heaven without having any stern to guide and
direct the frame of the earth; yet do they all err alike in their hearts, and
being all out of the way they shall find the same reward of their worldly
wisdom and their end to be damnation: now these two sorts and conditions of
men are easily discerned, for by their fruits you shall know them, the one
savoring the flesh pots of Aegyt, the other the sweetness of the land of
Canaan; the one being taken up and possessed by the pleasures of the flesh, the
other striving and laboring in the works of the spirit; the one having sin
as it were always under his nose savoring nothing else, the other having the
spirit ever in his eye to divert his feet from the snares and pleasures of
concupiscence; for by this word (after) which is in the text, is signified in
the original tongue, to be guided and conducted and led by the flesh, which
shows our great infidelity in not believing what the holy Ghost sets down,
giving it here in precise commandment that we should not be directed by the
flesh, and binding this commandment in the breach of it with a peremptory
curse of damnation for being guided by it; and yet as if God could not make his
word good, or that we could wrestle our selves from his wrath, our taste, our
smell and all our senses are busied only in the works of the flesh as if we
would cast away our selves willingly, whereas even in natural reason we
should abhor it; for who would be conducted by such a one as cuts the throats
of al he guides? or who is he that traveling toward the desert will pick out
such a guide as should lead him to be devoured of wild beasts? or who that has
his journey by sea will make choice of such a Pilot as has cast away as many
as he conducted? or who would entertain a known thief and a waster to be the
steward of his house? or who would take such a husband to be the guide of her
youth as spends and wastes himself in licentiousness? or what Prince will
admit him to be his chief counselor that is a known traitor to his person?
or such a one to be captain over soldiers as is a known and proclaimed
rebel? There is none so simple nor so profane but will dislike and detest the
choice of any such guides and leaders; and yet he that takes his flesh to be
his captain, his arm and his guide (a known and irreconcilable enemy to the
soul) shall by the conduct of his own corruption not only lose his body but
his soul also; for if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the pit of
perdition. Therefore let the world love her own, and the flesh pamper it
self: let Cain build him a city, Genesis 4.17. to hide him from the presence of
the Lord: let Esau follow his hunting, Genesis 26.30. to satisfy his pleasure in
the death of venison: let Nimrod, Genesis 11.4. build him a tower to get him a
name upon the earth: let the rich man, Luke 12.17. heap up his fruits till his
barnes will hold no more: let Dives, Luke 16: 19.20. be costly in his
apparel, and delicate in his fare every day; yet observe thou but their ends
and thou will not join hands with them, for Cain was branded of the Lord as a
castaway, Nimrod confounded for his pride, Esau rejected for his profanenes,
the rich man snatched suddenly from his substance, and Dives thrown down to
hell where he lies panting and criing for a drop of water and cannot have it.

Again in that it is said, they savor the things of the flesh, observe, that
all that is in a natural and carnal man and comes from him, is but flesh,
that is, sin, yea and the most excellent parts that are in him, that is, his
wisdom, deserves death, and is but as a worm in the shell to consume him,
for he wanting the spirit, which is the life of the soul, as the foul is the
life of the body, his soul, his body, his mind, his will, and his
understanding are but members, as Paul calls them, Romans 7.5. that is, but
flesh and blood, and therefore the perturbations of sins do work inwardly
in the members of a natural man: wherein we must make a difference between
perturbations and affections, we having affections in us by nature, for when
we were in our integrity, we had the understanding and knowledge of God and of
his will, yea and we had affections to perform his will; but after the fall,
these affections were perverted, for where before they were fixed on God, now
they are settled on sin: but for perturbations, they arise and proceed from
the corrupted root of nature, it being a sin derived from original sin, so
that if a man die in the womb the Lord has enough to condemn him; but if he
lives after his birth, then upon this original sin there works the
perturbations of sins which heapeth greater condemnation upon his head. And
this is the condition of the unregenerate, that all they do is sin, it being
but the some and fruit of the sin that lies within: for if a natural man
will bring forth fruit, he must either do that which is commanded or
forbidden, or else that is neither commanded nor forbidden, as things
indifferent, to marry, to eat, to wash the hands, and such like; and even in
these he sins, for as to the clean all things are clean, so to him that
is polluted, all that comes from him is defiled; yea that which of it self is
no sin but a duty commanded, as prayer, alms, hearing the word, and such
like, proceeding from him is sin, because they rise not from a good root, the
heart being defiled, nor tend not to a good end, the glory of God not being
respected: so as we may truly say of them; they do the good they would not
willingly do, and they do not the evil thy would do, for what was all Paul's
moral righteousness, Phil. 3.6. wherein he was unblameable, but as the
excrement of a dog, because it came merely from a natural man, for they are
not done for any love to God or of his glory, nor for any care of their
brethren, but only for ostentation to reap praise and commendation of men,
that if a brother hap to receive comfort by it, it is beyond the intention of
the doer, and therefore all is fleshly and sinful. Nay though the reprobate
have their repugnancy and conflict in them both before the sin committed and
repentance for it after, yet does this nothing lessen nor extenuate the malice
of their hearts, nor make their sin less sinful, for though their be a
contradiction between the sins they commit, and the light of nature, and the
judgment of reason which they enjoy, yet is this but between the heart and
the conscience, the conscience checking, controlling, and pricking the heart
for the sin, wherein they do not one whit exceed or go beyond Medea the
heathen, that could say; she saw better things, but she could not follow them:
for as one sick of a loathsome disease, does languish and pine away, which
makes all his frinds weary of him, by means whereof he bewaileth his own
case, not for his sin, but for his disease, and not for the cause of his
misery, but for the misery it self; so the reprobate are said after they have
sinned, not for their sin, but because their conscience accuses them of
their sin, not for hatred to the sin, but for fear of punishment for the
sin, which appears by this, that having liberty and opportunity anew, they
fall a fresh to sinning and wallowing in the mire. Therefore be not thou high
minded if thou be a great Rabbin learned in the schoole-points of Divinity,
if thou can decide controversies, resolve doubts, discourse of difficult
matters, for all this may thou do and yet savor of the flesh and of death,
if thou konwest only the letter of the Law and Gospel, and do not know the
true use both of Law and Gospel; neither be thou puffed up, what ever thou
art, because thou resorts to sermons, read over the bible, art able to cite
many places in the scripture, for these may be the fruits of a dead man to know
the Gospel, and to be ignorant of the use of the Gospel, that is, how the
Gospel teaches thee to humble thy self in an astonishment of thy misery, to
mortify thy self in hatred of thy sinful flesh, to deny thy self in an
acknowledgement of thy corruption, and to lay fast hold upon Christ, who is the
light of thy salvation; for look in Ier. 8.8. the carnal and unbelieving
Jews could say, they were wise, and the law of the Lord was with them; but the
Prophet answers, that the law unto them was in vain, and the pen of the
scribes was in vain; and Esa. 29.11.12. it is said, that the vision was become
unto them as the words of a book that is ^^^led up, which none can read
because it is sealed; which place teaches us, that they which know the Law,
and which know it not, it is as a book shut up to them, though their
iniquities be sealed up in it, because they truly understand not the use of
it, their smell is so stopped with the savor of the flesh that they pervert the
use of every thing which God has ordained for their conversion.

Now if we would take but a little view and look into the world, we shall see
many thousands savor the things of the flesh both in things unlawful, and in
things lawful unlawfully used. The covetous man, Job. 20.13.14 hides
wickedness under his tongue, and keeps it close in his mouth; the adulterers
neigh after their neighbors wives, like horses; the usurer is always devising
how to deceive; the hypocrite comes to the house of God to make it a cloak
for his free passage to the house of an harlot; many will seem to live after
the rule of the second table, but not of the first, bragging if they have done
any good to their neighbor, but never considering how many others they have
injured, nor how they have provoked God by the breach of the first table, as
profaning his Sabbaths, blaspheming his name, and raising up other gods to
themselves in their hearts, preferring the second table before the first, not
weighing that the first is the ground and foundation of the second, and the
second to be but the fruits of the first, and yet if they outwardly observe the
second, it is but to a false end to satisfy their private and fleshly humor,
or to get open and public praise of fleshly men like themselves, so as if by
chance they profit men, yet are they abominable to God, because they aim at a
wrong mark, making all the veins and current of their actions to end and
run into the maine Sea of the flesh, they being such as of whom Christ
speaks, Luke 16.15. Ye justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts. And if diverse be drowned in the filth of the flesh that hear the word
of God, Ioh. 5.25. then how many are there among us worse then they that never
hear it, but think that which is in truth the only food to preserve them,
the only poison to destroy them? And if she be dead that sauoureth so much of
the flesh, as to live in pleasure, 1. Tim. 5.6. then how many are there in the
world as evil as she, that would never have the Sun to set upon their
delights, but would have their life without limitation, that they might follow
their sports? And if he be dead that falls asleep in his sins, Ephesians. 5.14. then
how many of this kind are with us, that never took but one nap since their
birth, making the end of one sin the beginning of another? And if they be
dead that walk according to the course of the world, Ephesians. 2.1.2. then (alas!)
how few are living among us, many great stars falling from heaven to the
earth daily, that is, many great professors being either ashamed or wearied of
their preciseness in religion, falling away daiely, renouncing that their
faith wherewith they were once comforted, and embracing the world like Demas,
who shook off Paul as if he had been as pestilent as the viper that Paul
himself shook off, Act. 28.5. And if he be dead that follows not his
calling faithfully, Mat. 8.22. then how many such are there among us that
either through idleness neglect, or through fraud and deceit pervert those
means that God has appointed for their increase? And if he be dead which
strengthens not himself in the things which remain in him, Revel. 3.1.2.
then how do we abound with such as want this zeal of supporting their faith,
suffering it daily to decrease, and smothering and pressing it down with the
sent and savor of fleshly ease and preferment? And if they be dead that have
not part in the first resurrection, Reave. 20.5. then how many of this brood
have we that have not yet received Christin true faith at all, nor are awaked
to any better life then they brought from their mothers womb, thinking too well
of themselves, and for want of knowing themselves, being not able to know
Christ aright, and wanting this knowledge of him, they are ignorant what
benefit they may receive by Christ, and being ignorant of this it is impossible
for them to partake of any benefits Christ brings, they finding no better
taste nor sweetness in them then there is savor in the whit of an egg, as
Job says, cap. 6.6* Therefore let wickedness come form the wicked, and let it
be a bird only of their hatching, let them fill themselves with the bitter
morsels of the flesh, which turn to gall in their stomachs, for God at length
shall draw it out of their bellies, Job. 20.15. and shall cause his wrath to
rain upon them: burier^^ that call upon the name of the Lord depart from
iniquity, and being borne of the spirit let us distaste every thing that is not
spiritual; for in this opposition of contraries, of the flesh and of the
spirit, we must cleave as close to the blood of Christ and the water of a holy
life, as the fleshly men do to the devil, and to the course of their
corruption.

This rule then which the Apostle here gives, to be guided and conducted by
the spirit, condemns and conuinceth all them that have such froth in their
words, and some out of their months, that men are too full of the spirit, and
too vehement in the spirit, taking upon them like Schoolmasters to reach the
holy Ghost how to speak: but since the spirit takes it up as a phrase fit for
him, let not us be ashamed to use it as a garment fit for us; for the world
has been full of scoffing from the beginning; and though it engendered in the
flesh of Abraham, yet came it from the bastard brood of Hagar, Ismael being the
first, Genesis 21.9. that mocked Isaac. And what was Elisha the worse, 2. Kin.
2.23. for being mocked of the children; or the Prophets the worse for being
mocked of the people; or Christ the worse for being railed on in the open
Synagogue, and mocked at in the judgment hall, and upon the Cross? Mat.
26.41. Or Paul the worse for being called by Tertullus that flattering orator,
Act. 24.5. a pestilent fellow and a mouer of sedition? Has not this been the
lot of the righteous since the beginning, and the true badge of a Christian
since Christ's ascension? For Isaac had the blessing both upon his soul and
upon his seed, notwithstanding the curse of his brother; the Prophets went on
in their calling, and giving, as Esaias speaks, their back to the smiters, and
their face to the nippers, they were not dismayed: and Paul continued
worshipping the God of his fathers after the way which was called Heresy, Act.
24.14. notwithstanding the rage and malice of the unbelieving Jews. And
therefore shrink not thou in thy head a whit, nor let not thy zeal be cooled
for the quips and tants of perverse persons; for either thou must be a sheep
or a goat; and better be laughed at of men for thy sheepish simplicity, then
destroyed by God for thy goat-like qualities; and since there are but two
orders and ranks of men in the world, the one fleshly, the other spiritual, we
know he that was borne after the flesh ever persecuted him that was borne after
the spirit, and even so is it now, which can nothing hurt thee, because the
spirit does defend thee, nay it touches not thee at all; for they scoff at
God which dwells in thee, and he at length will laugh at their destruction.
Besides, it is but the reuiling of Satan which possesses their flesh, and who
will esteem of the devils frumps, since he does it only in envy at thy
salvation, and in malice against the God of heaven?

Here again are convinced all such who of their own drowsinesse frame and
pretend excuses, for not doing as they say they should, but this is but one of
the deceits of sin to wind thee further into her snares, for the spirit cannot
be idle, but is like the miller always grinding, an^ moving thee forward to
some good duty, for when the stronger enters he drives him out that was there
before: therefore examine thy self whether thou be as earnest in prayer as at
thy pleasure; whether as diligent in counting thy sins, as casting thy
accounts at home; as desirous to hear the word as a stage play; as earnest in
repenting, as in committing of offenses; as hungring after the food of thy
soul, as after the nourishment of thy body; for if thou be not, thou art so
far from favoring spiritual things, as the spirit has set no footing in thee
at all; for we read of David in the whole volume of his Psalms, how greatly he
delighted in the law of God, how he longed after it, as the Heart after the
river brooks; how he valued it better then thousands of gold or silver; how in
his estimation, one day was better in the courts of God, then a thousand in the
kings palace: and if this spirit was in him in the time of the law, then ought
there to be a double spirit in us that live in this golden time of the
Gospel. But I would it might not be said of us, that the children of this
world are wiser in their generation then the children of light; for they lie
stretching themselves upon their beds, straining their wits how to please the
flesh with choice and variety of delightful sins; whereas we through the
smoke of that corruption that flies up to our eyes are so blinded as we
think our selves encumbered with the comeliness of the spirit, straitning the
times wherein the graces of God should be blown up and cherished in us, and
giving too large an allowance to the portion we share out for the flesh;
therefore if we will be spiritual men indeed, we must lay up the word of God
in our hearts, binding it as a sign upon our hands, wearing it as a frontlet
before our eyes, and writing it upon the posts of our houses, that it may be as
a master to instruct us, and as a line to direct us, that as near as we can
our thoughts may be hedged in that they range not after the concupiscence of
the flesh, our affections restrained that they rise not against the work of
the spirit, and our actions so squared as they may be fit timber for the
building of such Temples wherein the Lord shall dwell by his spirit.

Lastly observe the fruits the wisdom of the spirit brings, which be two,
peace and life: even the two special benefits that the carnal man seeks
for, yet misseth of; for the flesh never gives peace but is continually
perplexed, eating and being never satisfied, flying and chacing themselves when
none pursues them; neither can it bring forth life, the wicked being ever
groping as in the dark: so as we see what worldly men most seek for, that
they are most destitute of; for we all agree in the end of our desire, that we
would be blessed, but in the substance wherein true blessedness consists,
there is great difference. The Philosophers speaking of happiness, were
distracted into two hundred eighty eight opinions, every one intending some
thing, and yet resolving nothing, some pointing to the right hand, some to the
left, some to the valley, some to the plain, and yet all of them out of the
way; yea and the enlightened Christian that has a true contemplation of right
happiness does notwithstanding by the halting of his conscience confute that
in practice which he in heart allows, confessing it to be ascribed to the
spirit, and yet seeks it in the flesh, placing it in heaven, and yet looking
for it in hell, whereas it is better go to heaven a beggar, then to hell an
Emperor; and, as Mat. 8. better go to heaven lame then to hell sound; and yet
such is our spiritual blindness that we had rather put it on the hazard of
our souls then to lose any present comfort in the body: But how can thou
think to find honey in a waspes nest, or to make a good garment of a spiders
web, or to receive wholesome food of a cockatrice egg, or to persuade thy
self of peace and life in following the flesh, which the Lord has cursed? The
only happiness of a Christian rests in his wisdom in the spirit, for by
this he has peace about him, and peace above him; though judgment smites on
every side, yet it spares him, for his conscience being upright, he has ever
his pardon in his hand to plead; though he be compassed with all the crosses in
the world, yet having the first peace in the forgiveness of his sins, he is
assured of his last peace also, that is, his lasting peace in life eternal.
That king was miserable that under his cloth of estate had a sword hanging
over his head by a little thread, and in this suspensed felicity he was so
perplexed, that he wished to be out of his rich misery; much more may they wish
it that have the sword of the Lords vengeance shaking over them for studying
only the wisdom of the flesh, which is so far from peace as it would hide it
self under the hills, and so far short of life as it is the undoubted
messenger of a most desperate death. But these be only fruits of such a tree
as the fear of God has made wisely old betimes, being planted by the spirit,
and growing up in the spirit, showing by their conversation upon what stock
they are grafted, and by what sap they are nourished, tasting nothing but the
true service of God, whereby they are able to stand before him with a clear
conscience which is walled about in every corner with the peace and favor of
God, and reserved in his due time for the perfection of glory in the life to
come.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 7.


THe drift of the Apostle in this verse as in the former, is to show that our
sanctification is the only security we have of our salvation, for to them that
are in Christ there is life and peace, and this our union with him is discerned
by our walking in his spirit; and this shall we know when the things we do
savor of the spirit; and this savor is seen by performing the fruits of the
spirit in the course of a godly life. And that this is so, he has proved by
opposing two contraries, as namely by the godly life of a spiritual man, and
the godles life of a carnal man: Now here he shows a reason why the
wisdom of the flesh is damnation, because it is enimity against God. So this
verse stands on two parts: First, he shows what the wisdom of the flesh
is, at plain hatred with God: Secondly, (...) patience that coals of fire may
be heaped upon their heads, and whether these three meet together in any one
man, or any of them alone possess him the wisdom of the flesh ever rebelleth
against the wisdom of God; and this I speak not of the folly of man, but of
the very best actions that flesh and blood can do, for the very best wisdom
of the flesh, was that of Peter's toward Christ, Master pity thy self, Mat.
16.22.22. and yet for this he was called Satan: so that to consult with flesh
and blood is but to take advice how to damn our selves, for if we be at enmity
with God, it must needs follow we are at friendship with the devil.

Now for the second part, which is the reason of this enimitie between God and
the flesh: observe, that if we will know how to please God, it is taught us in
his law, for if we would yield our selves subject to it, it being given and
pronounced at first by the mouth of God, written with his singer, and sent by
his Angel, delivered to Moses to be read to the people, and to be left for us
their posterity, it would teach us how to be the friends of God as Abraham was,
for therein is both life and death set before us, Deuteronomy. 5.33. it is as a line
and plummet to square our lives by, and to measure our steps to heaven; in it
is the revealed will of God for us, and the secret for himself, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
in it are contained promises for obedience, and a whole volume of cursings for
breaking it: so that if we will be saved we must please God, and how we
shall do this is set forth unto us in his law: and if we separate our selves
from the use of this law, then shall it become a killing letter to us, that is,
as often as we read it we shall read our own damnation, as appears, 2. Kin.
22.11. But if we study it to make it the rule of our obedience, and as a light
to direct us through the darkness of this life, then does it convert the
soul, condemning sin in the flesh, and freeing the flesh from sin, that if
we fall, we fall but in the arms of Christ, for he is the way we are
directed to walk in by the law. So as in a word learn, that the Apostle will
measure thy love of God, by thy love of the law of God, even as an earthly
Prince will discern thy affection of him, by thy subjection to his scepter.

Secondly, observe hence, that of all the creatures of God the rebellion of man
is greatest, nay he only swarueth from the course of his first creation, for
here we see how far he is degenerate; that being made after the image of God
to glorify him in his subjection to his law, now he turns the heel against
him, and has framed a law to himself which he does follow, namely the lusts
of the flesh, denying any obedience to the law of his maker, and not only
disarming himself of all possibility of subjection, but putting on the armor
of Gods enemy, flatly opposing himself, and standing in contradiction with the
law of God. But now the rest of the creatures of God, they keep the end of
their creation, the Sun giving her light for which she was made, the Sea
keeping her bounds wherein she was set, the water yelding her power to cleanse
for which she was ordained, the earth bringing forth her fruit, as she was
commanded, every beast of the field living in the ignorance of his strength,
and in his acknowledgement of man to be his head as he was at first enjoined;
whereas if they should alter their natural course, as the sun to bring
darkness, the wat^^ to defile, the earth to miscarry, and cast all her fruit
out of her womb before it were ripe, and the rest to pervert their ends for
which they were given us, we would count it as monstrous as for a man to go
upon his head with his feet upward; and yet is the case of man more monstrous,
for where God made him a living soul he has made himself a dead carkase and
a damned creature; and where he had his reason sanctified to all good, and knew
no evil, he has now all the powers of his understanding polluted, that
nothing but weeds and sins do grow up in him; and where he had a law given
him to bridle and keep him in from ranging; he has taken the bridle in the
teeth, and wrung himself by his concupiscence out of the hands and protection
of God, nothing being able to curb or keep him in till he had cast himself
out of the saddle, namely the paradise of God; and not resting thus foiled with
his fall, he stands now in arms against the Lord as if he threw him down;
whereas (alas) the Lord took pleasure in the work of his hands, seeing it was
very good; and he overthrew himself in pride and infidelity which still
increases as his age increases, and makes him so rebellious as he is; The
consideration whereof (this being the condition of the best of us, as we lie in
the womb) ought exceedingly to humble us and wound us at the heart, that what
we would condemn in the insensible creatures, that we senselesly run into, and
yet the obedience we see performed by them cannot draw us to the subjection
whereto we are tied, which shows us to be far more brutish then they; and
therefore what recompense of reward can we expect (if we continue thus untamed)
but as Solomon says, Prou. 1.31. to be filled with our own devises, and cap.
5.22. to be holden with the cords of our own sin, till destruction come like
a whirle wind, and carry us away without recovery?

Again, learn hence who they be that love, and who they be that hate God,
such as keep, or keep not his commandments, according to the saying of
Christ, If ye love me, keep my commandments; and as is comprised in the end
of the second commandment, that mercy shall be showed to them that love him
and keep his commandments; but those that hate him, and will not have Christ
reign over them, but cast his yoke far from them, he will pursue them with
his wrath to the fourth generation. And here we are to judge of two sorts of
men, the one that sin of too much presumption, the other that sin of good
intention: the first are blasphemers, profaners of the labbath, drunkards,
adulterers, usurers and such like, that think all time lost which is not spent
upon their lusts, and dare brave the heavens, as if there were no vengeance
reserved for them; these men chacing and hunting up and down to get new
occasions of sinning, not masking or dissembling, but openly proclaiming the
poison in their hearts by the scabs and vicers in their lives, do show from
what head they spring, for making no conscience of sin they are the brood of
the serpent, Ioh. 8.44. and Ioh. 3.8. For he that is borne of God sins not,
that is, he that laboreth to mortify his flesh daily, and to purge himself by
repentance; but he that will set fire to his affections that are already
enraged, and study how to invent mischief, he is of the devil. For the other
sort they are such as will serve God after their fancies, but this will not
suffice, for though they mean no hurt, or that their conscience be persuaded
that they do is right, yet here we see we must not frame the law of God
according to our conscience, but bend our conscience according to the law of
God, to worship him as he has prescribed in his word; for if good purposes or
good intentions would have served, then had the Jews as great cause to be
accepted of God as any, for though they went about to establish their own
righteousness through works, yet herein they did no more then they were
taught by the Scribes and Pharisees which were their leaders; yea and they
lived strictly as was commanded by the law of Moses, and had a zeal, but not
according to knowledge, and therefore missed of their salvation. They that
persecuted the Prophets, and rose up against Paul, Act. 22. had a good
intention; and Paul himself in the state of a Pharisie thought he had done God
good service, when Act. 9.2. he had got a commission to persecute the church:
and what could be better then for Peter in mere love to his master Christ, to
dissuade him from going up to Jerusalem, where he knew he should be hardly
entreated? yet was he called satan for his labor; or what could be better in
zeal of conscience, then for Vzzah to relieve and support the Arc from
falling, yet because it was contrary to the commandment he was stricken with
sudden death. So as our meaning is not that which can excuse us; for we must
square out our crabbed and knotty timber by the line and plummer, measuring
crooked things by that which is straight, that both may be straight; and we
must go to the plain rule, the law and word of God, and not to that leaden
rule whereby we are abused in the error of our judgment, for we must in every
thing submit our wills to Gods will, that they may be pure and holy as his law
is; therefore let this his law be our glass to see whether we be deformed or
beautiful; our touchstone to try whether our devotion be gold or dross; our
balance that it may appear whether we be weight or refuse; and our diet to
feed on that we su^fet not with the sinful pleasures of this lfie: and let
us walk with straight feet in an even path, that we neither decline to the
right hand to sin of presumption, not to the left to sin of good intention,
but without looking back (except it be to correct that which is amiss) let us
ever be going forward in that way the Lord has set us in, and then to us that
walk according to this rule peace shall light and rest upon us, Gal. 6.16. and
mercy shall compass us on every side.

Further, in that the Apostle says, that the wisdom of man neither is nor
can be subject to the law of God, we gather against the opinion of the Papists,
that it is no way in our power or freewill to take or to refuse the grace of
God, whereby at first we should be converted; for as there is no power in a
bow to bend it self further then it is drawn by the strength of man, no more
is there any liberty in us to incline our wills to goodness, further then it is
pressed and forced by grace; for first we say the infusion of grace is from
above, and the power to retain it and apply it is from above also, it being a
special prerogative given to Gods elect only, as Christ himself says, None
can come to me except my father draw him; the word signifies a violent
forceing and urging of a man when with all his strength he withstands it; and
the heart of a man is as a stone that cannot be softened, except it be by the
blod of Christ, no more then the diamond can except it be by the blood of a
Goat, but when it has once been washed with the blood of the Son of God,
then our wills work like wax in the singers of the Lord, Phil. 2.3. Besides,
if it should be arbitrary with us to refuse or receive the grace of our
conversion, then should we still continue in our blood, for as we have no light
in our selves at all, so being enlightened we can no longer keep it then the
hands of Christ are laid upon us; and therefore the Lord says, Exo. 33.19. I
will have mercy on whom I will, and whom I will I harden; it being wholly and
merely in him for the magnifying of his mercy on some, and the manifestation
of his justice on others, to save and to condemn: and this is set forth unto
us, Luke 15.5. in the parable of the lost sheep, for such are we all by
nature, straying from God in the breach of his commandment, in the fruit of
the forbidden tree. Now they will al grant it is mercy at first in the Lord to
seek us, and when he has spied us our in the desert of our sins, do we of
our selves set any one foot forward to hasten or help our return home? No,
but our shepherd is feign to take us on his shoulders and carry us all the way
home to his fathers house, for if we were not haled, and pulled, and borne, and
drawn to God by violence, we would be like the starting bow, that would
recoile back again. Neither does this take away the freedom we had in our
creation, for in Adam there was a double or twofold free will, answerable to
the twofold estate wherein he stood, the first while he was in his innocence,
and that was like the will of the Angels in heaven, in that of his own nature he
was wholly and freely inclined to do that which was good; The second, after his
fall, and that was like the will of the devil, who was a liar from the
beginning, and has no liberty but in doing evil, for he can not but sin,
and even such is ours, that come out of the corrupted loins of Adam, for we
have election only to commit this sin, or that sin, as may serve our turns
best, and as natural reason does lead us to: so as in that we are said to be
free, it is to make us inexcusable; and in that we are bound, it is to make us
miserable; for so long as we are holden of the flesh, there is a kind of
servile and slavish necessity to sin naturally, there being nothing but
sin and filth in our conception, and all the tortures and contradictions that
are, cannot change our wills to good, when they are inclined to sin; howbeit
this necessity shall not excuse the will, nor the will excuse the necessity;
neither yet by holding this necessity of sinning in the unregenerate man do
we charge God with any injustice at all, as the papists charge us with; because
this necessity proceeds not from God but from Adam in whom we stood, and in
whom we fell, in whom we were blessed, and in whom we were cursed. And yet have
we great need to be stirred up by exhortations, and terrified by threats: for
the reprobate in three respects; First, to keep them from outrageous sins,
for God has given that grace and power to the voice of a man, that it strikes
the heart as a thunderbolt, and by this awe they are kept in by denouncing of
judgment: it does appear that God has some church among them, which they
like wild Boares of the forest would otherwise willingly root out: Secondly,
that by this means their consciences being a little opened, might sometime
accuse them to their greater confusion; for hearing of the wrath of God and the
nature of it, of the mercy of God and the comfort in it, they do ofttimes
taste of hell even in this life: Thirdly, to make them the more inexcusable at
the last day, when they cannot say but the light was showed them, and they shut
their eyes; and that grace was offered, but they spurned against it in their
hearts. This preaching and exhorting and reproouing is also necessary for the
elect, as an instrument to conueie unto us that grace whereby we are converted,
as Lydia by hearing, Act. 16.14. had her heart opened; for though we might
live by Gods providence without our appointed food of bread, Deuteronomy. 8.3. yet if
we should reject bread, thinking to live by bare providence, we should tempt
God: even so, though the grace of Christ does only save us, yet is his word as
the golden vessel wherein it is reached forth unto us.

Out of this then that has been spoken generally observe: that the best,
choicest, and chiefest actions of a natural man, are enimitie against God,
that is, do directly sight and offend the majesty of God: the reason is,
because we are in this estate, so far from yielding subjection to his law,
that therefore we sin the more, because the law forbids us; for as there is
great contrariety betwixt cold and heat, so is there greater betwixt the
spiritual law of God, and the corrupt law of our flesh; and as the fire
compassed about with the force of the wind, has the heat that struggleth to
come forth, beaten back by the power of the wind, whereby it increases the
rage of the fire, as experirience teaches us, in scalding more in winter than
in summer; even so is it with us, for sin that would come forth, and is
driven back by the power of the commandment, proves the more fierce and
enraged sin. Since then it is our nature to sin the more because we are
forbidden to sin, and that the success and fruit of sin is so dangerous,
as to keep us at enimitie with God, with whom if we make no peace, but
continue at war, we shall have the worse, being to him but as the dry
stubble bfore the fire: let us beware how in this lethargy of sin we fall
asleep, since watchfulness is the cure prescribed by our Physician Christ;
but let us tremble at the first motion of sin, shake off the least occasion
that may provoke us to it; check it when it begins first to start out, and cut
it off while it is yet tender, lest growing strong headed, it makes us grow
stiff necked, and stubburne hearted; for it is not the way to amend, barely to
wish thou could leave it, and yet to excuse thy sin, because it is thy
nature, for as well may thou acquit the thief that robs thee, for he will
pray thee to bear with him, and tell thee it is so old and sweet a sin to
steal, as he cannot choose but follow it: But thou must submit thy self to be
reproved for thy sin, range thy self equally to the obedience of every
Commandment, not excluding covetousness as thy enemy, and yet suffering thy
self to be surprised by flattery, as a friend to thy promotion; rejecting
hatred, and yet harboring deceit; gaine-saying pride, and yet abounding in
oppression; defying popery, and yet embracing blasphemy; for they end all
alike in destruction of body and sorrow of mind: let us not therefore go near
the stews, if our eyes be bent to lust; nor affect pre-eminence if our hearts
be bent to pride; nor handle treasure if our affection incline to
covetousness; nor haunt the tavern lest our appetites be enflamed with wine;
for this were to quench the fire with oil, which is as fuel to maintain it:
But let us so moderate our selves in these inferior blessings, as we avoid
prouocations to sin, because of our pronenesse to sin, and suffer not our
weak nature to be too sharply assaulted by these deceivable delights, which
are in themselves but as sugared sins, the more easily to ensnare us in the
nets of the devil.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 8.9.




IN these verses the Apostle concludes his former argument of the opposition
between the flesh and the spirit, both ways proceeding as it were by steps
and degrees in this sort: They that walk after the course of the world, savor
the things of the flesh, and relishing nothing else they savor of damnation,
their consciences being already scorched with the fire of hell: and this is
all the excellency of man's wisdom, because it is not at slight variance, but
at utter defiance with God, and it continues in this enimitie, because it is
not in subjection to his law, and it is not, because it can not; and since it
cannot but rebel, it is impossible it should please God. On the other side;
they that make a conscience of their ways, savor the things of the spirit,
and by this their taste and delight in heavenly things, they purchase to
themselves life and peace, for such is the wisdom of the spirit; and not
being in the flesh, they can not but please God: which is partly expressed, and
partly implied upon direct consequent of the former words in the end of verse.
8. For since they that are given over as reprobates to the flesh cannot please
God, they that have but flesh and infirmities only in them, having the
greatest part of their soul and body seasoned with the graces of God, they
cannot but please God; and such are ye, verse. 9. the Apostle speaking of the
elect; which contains three parts in it: First a proposition assumed, S. Paul
taking it as granted, and as a matter without controuer sie, that they were not
in the flesh, but were in part sanctified: Secondly, the reason that moved him
so to take it, because the spirit wrought in them holiness of life; for God
and an unclean liver cannot lodge under one roose. Thirdly, a reason of that,
or a confirmation of the reason by the contrary, they that want Christ's spirit
are none of Christ's: but ye are elect and chosen, and ingrafted into Christ;
and therefore ye have his spirit, and having his spirit, he has so crucified
your corruptions as you are no longer in the flesh; and then being dead unto
sin ye are alive unto God.

Hence observe first the great force and efficacy of those words, They that are
in the flesh, for it is a greater matter to be in the flesh then for flesh to
be in us, for this makes us more fleshly; the first being true only of the
reprobate and castawaies, the other only of the elect; even as it is a greater
disgrace to say that a man is in his wine, whereby is meant drunkenness, then
that wine is in a man, for the best may take it to comfort their hearts; so to
say that a man is choleric, is more then to say choler is in a man, the one
being spoken as it is an offensive passion, the other but as it is an element
or quality or part of a man's constitution; so to say a man is in his heat, is
more then to say heat is in a man; so to say that a man is covetous, is a
sharper speech, then to say conerousnesse is in him, the one showing him to be
overcome of the sin of covetousness, the other but that the seed only of
the sin is in him, which is true of us all, we remaining in some part
unregenerate. And this is answerable to the speech of David, Psa. 51.5. I was
borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, it being more to be
conceived in sin, then for sin to be conceived in us; as it was more for
Simon Magus, Act. 8.23. to be in the gall of bitterness, then for the gall of
bitterness to be in him, the holy Ghost showing by the phrase there used now
he was overwhelmed and drowned in malice of heart against God. And this kind of
aggravating of sinnefulnesse in a man by this kind and manner of speech was well
understood, and used by the Pharisees, Ioh. 9.34. where they said to him that
had received his sight of Christ that he was altogether borne in sins. But
now flesh and sin may be in a man, and yet he may have an inclination to
goodness: which serves greatly for the curing of an afflicted conscience,
that if we can assure our selves without guile of spirit, that we strive to
the uttermost to mortify the rebellious lusts of the flesh, and that we
delight more in doing of good then of evil, then are we not in the flesh, and
then can we not but please God because we are united to his son in whom his
soul delights; for flesh, that is weakness and imperfection; is in the best
that ever came from the loins of man; but none are in the flesh but they that
give themselves over, and lay themselves naked to the lusts of it; even as
pride is in all men, but they are only in pride that think they have learned
enough when they have learned nothing of Christ truly, not caring how lean and
beggarly their souls be, and yet think they have never enough to pamper up
their bodies to their best show: so there is some couerous desire in all men,
but they only are in coue^^^nesse that make riches their God and are not rich
in God.

Secondly, we must understand that the Scripture speaks of (flesh) in two
sorts: first, as it is part of that flesh which is in man: secondly, as it is
the whole flesh of man. Of the first the scripture speaks of it as it is
subject to weakness, frailty, and mortality, as Psa. 78.39. He remembered that
they were flesh, yea a wind that passes and comes not again: and Esa.
40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the
field. Sometime the word (flesh) is taken for the ceremonies of the law, as
Gal. 3.3. Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the spirit ye would
be made perfect by the flesh? Sometime for the baseness of man, as 2. Cor.
10.3. Though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after the flesh.
Sometime for the estimation and credit of a man: and sometime for the common
course of nature, as Gal. 4.29. He that was borne after the flesh, persecuted
him was borne after the spirit. Of the second, that is, of the whole flesh of
man, the scripture speaks as it is subject to the wrath of God, and this is
that Paul means here, and which is mentioned, Ioh. 3.6. That that is borne
of flesh is flesh, that is, unclean: which may be thus described; It is that
natural corruption which is in us being absolutely deprived of al heavenly
grace, and positiuely full of all sin, of all manner of sins, of all the
vilest sins, by sin meaning original sin, which is called, pri^^^ foetus
peccati, the first birth of sin; or else sin proceeding from it, and out of
it, called perpetuus fomes peccati, the continual nonrishment and feeding of
sin: for example, water may be made hot when it is cold, or cold when it is
hot, or may be congealed into ice, and yet it remains water; but snow cannot
properly be termed snow when it is melted and turned into water, for then it
can be no more snow; so is it with the flesh, for it may be altered and changed
and transformed into the image of Christ, so that good things may dwell in it;
but then it is no more flesh: But so long as flesh remains flesh, that is,
unwashed in the powers of the soul, and polluted by the actions of the body,
so long it is impossible that any goodness should spring from it, and so
impossible to please God. From whence learn, that so much flesh as we have is
deprived of all grace, and full of all sin: and withal to confess, that
every one of us has so much flesh in him as deserves wrath: which ought to
humble us in prayer before ^^mercy seat of God, that this remna^t of corruption
may be changed, abated, and diminished, that the greatest part in us may be
regenerate: and not to post over our sins; as for the usurer to say, it is
not he that sins but his usury; or for the carnal man to say, it is not he
that offends but his flesh; and so to go through all sins, and yet think he
is corrupted by no sin, for this were but to take Adams figleaues which were
too light to cover our hypocrisy: so as for him that is fleshly, to recreate
himself with unsanctified solaces, is but to make him more fleshly; and for
thee to sin the more because thou art flesh, is to carry fire in thy bosom,
Pro. 6.27. and to put it to the dry stubble; whereas thou ought to be
taught the contrary lesson by thy infirmity, that since thou art weak thou will labor to strengthen thy self in the grace of Christ; and since thou art
so apt to sin, thou will lay faster hold upon the word of promise, which
shall keep thee from it; for sin must not be dead in thee in this sense, as
that thou art past feeling it, but as by the perfect obedience of Christ it was
absolutely slain for thee, so likewise by thy regeneration must it daily die
in thee, till by thy natural death it do wholly die with thee. On the other
side let us beware, for if we sow to the flesh, that is, if we be transported
with a more eager desire for the duties to man, then for the service of God, or
perform love to them for the flesh, that is, for wordly respects and not for
conscience, then do we remain still in the flesh, that is, in the state of
damnation. For if we have not the spirit of God to season our hearts, though
we abound in knowledge both of matters concerning this life for direction, and
of the commandments of God for instruction, yea and do taste in some measure of
the sweetness of grace for our inlightning; yet if we suffer our soul to be
the fountain of all uncleanness, and do make the members of our body as so
many pipes or conduites, to convey that uncleanness into our lives, the most
part of our thoughts, of our words and deeds, of our affections and desires,
tending more to the dishonoring of God, and the satisfying of our delights in
the flesh, then to the furthering of our salvation, making riches our hope, the
wedge of gold our confidence, and trusting in the strength of our malice, as
David says, Psalm. 52.7. Then are we in the damnable state of flesh, these
being iniquities to be condemned, and as Job says, chap. 31.28. A plain
denying of God, which must of necessity displease him in the highest degree.

Further observe hence, that none but sanctified men can please God, and that
all the works of carnal men and reprobates, with what face soever they be
done are hateful to him; the reason is because none of them consent to the law
of God in any other sort, then to make them inexcusable; for the understanding
whereof we must know that there is a two sold writing of the law in the hearts
of men, the one by the singer of God, the other by the spirit of God, and that
which is written by the spirit, is only in Gods children, the other is in all
men and in all nations being the law of nature, which is the light of reason,
and by this they do know and see their sins, and so far they consent to
the law: but not in this, to loath their sin or to be grieved at it, having a
striving with the sin, but not against the sin, against the sense and
feeling of it, that they may more eagerly follow it; for having this law
written in his conscience which accuses him for sin, he laboreth to race it
out that he may sin without controulement, for pride, self-love, cruelty,
hatred and such like are passions always working inwardly upon their members,
that is, upon their wills, understandings and affections, which sometime lie hid
like a toade under a stone; this proceeding from the goodness of God, for the
love he bears to his Church; (...) if the Lions of the field should ever
roar, what should bec^^^e of the poor lambs? And if they should hatch all
the sins they have conceived, they would live worse then wild beasts, and we
should have no peace nor face of a Church among us: and therefore what the Lord
cures in his elect, he restrains only in the wicked by ^n inferior working
of his grace, that they burst not forth into outrageous sins; he being
likewise hindered from the height of his impiety, partly for fear of
punishment, and partly for fear of shame and discredit, the world ever liking
it well, that men should live ciuilly, lest a ruin of the whole might ensue.
And yet herein we may see the exceeding bounty of God, that even for living
morally and aiming but at earthly praise and commendation, without any respect
of the love of God, these being fruits not of the woorst sort, he rewards
them in this life with his outward blessings, for their civil obedience and
outward carriage, and in the life to come, though not with heaven, yet with
mitigation of their punishment in hell. Iehu we know was but a carnal man, for
he departed not from the sins of Ierobeam, that made Israel to sin, 2. Kin.
10.30.31. yet because he did diligently execute that was right in Gods eyes, he
rewarded him in this life with the promise of posterity to the fourth
generation, to sit upon the throne: notwithstanding all that the wicked do,
tend to death; because they perform only the letter, and not the sense of the
commandment in their best works. Now in that the wicked are recompensed in
this life, it is in two respects: first, to encourage us to perform the like
duties outwardly which they do: secondly, to comfort us in this; that if the
Lord carries his eye of bounty toward them that are without and strangers
from his fold; much more will he reward us which are his elect and sheep of
his own pasture. And yet in that their best fruits bring death upon their
souls, and cannot please God, it is to meet with the bold presumption of them
that think they shall be saved, what profession soever they be of, and that
they be greatly in Gods favor if their actions be a little varnished over with
hypocrisy; which is as much as if they should think to go to heaven
backward, which will deceive them; for if a thief going to the gallows should
think himself in as good case as a true man, would we not judge it madness,
since the one escapes, and the other is hanged; yet fares it thus with
worldlings and profane men, who sleeping in the midst of the sea, think to
escape drowning; and living in the lusts of the flesh, imagine to escape
damning, which cannot be, no more then they that sleep in the top maste
without any hold, can think to escape falling.

Now in that the Apostle says, Ye are not in the flesh: we must understand he
speaks generally to all the Jews, who at this time were the house and garden
of God; for then none were admitted into the church, but only such as were
outwardly reformed and seemed to be regenerate by their submitting themselves
to the public ordinance of God in the word and prater; and as for outrageous
and shameless sinners, as adulterers, blasphemers, prophaners of the Sabbath,
and such like, they were not to be received without repentance, that as they
signified their disobedience by their sin, so should they testify their
sorrow by their confession, and then they ceased to be such: for as it is
treason in the Chancellor to pass any thing from the Prince, without the
Prince his seal; so they accounted it in those times treason against God, to
set the seal of Baptism on that child that had neither of the parents a
believer: where we may learn that we must esteem hypocrites as regenerate,
and to be in the spirit of Christ, because they are outwardly reformed in their
lives, and in profession do resemble the children of God; but if they be open
and notorious offenders in any gross sin, committed with a high hand, then
ought they to be excluded for a time, till shame and separation from their
brethren may work their humility to amendment: but if they continue
obstinate, not to be reclaimed, then are they to be cut off as putrified and
rotten members, that may infect others; otherwise dissembling hypocrites must
be wrapped up in the prayers of the Church, and the tares must be suffered to
grow up with the wheat, and the goat may give as much milk as the sheep,
and for the goodness of it it must be left to the secrets of God, till he
thrust his sickle into the harvest. Howbeit this order of proceeding against
known and infamous sinners, as to thrust snarling dogs out of the Church; and
to cast the acornes among swine, is not to be done by every private man, but by
the church and congregation; and if they admit any such, the fault lies in
them, and not in those that join with them; for the children may take their
appointed food, though some snarling and snatching curres and bastards stand
by: And where it is said in another place by this Apostle; Eat not with him:
it is not meant of the Communion at the Lords table, but that we must have no
familiarity with him, not take delight in his company.

Further out of the reason given, why they were not in the flesh; namely,
because the spirit of God was in them, we gather, that a man may be sure of his
salvation: and this is the whole drift of S. Paul in this Chapter, to secure
the elect of the everlasting love of God in his Son, sensibly felt in
themselves; for he begins with this general ground of their comfort, That
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ; then must they needs be
saved. But now all the question is, who they be that are ingrafted into Christ;
and for proof hereof, he descends to examine the particular course of their
life, which is visibly seen to all, but particularly and best known to ones
self, and this is, if they walk in the spirit by a religious kind of
conversation; and their way in this is discerned by their life in the spirit,
that is, by their joy and comfort in godliness; and this spiritual life is
seen by not gratifying the flesh in the lusts and desires thereof; and this
crossing and correcting of the flesh in the pride of her lusts, is seen by
crucifying and killing of it with the affections thereof, that is, not only
beating and pressing it down, but stifling and braining of it altogether; and
this violence to the flesh is performed by them that have suffered with Christ
in the flesh, that is, that have not listened or given ear to the pleasures of
sin, but have, Heb. 12.1. cast away that presses down, and the corruption
that hangs so fast on: and this is done by them, 1. Pet. 4.1. that cease from
sin, that is, that slip into it unawares, as a bird into a snare; and such
be they as bestow the rest of their time after the will of God; and his will
being our work, we cannot but please him, and pleasing him, it is his
pleasure, Lu. 12: 32. to give us a kingdom. Besides, we may know whether we
have the spirit of God in us or no, as appears, 1. Cor. 2.11.12. No man
knows the things of man, save the spirit of a man; even so the things of God
knows no man but the spirit of God, which we have received, that we might
know the things are given to us of God: which proves that as we know our own
thoughts or words; so the spirit of God in us makes known the will of God to
us, as far as is needful to be revealed: if we then know the will of God, we
may assure our selves we know his spirit to be in us, for his will is not known
without his spirit, this spirit teaching truth; but the spirit of the world
broching error. And 1. Io. 4.13. hereby know we that we dwell in Christ, and he
in us, because he has given us of his spirit: which proves that though we
know not what manner of thing the spirit is, because it is invisible and secret,
yet we may know we have it by the fruits of a sanctified life: after this manner
speaks Paul, 2. Corint. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you except you
be reprobates? And yet the Papists would have all reprobates, counting it
presumption to say we have the spirit. It is true, if any presume he has it,
when his life is not answerable to it, he is deceived, and abused by
presumption; but if we walk and trade in the spirit by a holy conversation,
we may be sure we have it, for that is the argument of the Apostle, that our
sanctification is an undoubted testimony and an assured certainty that Christ
dwells in us; for there being but two spirits that rule in the hearts of all
men, the one the spirit of the world, the other the spirit of God, why should
not our course be as profane as others, and our carriage run after the flesh
as well as theirs, if the mightier and stronger, that is, the spirit of Christ
did not possess our souls? Yet say they; No man can secure himself he shall
be saved. But as we may be sure of the spirit, so may we likewise be of the
riches that it brings, which is salvation, for it cannot hide so great a
treasure from us, it being as an earnest penny given us, that perfecteth the
purchase of our inheritance in heaven; for as we may trace a Hare in the snow
by her footeing, and come to the form where she sits; even so by those holy
steps that we tread, and by those spiritual bounds wherein we keep our
thoughts and our affections, we may well and certainly perceive that the
spirit leads us to the seat of God. Besides, this spirit of God within us
keeps not his fruit and comfort secret to himself, but discovers it to us,
and bears witness to our spirits, that we are the chosen of God; and the
spirit of man knows what is in man, whether his heart be filled with
hypocrisy or with sincerity; with humility or with pride; with true zeal or
with counterfeit; that howsoever we may bleare the sight of men by our
dissembling, yet we carry our own eyes down to our heart, that see by what
false waights we measure our fruits to God, that is, our religion and our
righteousness to men, that is, our conversation: so as we have a double
evidence of our salvation, the one backing and strengthening the other, which
is set forth, 1. Ioh. 5.8. There be three which bear record in earth, the
spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one, and where
water is, there has blood gone before, for these two go together, as they
came forth of Christ's side together, Ioh. 19.34. repentance being the leader,
and remission of sins following after; blood washing away our guiltiness,
and water the uncleanness of our lives, and the spirit of Christ sealing up
these things in our hearts, that as by the sealing of the conueiance the
purchase in law is made perfect: so by the settling of our consciences in an
upright course toward God, our salvation in Christ is made perfect and sure,
even to us. Yet say they, we cannot assure our selves we shall thus continue;
for we have examples of many that have begun in the spirit, and have ended in
the flesh, that have seemed fruitful for a while, and have been barren ever
after, that have given John Baptist good countenance, and yet have chopped off
his head, for reproouing justly. It is true, there is none stands but he may
fall if he lean to his own wisdom, nay he must wither if he grow up among
stones, because he was never well rooted; and whenever the Lord pulls away
the vizard from any that masked under the cloak of religion, he does it to
make them that stand strengthen themselves in Christ, Philip. 4.13. and to make
them that be hollow hearted tremble; for they that thus fall, their heart
tells them before hand of it, their coming to Christ being but in the
Sunshine when there are no clouds of persecution hanging over; and their
following after him, being like a thief after his pray, that will let it go
unless he may gain by it, their hearts ever misgiuing them in their own
profession, and they having a secret corner in the flesh which they always
feed, what show soever they make to the contrary. But now the straight and
upright minded Christian has his heart as adamant, and his face as brass,
that arms him with resolution for the Lords cause, he has no confidence in
the flesh, Phil. 3.3. but his whole rejoicing is in Christ; he feels such sap
of the spirit at the root, that he thinks it (with Christ) to be his meat
to do the will of God, yea he can truly and boldly say with this Apostle, that
neither anguish of mind, nor torment of body, verse. 39. can sever him, or make
him so much as lose the sight of his master Christ, but he will ever be just
behind him, for by his life he has comfort in him, by his afflictions he has
fellowship with him, and by his death he shall enjoy the presence of him for
evermore: all this heart and assurance they have, having their foundation from
the words of Christ, John 10.28. None shall pluck my sheep out of my hands.
And whether thou be a sheep or no thou can tell by thy feeding, for
howsoever thou may come to graze in the outward assembly with the
congregation; yet if thine ear be only feeding at Church, and thy thoughts and
thy affections at home in the flesh, thy self can tell thou art but a wolf
in sheeps clothing: so that as the persuasion of our salvation is certain and
undoubted, so is it also constant and perpetual. Howbeit, the power and pride
of prosperity wherewith the wicked are puffed up, and the strength and sting
of adversity wherewith the godly are humbled and abased, the one trampling
upon the earth as if it were too base to bear them, the other creeping like
worms and grasshoppers upon the ground, has made many to stagger in the
opinion of their profession, and in the persuasion of their salvation, because
he seemed thus to pass by them as in a whirlewind, and by the wicked with a
mild and still voice, meeting them as it were in the success of every thing:
and this was that made David, Psalm. 73.13. think his labor in mortification
to be but lost, because he tasted of correction every morning; whereas they
that set their mouths against heaven were lusty and strong, and had the waters
of a full cup of prosperity wrung out to them: but when he had been in the
Sanctuary of God asking counsel of him, by whom he understood their end to be
but as a dream when one awaked, they increasing their sins by their fullness,
whereby they make the sword sharper for their slaughter; then he found his own
footing to be safe, and theirs to be slipperie, the one to begin his journey
with sorrow, and to end it with peace, the other to set forth in iollitie but
to come home as we say by weeping cross: for as Ioh says, Chap. 20.22.
Terrors shall take the wicked as waters, and the east wind shall hutle him out
of his place, and God shall cast upon him and not spare him, though he would
feign flee out of his hand. Even so let us not make this comfort of our assured
blessedness uncomfortable to us by our doubting, for if we waver in this,
whether God love us and we him, the chastisement of a father will prove the
scourge of a revenger, and we shall think he smites us because he hates us,
and lifts us up to cast us down; or else we shall imagine our store to come
from our own hands, and measure our lives after the crooked line of men's
example, which run on heaps to hell, for their own souls conuinceth them
of their forgetfulness of God, and then cannot he remember them in Paradise;
whereas we setting God always at our right hand, may be fure hereafter he will
set us at his, and that he guiding us by his counsel, Psalm. 73.24. can not but
in his time receive us to glory. Therefore let us lift up our heads ^^d keep
the way even within, that there may be as little rubbish in the heart as can
be: and since through infirmity we fall often, let our care be it be in the
right way, where we are sure to mere with Christ, who is the way and the life
to us; and let us make the like use travelers do, go the faster for our fall,
for our faith must go further then to believe there is God the father, Son,
and holy Ghost, and a communion of Saints, etc. this being but in general;
whereas we must believe it with application to our own particular, as that he
is a God to me, in his love to make me, and by his providence to keep me; a
Son to me, to redeem me when I was lost, and to feed me when I am come
home; a holy Ghost to me, to comfort me in my distress, and to work in me a
holy life; a communion of Saints to me, to help me with their prayers, and to
strengthen me by their good example. And if this treasure be in thy heart, thou
have the assurance of thy salvation laid up there for thee also.

Again, where it is said, the spirit dwells in you, learn, that we must not
serve God by sits, but it must be continually, for the spirit remains not in
us for a time, but takes up his mansion and abiding with us, and while he is
with us he is ever working, as the Sun is ever moving, and works of his own
nature, stirring up good thoughts and affections in us at all times, and is
never idle not in vain in us; not but that in many things we offend all, but
we send forth such a peale as it were of prayers and repentance after the sin
committed, as it ouertakes it and turns it back before it can flee to the
justice of God; and this is that makes S. John, 1. John 3.9. to set it down
as a position and rule in scripture, that he that is borne of God sins not
at all, because it flies forth as shot to which the hand did never set fire, we
being overtaken sometime in weakness that we slip, which we no sooner feel,
but being warned by this spirit, we gather our feet the more close together to
stand fast. Since then this spirit of God has set up his rest in our souls,
let us as lively stones in this spiritual building cleanse and polish our
selves from all corruptions, that it may take delight to continue with us; for
if he come to survey thy heart, to see what room thou have for him, and he
find every chamber there full of some sin, and sees that as fast as he
emptieth it with one hand thou fillest it up with another, re^sting the power
of him as if he came to torment thee, he will take his flight from thee, and
thy sins shall break out as the plague sore upon thee to thy utter
confusion: but if thou submit thy self to his work, suffering him to mine and
undermine every vein in thy body, and to cleanse every corner in thy soul,
and being emptied of thy corruption, wilt labor in sanctification to keep thy
self clean, so beating down thy fleshly thoughts and carnal desires, as
they shall not so much as sleep with thee, and if they chance to creep into
thy bed thou will spurn them out as a chaste lover will a harlot; then shall the
spirit take up thy body as his house, and thou entertaining him, he will keep
out all thine enemies that may disturb thy peace with Christ.

Lastly, where he says, But he that has not the spirit of Christ is not his,
observe, that by an argument drawn from a natural man he proves, that as
many as have the spirit of Christ are sure of their salvation; for as a
natural man who has not the spirit is not Christ's so long as he remains a
natural man; so consequently it follows, that they that have the spirit are
Christ's, and being his, it were an absurd thing if they should not be saved;
for the conscience being pacified that God will accept us in Christ, we are not
now perplexiuely to doubt of our salvation, or how to avoid damnation; for if
we should doubt of our (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 10.


IN this verse the Apostle makes the preuen^^^^ of a doubt which might have
risen out of the former doctrine: for he having before proved that the spirit
of God, the spirit of Christ, and Christ himself are in us that are elect, we
might make question of the truth of this, seeing we have a large remnant of
sin and of the corruption of nature abiding in us: To this the Apostle
answers in this verse, and those that follow; First granting that so long as
we carry about us this body, so long shall we carry about us sin in our
body, part whereof is already mortified in this life, the rest can not be but
by mortality: But then in the second place that we might not be too much
dejected with this clogge of sin we draw after us, he would have us with this
occasion we have to humble us, to join withal the consideration of the spirit
of Christ which is in us, to raise us up again: assuring us that if our faith
by her visible fruits can appear in our lives, that though we have a portion
of sin which can not die but by death, yet we have the spirit of God, the
spirit of Christ, and Christ himselfe-dwelling in us, the fruit whereof is
everlasting life in glory, obtained by the righteousness of Christ for us;
applying himself in the latter part of the verse to comfort the weakness,
and to cheer up the faint hearts of the faithful, laboring to relieve them
with some spiritual consolation, that notwithstanding they cannot shake off
the sluggishnesse of the flesh, but are taken as it were with a palsy half
dead on the one side, being compassed about with many infirmities in this life,
and having many grudgings and resistances of this earthly lump, which is the
body, against the work of our sanctification: yet for all this the faithful
and elect may know and be assured, that they are not trained forth to fight
and have the foil, nor that they are called to any doubtful combat, but to
such a field where our hands shall be held up if we faint, Exodus 17.12.
as were the hands of Moses, and where we shall prevail, not only against
the Amalekites as did Joshua, which are enemies without us, but even against
the hidden enemies of our heart, the rebellion of the flesh, and the corrup^^^^
of nature, which is contained in these words; But the spirit is life: so as the
verse stands on two parts; First he grants part of the objection, namely,
that sin cannot fully be shaken off: Secondly, to the full satisfaction of
our consciences he answers the other part of the objection: namely, that
notwithstanding this remainder of sin in us we need not be perplexed or doubt
of our salvation.

Here first we are to consider of the three special kinds and phrases of
speech the Apostle uses in the former verses, and in this; concerning the
spirit of God which is in us, the spirit of Christ which is in us, and Christ
himself which is in us. Whereby we are taught to believe that the whole
Godhead and Trinity dwells in every Christian. Howbeit concerning the spirit
of God, we must know we cannot attain unto it, but by the spirit of Christ:
for as the waters that boil in the earth cannot be conveyed unto us but by
wels and pipes by which we receive of the fountain it self; so the spirit of
God is the fountain of life, but a Well too deep, and the place too high for
us to reach to, he dwelling in a place inaccessible and not to be approached
unto; and for this cause the spirit of Christ is the wellspring and pipe which
passes this life to us, and by this we are made partakers of that life in
glory, so that in this respect the spirit of God is said to be in us, and also
the spirit of Christ, which spirit could not be conveyed unto to us but by the
flesh of Christ God and man to reconcile us to his Father; and yet all this is
but one God and one spirit, as 1. Ioh. 5.7. which proves these two things:
first that Christ is God: secondly, that the holy Ghost proceeds both from
God and Christ, because they both are but one, and the selfsame spirit is but
one. And in that Christ is also said to be in us, it is but the same in effect
that the spirit of Christ is in us; yet are we verily to believe, that very
Christ is really in us indeed, yet invisibly, and this must be understood
supernaturally: and therefore they that hold they are only partakers of the
graces and benefits of Christ, but not of Christ himself, cannot believe that
Christ shall save them; for Christ's benefits are so inseparably united to his
person; as if we have his invisible spirit, we have himself, and may equally
assure our selves of both, and that we are flesh of his flesh, expressed in
the Scripture, as has been before declared, by natural proportions and
supernatural, as, first by the conjunction of the head and the members of a
man's body: secondly, by the vine and the branches: thirdly, by the husband and
wife: fourthly, by meats and drinks, that as they being eaten really do
nourish the body; so we eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ
spiritually, he nourishes and feeds our souls to life eternal. This union
is also set down unto us supernaturally, John 14.20. Ye shall know I am in
the Father, and you in me, and I in you; howbeit we are not in the same
measure in Christ, and he in us as he is in the Father, but according to that
proportion of faith which is in us, and in that abundance that shall make us
blessed for ever.

Again, learn hence, that we are not to look for any perfection in this
life, but so long as we bear about us this mass and lump of flesh which is
the body, there will remain certain relics of corruption which can not be
extinguished but by death, nor wholly removed but by mortality, and this is
the case of Gods best children: Paul speaking of himself as in the part
unregenerate, and as but in part spiritual, Romans 7.14. said he was sold
under sin and carnal, meaning thereby, that so much as he had of the spirit
so much was the image of God restored in him, and so much he delighted in the
law of God; but so much as was wanting of the spirit, so much was wanting of
Gods image, and so much he rebelled against the law of God, and served the law
of sin. And Peter that chosen vessel of God, John 13.10. by the wisdom and
instruction of Christ himself has need of water to wash his feet: and 1.
John 5.8. Christ came not only by blood, but also by water, that by daily
regeneration we may purge and cleanse our selves. And to this may be referred
that speech of Christ, John 13.33. Whither I go ye cannot yet come; which
proves we have still some corruption, that makes us yet unfit for the
kingdom of heaven, until we have washed our feet cleaner, and mortified our
selves better, for we know yet but in part. But then it may be said: since we
have these imperfections how shall we be known from the reprobate? Very well:
for there is great difference between our imperfections and their sins, our
scarres and their ulcers, our limping and their halting down right, for as 1.
John 3.9. He that is borne of God sins not, that is, as the world sins,
the one sinning of ignorance, the other of knowledge; one of infirmity, the
other of presumption; the one with grief, the other with greediness; one
through weakness, the other through obstinacy and malice; the one striking
and checking his heart for the evil thought it produced, the other feeding and
encouraging his heart not to stay at the thought till it break forth into
the hands; yea God does bring us up that are his children thus imperfectly for
two ends: for first he will not suffer us to have our perfection here, for
fear we lose it as Adam did: secondly, he does exercise us with these
imperfections to humble us lest we should wax proud and so care not for him;
and this is his great mercy that he does try us with infirmities, but not
destroy us; vex us, but not v^nquish us, giving us power in the end through the
sufficiency of his grace to overcome them.

Now for the second part, which is his satisfaction given to the faithful,
that they must not so sink under the burden of their infirmity as to mistrust
their salvation; observe when it is said, the spirit is life, we must
understand no natural life, but such a life as Paul speaks of, Ephesians. 4.18.
where he says, the Gentiles that walked in the vanity of their minds were
strangers from the life of God, that life whereby God dwells in us; and to be
strangers from this life, is to be strangers from holiness of life: for God
and an unclean conversation cannot company together. And this life of the
spirit is that, whereby (as Peter says, 2. Peter 1.4.) we are made partakers
of the divine nature, not really, but by renouation, having obtained this
mercy to be borne a new of immortal seed by the word of God. For as the
soul infused into the body, quickens a massy piece of flesh which had no
motion before: so the soul to make it a lively and good soul, must have a
soul powered into it, that is, the spirit of God; and if this spirit be absent
we are as dead from holy motions, as the body natural is from outward actions
by the priuati^^ of the soul. So as we learn hence, that a man may live ^^fe
in the flesh, and yet be dead in respect of the life of God, which ought to
move us to work out our sanctification in fear, knowing that if we be all
flesh, we shall never see the face of God.

Now as to live a natural life, there must be a generation according to the
flesh, so if we will attain to this life in the spirit, we must be brought to
a second birth; not to be turned into our mothers wombes again, as Nicodemus
thought, John 3.4. but as Christ says, we must be borne of the will of his
Father, that is, of the seed of the holy Ghost. Here it follows, as a man
naturally borne has his life maintained by being nourished with meat and
drink: so when we be borne again of the seed of the spirit, we must be
maintained and fed by the flesh and blood of Christ spiritually: and as we are
borne of the holy Ghost by the word, so we must be nourished by the holy
Ghost in the word, or else we shall never be saved. In the desire therefore of
our salvation, we ought to thirst and part after the rivers of life, which do
plentifully flow in the book of God.

Again, as men in this natural life have their degrees to proceed in, which
do never change, as that first they be children, then after grow to a more
understanding age: which was even true of Christ in this flesh, who ( Luke
2.52.) is said to have increased in wisdom and in stature: even so we must
know, that our spiritual birth is not perfect at the first day; but it has as
it were a childhood, and we are babes to be fed with milk, as S. Peter says,
1. Pet. 2.2. and then afterward we grow from faith to faith, and from one
degree of grace to another: yet herein they differ, that in our spiritual
life in this world, we cannot come to any perfection, sin hangs so fast
about our heels: but in our natural life we attain to a fullness and
ripeness of strength. And in this also they differ, that the natural powers
of this life decrease by age and by infirmities: but so it must not be in our
spiritual life, for in this we must never neither stand still, nor go
backward, nor grow downward, but still be steadfast in faith, and walking on in
love, like men always running a race, till we have attained the prize, which
prize is glory.

Again, consider for this spiritual life, that as the body whi^^ it has the
soul, is but a natural body, spending like oil in the lamp, and cannot but
in the end die, yet after this life shall be called a spiritual body, not in
substance, but because in the resurrection it shall be quickened by the
spiritual power of the holy Ghost; so a man that has but a soul, if he have
not the soul of the soul, that is, the spirit of God to quicken it, he is but
a natural man, and must needs be damned. Again, as a body raised up, and
quickened by another power can never die, so the soul being a spiritual soul,
and having once received the earnest of the spirit, and the power of
sanctification: from the holy Ghost, can never die. And in this respect we are
exalted to a greater privilege than Adam had in his creation; and it fares
better with us than it did with him: for it was a^btrarie with him, and rested
in his will to die or not to die: whereas we having once drunk of the water of
life, and once tasted of this spiritual life, we may never thirst: and as S.
John says, 1. John. 3.6. we cannot sin, Ioh. 6.54.
that is, not to sin, but that we purge our selves upon reproose, and recover
our selves when we fall.

Further observe hence, that there is a double death and a double life* first,
there is a death in the present corruption of sin, whereby in this life we
deserve damnation. Now that there is a death in this life, is proved, 1. Tim.
5.6. the widow that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives: and Ephesians.
5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead: and Revel. 3.1. it
is said of the Church of Sardis, Thou have a name that thou linest, but thou
art dead. Secondly, there is a death in the perpetual condemnation for sin,
which is first inflicted upon the soul at the separation from the body, and at
the last day shall be laid both upon the soul and body in a fearful and full
measure. Answerable to this is life, the first kind whereof, is the grace of
God vouchsafed us in this our pilgrimage: the second is the glory of God, given
us in the life to come. Now the life of the spirit has three degrees: first,
at the regeneration when we are renewed in our affections, and do feel a
change of mind within us: secondly, at the separation of the soul from the
body, when being as in were released out of the setters of this life, she takes
her flight to heaven, for then does the soul live more excellently than it did
before, being freed from the bufferings of Satan and the allurements of the
flesh. Thirdly, at the general resurrection, when the world with the Iustes
thereof shall pass away like a cloud, and be wrapped up like a clout, for then
both soul and body shall enjoy the presence, yea more than that, shall live
the life of God for ever. Even so death in the reprobate has three degrees:
first, in the contagion of sin: secondly, in the separation at the door of
death as it were, when the soul alone goes to the devil: thirdly, at the
resurrection when the body is reunited to the soul, to receive the fullness of
their endless torment.

Again, the reprobate in this life and in the life to come have a double
misery coupled to their double death: for first in this life they want the
grace and favor of God, and be even like Cain, Genes. 4.14. afraid lest every
man should kill them. Secondly, they have resident in them the devil, who
being the God of this world, has and does carry them away daily in the power
of darkness. Then in the life to come, John 16.11.
they have first a privation or loss of the presence of God: secondly, a
suffering and enduring of all torments, 2. These. 1.8.9.
where there cries shall never be pitied, nor their pains ever be eased.
Proportionable to these have the children of God double comforts, which may be
gathered from the contrary of the former. For first they have the countenance
of the Lord always smiling on them, and the strength of the Lord alwais
supporting them in this life. Secondly, which is more, they have the true
spirit of comfort dwelling in them, and the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost does continually feast with them while they live here. And when we fall
a sleep (for nothing else is death to the Saints, as we may see in Stephen, 2.
Cor. 3.17.18.
Act. 7.60.) then do we first stand always in the sight of God, and behold
him face to face; neither does his glory then any whit amaze us as it did when
the veil was before our eyes, but it does rejoice us, and we glory in it.
Secondly we are filled with ioies unspeakable, and have the full access and
fruition of all that the heart can desire or seek for.

Now the way to know that this life of God is in us, must be by the amendment
of our lives and by the leaving of our sins: for regeneration begins at
repentance, and repentance at leaving of sin, in which point every man must
examine himself wisely: for if thou have not brideled thy tongue from bitter
and blasphemous speech, if thou have not taught thy hands to work truly
without deceit, and have not brought thy heart to pray fervently without
hypocrisy, then have thou no part in this regeneration, and by consequent no
fellowship in the life of God.

For righteousness sake: That is as much as if the Apostle had said,
reformation of life and religion is the badge and evidence of the spiritual
life we lead here. The cause of this is the righteousness of Christ, which
rests in these two things: first, in satisfying the justice of his Father for
our sins, as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, and by his stripes are we healed:
secondly, in fulfilling the law, which he performed four ways: first, by
teaching it precisely: secondly, by obeying it exactly: thirdly, by suffering
for our breach thereof meritoriously: fourthly, by sanctifying us to do it
effectually. But this kind of righteousness is only resident and inherent in
the person of Christ, howbeit the righteousness here spoken of by the
Apostle, is a sign only and a token that we are sanctified by the flesh of
Christ, and that Christ has purchased salvation for us, and that we sighing
under the burden of sin, Romans 7.25.
walking in a reformed life, and waiting for the glory that shall be seen,
we shall be as the Saints of God, beloved of the Lord, having our long robes in
sign of stateliness as Senators, and palms in our hands in sign of victory
as conquerours, Reu. 7.9.
for we in Christ have over come Satan.

Further we must observe and know, though this spirit of life dwell in us, yet
so long as we are enclosed in this earthly tabernacle, and have the corruption
of nature clasping about the soul as Ivy to the Oak, Ioh. 13.8.
we cannot be free from infirmities and sins, nor washed so clean but that
some filth will cleave to our hands or our feet. Yet there is great difference
between the slips and sins of him that has, and of him that has not the
spirit of God, as great difference as there is between him that is drenched
and plunged over head and ears in a puddle, and him that has only fouled his
foot: according to the speech of Christ to Peter, Ioh. 13.10. He that is
washed needed not save only to wash his feet: as if he should have said,
Peter thy head and thy hands are clean, only thy feet need washing (...) that
is, always in this life some inferior affection is unclean, and there will be
a little boiling against the working of the spirit; but the principal purpose
of our hearts shall be to please God and to loath the world. For the children
of God are as poisoned vessels washed by the holy Ghost, 2. Cor. 10.^^
wherein notwithstanding there rests some taste and tang of their former
filthiness: but the wicked are as vessels full of the poison of the devil,
wherein the spirit of God never set footing. Again, sin in the regenerate
has a wound, and is like the Sun faintly appearing through some thick cloud,
but in the wicked it has it full stroke. Again, the wicked are so chained
that they cannot stir one foot to heaven; and being cast from God, they so
little care for it, as they will with Cain ( Genesis 4.17.) fall a building of
cities, and having lost the harmony of a good conscience they will get some
Iubal or other, ( Genes. 4.21.) to play on the organs to make them merry: but
the godly though they be loosed from the chains of the devil, yet while they
soiourne here they must draw some irons after them. Again, the wicked from
their birth have turned their backs to God, and their face to the devil: but
the godly though they be hindered in their course, and stayed in their
profession of godliness and of sanctification by some infirmities inseparable
from the flesh, yet do they strive in their running to recover their fall, and
wrestle for a prize that shall never fade. And yet no doubt there is a
contradiction in the wicked even in finning, as it is said, Genesis 4.7. sin
lies at the door of Caine, that is, the blood of his brother Abel should
torment his conscience. Howbeit this combat and contradiction is but between
his conscience that condemns his sin, and his heart that loves it, but in
them there is never any strife between affections and affections: whereas the
godly have this fight between affections and affections, as the flesh desires
to do such a thing, but the spirit that dwells in the flesh does always
abhor it, and strives against it. So as if God has sealed thee up to
salvation, and has given thee the stone of absolution and pardon for thy
sins, though thou art now discouraged at that remnant of sin that rests in
thee, and fear lest God should frown at thee and turn his face from thee
for thy weak service of him, yet lift up thy head, thou shall be sure
hereafter through the power of this spirit to cast down that great Goliath, 2.
Cor. 3.18.
and thou shall have the full fruition of that hope thou yet do apprehend
and see as in a glass: Ephesians. 1.14.
and if thou have received but the earnest penny of the spirit in this life,
thou shall be sure to receive thy full wages and hire in the life to come.
Neither need we be dismayed that we limpe like Jacob, 2. Cor. 5.5. 2. Cor. 12.8.
Genes. 32.25. and be imperfect in this life: for if we had not infirmities, we
would be as proud as the devil, whereas now they make us to express our
thankfulness to God, that he so mercifully restrains them, and so fatherly
passes by them, they serve to multiply our groans in the spirit to God, Phil.
1.23. Romans 7.24. Heb. 13.3.
that we might be delivered from this body of death and bondage of sin: yea
they stir us up to the love of others, to sorrow for the afflictions of
Joseph and of our brethren: whereas if we our selves were not infirm and
weak, we would never be touched with compassion.

Verse. 11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his spirit that dwells in you.

Howsoever we have advantage and comfort by the former doctrine, that by the
extinguishment of this light which we have here beneath, and by the
separation of our bodies from our souls, sin must die, and cannot otherwise be
mortified than by mortality: yet in this verse the Apostle stirs us up to
greater joy and to the top of all Christian comfort, showing that the time
shall come, when our vile bodies shall be made like to the glorious body of
Christ Jesus. The verse stands on two parts: first, of the raising up of
Jesus Christ: secondly, of the raising up of our bodies to be made conformable
to Christ our head.

First observe the manner of the Apostle his speech, If the spirit etc. consider
wisely this speech propounded by Paul as it were conditionally, which does not
argue any suspended doubt fullness of the matter, or make it any whit subject
to exception, but carries with it a peremptory necessity that it is so, the
Apostle taking that for granted which cannot be denied without falling into
gross absurdities. For if he should have doubted whether Christ had been
risen again, then in vain had he gone about to prove that we should rise
again: and therefore by this manner of phrase the Apostle calls not the matter
in question as a doubt, but does boldly assume it to all Christians, that
Christ is risen. And this is the common course of the Scripture, and of the
Ministers of God in all times usually to say, If there be a day of judgment,
2. Pet. 3.11.
and if it be so that this book of Gods word shall be w^^^^^^^ our hearts,
then is there a fearful reckoning to be ex^^^^ for: which they do not as
doubting of these things, but taking them as granted of all men, they be so
certain without contradiction. So the Apostle before in this chapter, verse. 9.
If the spirit be in you (speaking to the elect) for all that is spoken in this
chapter belongs only to them that be called sanctified; but (says he) the
spirit is in you, for if they should deny that, they run into this, that they
must needs be reprobates and wrapped up in condemnation.

Secondly, observe in the raising up of Christ two parts: first, that he was
raised up: secondly, by what power he was raised up, namely by the spirit of
his Father. That Christ was raised up, the Apostle does not demonstrate it, but
assumeth it: for if Christ were not risen, then all Paul's reasons (1. Cor. 15.)
to prove our resurrection may easily be eluded, for that is the first argument
he there uses to prove a resurrection, because Christ is risen, and all his
arguments there following are linked to that, and depend on that: reasoning
from absurdities: if Christ be not risen our preaching is in vain, and your
faith is in vain, for Christ crucified and his resurrection is the sum of
the Gospel and the end of our faith. But the matter is, by what power Christ
was raised up. As he was flesh it profited nothing to raise up it self, for 1.
Pet. 3.18. it is said, he was put to death according to the flesh, that is,
according to his humane nature, and was quickened in the spirit, which the
Apostle there shows to be by that spirit wherein he preached in Noah's time.
And Romans 1.3. the Apostle speaking of Christ, says he was of the seed of David
according to the flesh, but declared to be the son of God by the resurrection
from the dead: which shows that it was the power of God that raised him up.

He that raised up Christ, etc. Here consider three parts: first, what shall
be raised up, our bodies: secondly, by what power they shall rise, by the same
power by which Christ was raised up: thirdly, after what manner; the same spirit
that quickened Christ is now communicated to us, and by Christ's righteousness
we are made righteous, and so are become fit temples for his spirit to inhabit
in us.

The Scripture proposes two arguments to prove the resurrection: first, the
conformity of the body with the head, that as Christ our head is risen, so
we his body shall rise again. The secondly is the consideration of Gods
omnipotency, and out says in his power: that is, to believe that he can do
all things, and therefore can raise up our putrified bodies. The first reason
holds both ways: if Christ be raised up, then shall we be raised up: Christ
is not risen, therefore we shall not rise. We are raised up, therefore Christ
is raised up; we are not raised up, therefore Christ is not risen. And this
does minister unto us great comfort, and may even astonish our hearts with
joy: for it is impossible, that we who are the body can be drowned, as long as
Christ our head is above the water. So then since our head Christ is lifted up
above all gulfes, has tasted of all sorrows, and has overcome all dangers,
we need not to fear that we shall be stifled or swallowed up of the wanes of
torments and afflictions, though we seem never so much cast down in the
outward man; for let the wild beasts of the forest roar never so fiercely, or
let the rain fall, and the waves beat, and the winds blow never so strongly,
Mat. 7.27.
yet shall their mouths be shut that they shall not hurt us, and our house is
built upon a rock that cannot move: for our Redeemer lives, and our head is
safe, and we at the last when he has sufficiently exercised his graces in us
by the trial of our faith, and the experience of our love of him, Ioh. 19.25.
shall through him overcome all troubles and sorrows.

For the second reason to prove the resurrection: which is the consideration of
Gods omnipotency, the Apostle ( Philipp. 3.21.) joins the raising up of our
bodies to the consideration of that power whereby God is able to subdue all
things. This also is evident Ezech. 37.5. where the Lord by his power gives
life to a company of dead bones. And Christ ( Ioh. 5.25.) says his Gospel
was able to raise up dead souls: that is, such as be dead in profaneness, but
by the power of his word shall: be revived and quickened in the spirit, which is
the first resurrection: and verse. 28. The day shall come (says he) when ye
shall find that to be true in the second resurrection to your damnation, which
ye will not now believe in the first resurrection ^^^our salvation, when by
the very voice of God the dead shall be raised up. Among many places to prove
the resurrection of the body that is most excellent, ( Mat. 22.32.) upon the
demand of the Sadduces, whose wife she that had had seven husbands should be
in the resurrection? I am (says he) the God of Abraham, etc. I am not the God
of the dead but of the living. No place at the first sight may seem to carry
less proof of the matter Christ then had in hand, but being duly weighed, it
is most substantial to prove it. It may be said: True it is, thou art the God
of Abraham, that is, of so much of Abraham as now lives; so as thou art the
God of Abraham's soul: but it is convinced out of the place it self, that thou
art not the God of the dead, and therefore thou art not the God of Abraham's
body, for his body is dead. But note, he does not say, he is the God of part
of Abraham, but he is the God of Abraham's person; which person of his stands
upon soul and body. Secondly, some say this place proves the immortality of
the soul only. Nay it is certain, if the body be not immortal, the soul
cannot be immortal: for if Abraham lives in any part now, he must at the
last live in all; and if immortality were only given to one part, then all the
reasons of Paul (1. Cor. 15.) to prove the resurrection of the body might be
easily euaded. For the Apostle there ( verse. 18.) to prove the resurrection of
the body, says: Unless Christ be risen and we rise, we that are a sleep
(...) Christ are perished. But it may be objected: Nay, there may be an
immortality if the blessed souls do live, and therefore they cannot be said
to be perished. And verse. 19. If our hope (says Paul) be in this life only,
we are of all the most miserable. Nay it may be said, we are happy in the life
to come in the soul: so verse. 29. he proves the resurrection of the body
from our baptism. Yea, but it may be said: That is not so Paul, for though
our bodies rise not, yet baptism may profit us in the spirit; and though thy
body (Paul) do not rise, yet thou have not fought with beasts at Ephesus in
vain: for thou shall be crowned with glory in thy soul, for that thou have
sustained these combats. And thus if we stand only upon the immortality of
the soul, all Paul's arguments in that place may be soon rejected.

It is true, that the souls are now blessed, as it is in the Revel. 7.9. where
the Saints are said to have their white robes in token ^^nnocency; long, in
sign of stateliness; and palms in their hands, in sign of victory: but it
is as true, that the soul is not happy, saving in the constant expectation of
the last day, when it shall be joined to the body: and it has not now that
fullness of happiness it then shall have. For it stands with the law of
retribution in God, that as he received most glory from them both when they
were united, so should he return them most joy and fullness of glory, when by
his power they are brought together again. And even so fares it now with the
reprobate that are departed, who feel only torment in their souls at this
time: but when their bodies shall be raked out of the dust, then shall their
pains be increased. So as this is the doctrine we must hold, that the souls
of the Saints are blessed ante resurrectionem, before the resurrection; but
fine resurrectione, without the resurrection they are not blessed. Romans 14.9.
God is said to be the Lord of the dead, and Mat. 22.32. Christ says, he is not
the God of the dead. In which places there is no contrariety: for Christ
means, that he is not the God of the dead according to the supposition of the
Sadduces: for no man is a King without subjects, nor a Captain without
soldiers, nor God the God of Abraham, unless Abraham be: but he is the God
of the dead, because they by him shall be raised up.

Now follows the first part: what shall be raised up, namely, this very body
which we now carry about us shall be raised up* Which is proved, first from
the proportion and resemblance with the head: for the same body of Christ that
was buried, was raised up: which is signified unto us by himself, ( Luke
24.39.) who to remove all doubts of the truth of his resurrection out of his
disciples minds, said: Behold my hands and my feet: and John 20.25. it is
said, that Thomas put his finger into Jesus side after his resurrection. And so
much did Christ forete^^^^re his death ( Ioh. 2.19.) Destroy this temple,
(meaning his body) and I will build the same (not another) up again: Secondly,
it is proved from the proportion of Gods justice toward the elect and the
reprobate also: for it stands with his justice, that those lips which in
this life offered up the calves of thanksgiving unto him, that that body that
has been baptized into Christ's death, that mouth that has feed upon Christ
by faith, that that body which has been exercised under the cross, and
sanctified through afflictions, which has testified to the blood the
profession of his truth, it stands, I say, with the justice of God, that
that body and no other should be raised up to glory. And Paul notes forth
so much in himself a member, (1. Cor. 15.53.) when he says, This mortal
shall put on immortality: as if (says a learned Father) he had taken it up in
his hands to have expressed his meaning. Again, the proportion of Gods justice
toward the reprobate is, that that knee that has bowed to the Mass, shall
also bow to the devil in hell torment, and that that body which has embrewed
it self with the blood of Gods saints, that has rent as it were the Lord in
pieces by their blasphemy, and that have shut up their compassion from the
poor, that that body should be punished eternally in hell fire; and even
denied so much as a drop of cold water to cool their tongues. Luke 16.24.
For what justice were it in God to frame them new bodies, and so to punish
them in that flesh wherein they never sinned? Nay, it were mere injustice to
punish them in any other parts than those wherein they have offended. Now this
body of the faithful that shall be raised up, shall have three special
graces given unto it which it had not before to show the riches of Gods mercy
toward them: as first, it shall be immortal, and shall never putrify:
secondly, (...) shall be maintained by no natural power: and thirdly, it shall
have glory. Answerable to these, in another kind shall the bodies of the
reprobate be: for first, they shall wish they might rot, but cannot: secondly,
they were happy if they might pine away, but the worm shall be continually
gnawing, yet never satisfied, nor they weakened: Mark. 9.48.
thirdly, they shall have horror and shame, and howling and gnashing of teeth
continually.

For the second point, which is, by what power our bodies are raised up,
namely, by the same spirit that Christ was raised up. Now then it may be asked,
how the reprobate shall rise, for they partake not of this spirit, nor have any
part in this resurrection. It is true, that the power of Christ as a Savior,
and the fruit and benefit of his death are inseparable from the elect, and
belong only to them. The reprobate therefore shall be raised up by the same
power by which they were at first created: and as at the first they were made
by the power of God in his Son, the Father consulting with his wisdom, which
is Christ: even so shall they be raised up again by the power of God in his
Son, not as a redeemer, but by the absolute power of Jesus Christ their
Judge. Gen 3.23.
And as when Adam fell he was not only deprived of the tree of life, but of
all the other fruits of the garden, and in the loss of that lost all the
rest, and was driven out by violence, and kept out by the sword from any more
fight of God in Paradise: even so the reprobate deserve not only to be
secluded from the possession of heavenly glory, where grows that life that
ever flourishes, but even utterly to be extinguished and abolished, for they
are but usurpers upon the Lords heritage, and even the air which they breath
in shall be their damnation, for they deserve not so much as their being. Yet
such is the great bounty of God, that he raineth as well upon the unjust as
upon the just, yea and oftentimes obscureth his goodness toward his Saints,
and hides as it were his face from them, when the wicked flourish as t^^
Palm Tree, and abound in all earthly prosperity: but yet this is our comfort,
that they pass away as a shaft in the air, and as a ship on the sea, so is
their place no more seen, and indeed they shall find it were better for them
they were not: whereas the godly know, that in (...) earth they have no abiding
city, but that their treasure is in ^^^uen, where their hearts always be, and
their bodies heereaf^^^ shall be.

Because that his spirit dwells in you. This is the third part was noted out
unto us, namely, how this power of the spirit is in this life communicated unto
us. Wherein obser^e, that whosoever is regenerate is made partaker of the life
of God, and such a man has his soul and body taken up and dressed, and
dedicated to entertain the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost abides in him: and
John 14.23. Christ says, If any man love me he will keep my word, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell with him: so as the
whole blessed Trinity abides in such a man; which is a most princely
prerogative and royal dignity which the faithful have, that the King of
heaven will stoop so low as to abide in the soul of a poor Christian.

Further observe, in that the spirit dwells in us, that as Christ before he
took upon him and assumed our flesh, sent his herbenger before him to seele
that house, and sanctify that womb wherein himself would lie, Mat. 1.18.
that the virgin by that means was full of the holy Ghost: even so he still
sends forth his spirit to take up his lodging for him in the heart of every
Christian, and to sanctify them in some measure, 2. Cor. 13.4.5.
though not in that fullness he did the virgin. And as God in no place on the
earth was said to be more then he was in the Arc, so is he in no creature so
much as in the elect, 1. Sam. 4.7. Psalm. 8.1.5.6.7.
yea all the creatures by this means are made serviceable to the elect.

Now when the spirit comes unto us, it finds our hearts very ruinous like
an old house, yet such an habitation as by some ancient monuments shows what
stately building it was at first by creation; then it falls a tempering and
building it up again by the love of God ingrafted in our hearts, and it does
sift us and cleanse us: and wherea^ ^t finds nothing but bare walls, that
is, a departure of all the graces of God, and a deprivation of them, it fills
us and infuseth unto us all heavenly virtues. And as the Lord was in the
Temple, and yet not shut in and in^^uded there; but in that he was there, it
was necessary it should (...) kept clean, as appears 2. Chron. 23.19. that
for this purpose porters were set at the gates of the house of the Lord, that
none that was unclean in any thing should enter in: so we that are Christians
being a type of that Temple that should be built of living stones, whereof
Christ must be the chief and corner stone, and wherein we must believe that
God dwells far more spiritually and effectually then he did in the other;
we (I say) must be kept far more cleanely then the other Temple was. In this
respect also, that this Temple wherein the Lord now dwells is our souls and
bodies, the Priest our selves to offer up our selves, the sacrifice our selves
to be sacrificed in our souls and bodies upon the altar, which is our hearts;
but yet so, as we are still acceptable only in the sacrifice of Christ and in
his priesthood. Now this spirit that thus dwells in us, is called the spirit
of sanctification, in respect of the four properties wherein it resembles the
material Temple. For first, as the Temple might not serve for a dwelling
house, but was only consecrated to abide and continue there while they served
God: so the temples of our bodies must not be taken up of the lusts of the
world to dwell there, but be dedicated only to entertain the spirit of
Christ: and secondly, as the holy garments were only worn in the Temple, so
ought we to look that we attire our selves only as becomes Christians
that stand always in the presence of God: thirdly, as the holy meat was only
eaten in the Temple: and fourthly, the vessels only there to be drunk in: so
this shows that our bodies and all the powers, affections and actions both of
soul and body, as well in the heart within, as in all the use of Gods
blessings without, 1 John. 2.17.
must be separated from all earthly things to be by them estranged from the
worship of God, and be reserved only to holy uses, that God and his glory may
be the chiefest end of our life, for so the Hebrew word to sanctify,
signifies to be set apart, and not prostitute to any profane use.

Hereupon it is, that if in the Temples of Christians we see idols erected, we
are grieved and offended, and that justly, because we see a great part of Gods
service shall be spent in bodily adoration, which ought not to be: for though
it be true that God requires to be worshipped of every bone in the body, yet
principally in this sacrifice of prayer and other religious exercises he
looks at the heart, and sets his eye on our affections to be worshipped in
spirit and in truth.

Now if it be unlawful to erect and set up an idol in any Christian Temple,
John 4.24.
for so much does the Scripture in express words testify in many places, as,
Pull down their altars, break their images and burn them in the fire, Deuteronomy.
7.2. and. 12.3. Judge. 2.2.
with many such like places and speeches: how fearful a thing then is it,
that we that are Christians should set up idols in our souls, the most
beautified place that God has on earth, as the idols of covetousness,
hypocrisy, filthiness, pride, and such like, which be invisible, and
therefore worse then the other, and which do secretly like a thief steal away
our hearts from the love of God, and as a moth do even feed upon us and
consume us, till we suddenly fall into the wrath and displeasure of God.

Here let us further consider but how we use our own houses, wherein we dwell
in the tabernacle of this life, and which ought to be but as tents to be
carried at our backs, Genesis 18.1.
to put us in mind of our pilgrimage: for if the matter of the Church cannot
affect us nor touch us at the quick, yet shall it set forth our wickedness
and enlarge our condemnation, that we esteem more of our own dwelling places,
wherein we sleep to night, and to morrow are cast into the grave, then of that
place wherein the Prince of heaven and earth takes up his abode: how curious
we are in scouring of our pots, in sweeping of our parlots, in plaiting of our
garments, and tricking up our selves nicely and garishly! yea no servants can
please us, but such as wear out their knees in rubbing our houses; and how
fearful and shameful a thing it is, that we make no account nor reckening of
that place where the whole Trinity should abide; that our houses shall be
clean where only our dirty feet do tread, and out selves the vncleanest
part of it; and that through our wretchedness and negligence in purging of our
selves, and cleansing of our souls, we are rather dens fit for the damned
spirits, then temples meet for the holy Ghost to abide in? for if our hearts be
once ouergrowne with the weeds of profaneness, idleness, covetousness, and
such like, we may assuredly know, that God can have no room to dwell in such a
soul.

Further, from the Metaphor or borrowed speech (dwells,) note that there is a
residence of the holy Ghost in all those that be his: so as it must not be a so
iourning of the Lord with us, to come like a stranger for a night or for a
meal, and away again, but he must be a household guest, to go in and out with
us: so that we must know it is not every pang of conscience, or fit of prayer,
or hanging down our heads for a day, whereby we are sometime perplexed and
wringed with sorrow, that is the dwelling of the spirit in us, no more then was
that fit of Balaam, ( Numb. 23.10.) when he prayed that his soul might die the
death of the righteous, and that his last end might be like his. Neither is
this spirit known to be in thee by doing many good things: for Herod ( Mark.
6.20.) did many things at the persuasion of John Baptist, yet was he a most
cruel incestuous bloody ty^ant: nor yet by leaving many evil things undone,
for the very Heathen had many moral virtues which made them decline from many
vi^^^. ^ut by this shall thou know that thou have this spirit, if a^^^ (...)
^^osseth and repugneth thy affections, if thy affections ^^e ^^t against it,
but that in the meditation and purpose of sin thou please thy self, and take
part with thy affections against God to fulfill it, as Balaam did, when by the
proffer of riches ( Number. 24.13.) he would feign have cursed where the Lord had
blessed; it is certain this spirit of God abides not there, but the devil.

Lastly observe, since there is no hope of the resurrection, but so far as
we are sealed in this life to that glory we shall have hereafter, by the
earnest of Gods spirit given unto us: we may truly say of the wicked, whom the
Son never kissed, Psalm. 2.12.
that when they die they go to the damned: for he that has not his part of
this spirit in this life, unless the Apostle be a liar, which were blasphemy
to think, that man shall never have the glory of the life to come. And
therefore such as do scorn and scoff at the servants of God, as Ishmael did
at Isaac, Genesis 21.9.
calling them Men of the spirit, they do commit most sacrilegious scurrilitie,
and in this state wherein they stand, they are as surely the devils as the
devil is not Gods; yea, in this they do with their own mouths pronounce and
subscribe to their own damnation: for the Apostle says, we must have this
spirit, else it is impossible to be saved.

Here it may be said: Since there is only joy and peace in the spirit, how is
it that the wicked run on in the course of their life prosperously, and in
the end of their days go away quietly: whereas the godly walk through many
snares, and are in their life scratched as it were with many thorns, and in
their death often times are much troubled, and depart in great agonies. True it
is, the wicked may perhaps die quietly, and to the sight of man comfortably,
having (as Job speaks) no bands in their death: Job. 21.13. Psalm. 73.4.
but look thou judge him no more by his death than by his birth: for many
women have had more easy travel of a reprobate, than an elected child of God:
especially the cause of their quiet being, because hypocrisy has put their
consciences to silence here, that they may soon after roar out in hell: and
there is such a crust grown upon their hearts, 1. Tim. 42.
that they rot and fester within and feel it not: whereas in the elect the
(...) is kept always open, and we cannot feel the least b^^ (...) Lords
displeasure but we are anguished, neither can we (...) that we ever fear
enough: which tender heart of a Christi^^ is like the Adamant, to draw the oil
of comfort into his soul, and to hasten and quicken the life of the spirit in
him. Let us all therefore earnestly pray for this spirit; having obtained it,
let us cherish and welcome it, so as it may take delight in us: for we all
know it must one day come to this, In manas tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum,
Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit: and it is now at this, In manas
tuas (homo) commendo spiritum meum, Into thy hands (O man) I commit my spirit.
And therefore as we will have the Lord gracious to our spirits at the latter
day, so let us well use and entertain his spirit in this acceptable time,
which vouchsafes to dwell with us.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 12.


Upon that which went before, the Apostle infers a most vehement exhortation
to this effect: that seeing Christ has saved them, and freed them, not only
from the condemnation of sin, but also from the power of sin, therefore the
Lord does indent with them, and in them with us all, not to merit salvation:
but because salvation is already merited for us, to be engaged and obliged to
the Lord; and that since he has taken the hand writing away from Satan,
Coloss. 2.14.
and has cancelled it in Christ, that therefore we should be debtors not to the
flesh, but to the spirit.

H^^reupon observe, that the greatest argument to per^^ (...) rather to enforce
us to good works, is taken from (...) of our redemption: as appears by Saint
Paul, who (...) ^^^t argument ( Romans 12.1.) I beseech you by the mercies of
God, that you give up your bodies a living Sacrifice unto the Lord: that since
the Lord has been so merciful unto you, as not to look upon your
nakedness, but as you are clothed in Christ, you would therefore return unto
him conformity of obedience, in sacrificing your selves unto him. After the
same manner does Saint ^eter persuade (1. Pet. 2.11.) I beseech you as stangers
and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts. As if he should say: Since you are
now a chosen generation, and a people set at liberty by the death of Christ,
and by this means made Citizens of heaven, walk according to the laws of
that heavenly city.

Here are they condemned, that say: If by doing good works we can deserve
nothing, what heart can we have to do them? And since we are bought already,
why should the Lord be twife fatisfied? Whereto we answer, that though we can
deserve nothing, Luke 17.10.
yet by this means we show our thankfulness, in doing as much as we can; and
though in all things we are unprofitable servants, yet must we be thankful
for that which Christ has done for us. And since Christ has fully satisfied
for us, it is not further required that we keep the law to satisfy it, but
to testify our obedience and thanks, that we are made partakers of such
grace, and have received so great a pardon. And so by this our working we
declare our gratfull minds to God the Son by whom we are redeemed, and to
God the Father, to whom we are redeemed: for none of us can satisfy for that
he has broken: only Christ has made up the breach, and broken down the wall
that parted God and us: and therefore when we shall hereafter keep all the
laws of God in heaven, it shall not be to satisfy for that we kept not in
this life: for by doing but that we ought then to do, we cannot free our selves
from that pain we deserved for that we did not before.

Here arises the difference between the law and the Gospel. The Law
commandes works to merit salvation: the Gospel because salvation is already
merited, that therefore b^^ (...) good works we should testify that we are
bound and (...) to the Lord.

Hereupon note, that there is in the Gospel a double covenant: the first, of
mercy: the second, of morti^^cation. The covenant of mercy going first, which
is, I will save thee, I will write my law in thine heart, Ier. 31.31.
My soul shall delight in thee, Thou shall be beloved, and such like gracious
words and promises. Then follows the covenant of mortification; Thou art
saved, therefore live well, Thou art pardoned, therefore ^^fend no more: so as
first we must be forgiven, John 5.14.
and then we become debtors. We are not then saved because we do good
works, but we are saved, therefore this mercy of salvation makes us fruitful
in good works: as John 5.14. the sick man was not healed because he should
sin no more: but thou art healed, therefore remember this mercy of the Lord,
that thou do sin no more. So Luke 14.23. who be they that come to the
wedding* Call (says the King) the halt, the lame and the blind. So as such as
are emptied of al opinion of all worthiness in themselves, and be stark
beggars, must come; yet when they are come they must have the wedding garment:
so as we are bid to come, not because we have the wedding garment, but
because we are bid to come in the mercy of Christ, being beggars, we must
strive to get that garment, that is, a good conversation. So Luke 19.4.
Zaccheus was not saved because he gave half of his goods to the poor: but
Christ first spoke inuisibly to his soul, to make him clime up to the tree,
and being converted then he gives, as testifying a fruit of mercy to others
for the mercy himself received. So Lu. 7.41. in the speech of Christ of the
two debtors, they were both forgiven, but who loved most? Peter could say, he
that had most forgiven; and what made the debt forgiven, but the mere mercy
and good will of the creditor? So as in that place of Luke, not because the
woman loved much, Luke 7.47.
therefore was much forgiven her; but much was forgiven her, therefore she
loved much: for where the mercy is great, there must our labor in
mortification be great also. According to this it is said, Mat. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. But mark the
^stipulation and indenting of Christ with them again, ver. 29 ^ake up my yoke,
and learn of me to be meek and lowly: that is, after this great mercy
obtained, of disburdning you of that yoke which pressed your souls with
discomfort even down to hell, return this fruit of thankfulness to God
again: deny your selves and your affections, and be you yoked to the obedience
of the Gospel.

Verse 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live.

Before the Apostle persuaded us by the benefit of our redemption which is
wrought in Christ, to be humbled, and to acknowledge our selves indepted unto
Christ, that as by him we are saved f^^m Satan's tyranny, and freed from his
slavish service: in acceptance of this liberty, we should show our selves to
serve God in righteousness and holiness of life. Now because this would not
sufficiently subdue the rebellious disposition of hypocrites, and to stir up
the dullness of Gods weak children, he does in this verse add a reason to
make the former persuasion more forcible: first by a denunciation and
peremptory speech to the hypocrites, that besides the plague of God inflicted
upon them in this life, at the separation of the soul from the body, their
souls shall be carried to the damned ghosts there to be reserved to the
judgment of the great day: Jude 1.6.
secondly, by a provocation to the faithful, wherein he proposes to them the
hope of immortality.

Understand generally, as all Scripture is earnest in persuading these two
things, first, remission of our sins: secondly, repentance from our sins,
according to the speech of S. John of blood and water, that is, the grace that
pardons, and the grace that renews: so S. Paul is more precise in those two
than any other, in urging grace and mere mercy, and nothing but faith in the
point of our justification before God, and does also urge pre^se mortification
in our selves, to show by our sanctified lives that we are sealed up to the
day of redemption; that as Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, 1. Cor.
5.7.
so we should keep a continual feast unto the Lord in the unleavened bread
of a ^^^cere and sanctified life.

Now with these two has the wisdom of the world been greatly offended, and
has devised against them two errors: first, against mere mercy, Satan in
his subtilty and enmity to man, has stirred up the heresy of Pharisaicall
righteousness, ioining merit with mercy: and secondly, against the strictness
of mortification, he raised up the heresy of Libertines, that is, of them that
maintain worldly profaneness and licencious loosenes: so as one cries out, if
there be nothing but mercy, then there need no repentance: and the other
cries out, since it is done by mercy, what need such strictness and
preciseness in life? But howsoever these be laid as blocks to stumble at,
Mat. 11.19.
wisdom will be justified of her children, and the latter ^^i^e shall not
fall in vain upon the hearts of Gods chos^^^. Yet whether the Gospel preach
either of these, or both of them together, the hypocrites and profane
worldlings will take occasion of offense: as John Baptist is too precise
preaching repentance so earnestly. Mat. 11.18.19.
And if Christ be affable, gracious, and to be conuersed with, then is he a
friend of unrighteous persons. At John Baptist the Libertines, at Christ the
Pharisees be offended: so as whether John weep sorrow for sin, or Christ pipe
deliverance from sin, neither of these can please the itching humors of
wavering minded persons.

In the words are comprehended first a commination or threatening to the wicked:
secondly, a provocation or encouragement to the godly, by proposing a reward;
and both being set down conditional in the word if, they compare contratie
courses of life to contrary ends whereto they tend: the contrary courses are a
bad or a good life: the contrary ends, a bad or a blessed end, expressed in
these two words, they shall live, they shall die.

What it is to walk after the flesh, appears Ephesians. 2.3. to be, to follow
the course of the world in fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, as to be as
scoffing as Ishmael, as profane as Esau, Genesis 25.34. Exodus 4.21. 2. Tim. 4.10.
as hard hearted as Ph^^ach, and as covetous as Demas, that shook off Paul to
embrace the world. And what it is to mortify the deeds of the flesh, is set
down Galath. 5.24. to crucify the affections and lusts thereof, not utterly
to abolish the very life of sin, and to strike it dead at the root, for that
is the pattern of perfection we follow after, the gole we run at, and the
victory we strive for: but he that cease from performing and gratifiing his
flesh in the desires thereof, though there remains some tang of corruption,
that man may truly be said to mortify his flesh. And therefore understand a
difference between sin in the reprobate and in the elect, by a natural
proportion: as there is great difference between him that has a strong body
impotent in no part, but lively to perform all the actions of this life, and
him that lives, but has received his deaths wound, or is sick of a pi^^^
^^onsumption: so in the wicked sin lives a full life, and has his full
swinge to seek after all manner of evil, and increases daily without any
declination at all, rising early and resting late, to fulfill the pleasures of
the flesh: but in the godly sin lives droupingly and languishingly, always
holding down the head; for howsoever the elect do fall by infirmity, yet the
principal purpose of their heart is to follow Christ, even in his afflictions,
and so it is in them only a benumbed sin.

For the contrary ends, which are set down in two words, they shall die, they
shall live; it is not to be understood of any natural separation which is
common to all in death, but of an utter separation after death from Gods
presence to be tormented in hell: and so of life, for to live in this place is
meant to be saved, and to enter into the rest of God. Whereupon observe, that
speaking properly the wicked never live, nor the godly never die, that is, die
the death of deaths, as Christ speaks, John 8.51. They shall never see death;
for when, our breath shall leave our bodies, and we fall asleep, we shall
behold the Lords arms stretched forth to embrace us and the heavens open to
receive us, so as this kind of death is but an enlargement after a long
imprisonment, and a landing at our own country after our tedious travel and
troublesome pilgrimage in the sea of this world; which life in the godly is
begun here by our enjoying of Christ, enlarged in death, when our souls shall
live a more blessed life, and perfected at the last day, when we shall have
absolute joy without diminution in eternity. Even so is the death of the
wicked, begun here in their impenitency in sin, increased when they are in
part tormented after this life, and then made a living death, when at the last
they are thrown from God for ever.

If ye live after the flesh, etc. In these words the Apostle is precise for
works: and why? because it cannot be otherwise, but that we walking as
ordinary men, and after the custom of the world, must needs be damned. First,
take for a ground, that (which is verse. 8. of this chapter) They that are in
the flesh cannot please God; which he proves by matching of contraries: for
they that are in the flesh savor the things of the ^^^as they that be in the
spirit savor the things of the spirit: and that savor of the flesh is death.
He yields a reason: why? because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God;
not an enemy to God, for then there might be a reconciliation: but the Apostle
speaks in the abstract quality (enmity) as a vicious man may become virtuous,
and we of enemies are made friends with God, but vice can never become virtue,
nor enmity amity. The like speech is used of God himself in his curse of the
Serpent, Genes. 3.15. I will set enmity between thee and the woman, that is,
such hatred and debate as shall never be appeased. Now why this flesh is enmity
with God, he gives a reason, because it is not subject to the law of God as
the spirit is, neither can be, as the spirit cannot but be: for we must walk
in all the commandments of the Lord without exception, though not with
perfection: even as it is said, 1. John 3.6. They that are of God cannot sin:
that is, deliberately continue in any sin. Now who they be that are in the
flesh, we must learn by the contrary, that is, they that are not in the
spirit: as verse. 9. of this chapter: Ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit:
and who is not in the spirit? he that is not led by the spirit of Christ. And
who is he? He that walks not according to that spirit: that is, if he live in
the spirit a life invisible, he must show it by the effect of visible motions;
and he that walks according to the conversation of the flesh does it not. And
this appears, Gal. 5.24. All that are Christ's have crucified the affections
of the flesh: and who are said to do this? 1. Pet. 4.1.2. they that suffer in
the flesh; and who so suffers in the flesh cease from sin: so as to come
back again the same way we went; if thou have not ceased from sin, thou
have not suffered in the flesh; if thou have not suffered in the flesh, thou
have not crucified the flesh; if thou have not crucified the flesh, thou have
walked in the flesh; if thou have walked in the flesh, thou have not been led
by the spirit; if thou have not been led by the spirit, thou have not the
spirit; if thou have not the spirit, thou art in the flesh, that is, drenched
and drowned in the flesh: for it is one thing to have flesh in thee, and
another thing for thee to be in the flesh; for all have flesh in them, that i^,
infirmities; but to be in the flesh, is to be in Simon Magus case, in the gaul
of bitterness, Act. 8.23. and in the bond of iniquity: and in Eylmas case,
Act. 13.10. full of subtilty and mischief, the child of the devil, and an
enemy of all righteousness; and if thou art in the flesh, thou art already in
condemnation. Now I little doubt, but every wicked man desires to be saved:
but they endeavor it not, no otherwise then Balaam did, ( Nu. 23.10.) who could
wish to die the death of the righteous, but never indeauoured to live their
life.

Further to prove the precise necessity of mortification, look 1. John 3.7.
Let no man deceive you: he begins with a preoccupation to possess their
minds before hand: He that does righteousness (says he) is righteous, not he
that can discourse and talk of righteousness: and therefore one says truly,
Tace lingua, loquerevita, talk not of a good life, but let thy life speak.
This the Apostle there proves by the contrary: for he that commits sin is
of the devil: that is, he that commits f^^^^ the world does, and does not
purge himself: for the Apostle opposes sinning to purging; and he that is of
the devil cannot please God. For therefore was Christ sent to destroy the
works of the devil: so as if these works be not destroyed in thee, and his
building pulled down, Christ was never sent unto thee. Again he proves it by
the contrary: He that is borne of God does not sin, for he has the seed of
the spirit: therefore it is as if he should say: when such wicked men shall be
saved, the devil shall be saved. This is further proved by the words which
Christ himself spoke in the flesh, Ioh. 8.34. He that so sins as to make a
trade of it, he is the servant of the devil, verse. 44. and if no chastisements
nor benefits can reclaim you, ye are the devils: for the lusts of your father
ye will do. Lastly, add to this, that of the new covenant made with Israel,
and so with us: Ier. 31.31. I will write my law in their hearts, verse. 33. And
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. So as if God pardons any,
he does promise him grace to amend his life; and if that grace be denied him,
he never couenanted to save him. The covenant then implies thus much: If thou
have not grace to abstain from gross sins thou shall be damned; and if thou
have the grace of sanctification given thee, thou shall be saved.

But if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, etc.

This is the second proposition which the Apostle lays down, namely, that a
good course of life leads to a good end. Wherein first is questionable,
whether it stands in the power of the heart of man to subdue the corrupt
desires and affections of his nature, as well as it does to fulfill the lusts
of the flesh: for 2. Tim. 2.20.21. Paul showing, how that in a great house
there be vessels some for honor and some for dishonor, some for base and some
for higher services, which house he means to be the Church of God, says,
that if any man purge himself, he shall be a fit vessel for Gods house: and
1. Ioh. 5.18. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself from that wicked
one, (which is the devil) that he touch him not. Which places may seem to
attribute the purifying and cleansing of our selves to our selves, by our own
inclinations and wills: but it must be understood, that the Scripture in these
and such like places, sets not down the cause of this cleansing, but the
execution of it. For the cause of this our mortification appears Ezech.
36.26. I (says the Lord) will give you a new heart and a new spirit: so as
there it must be had, even of God; but it must be in us, otherwise we pertain
not to the Lords election. Hereupon the Scripture vouchsafes us that honor to
say we do it, because notwithstanding the reforming of our judgments, and the
changing of our affections is wrought by the supernatural power of the holy
Ghost working in us, yet this holy Ghost does work in us as the subjects, and
by us as the instruments: as when it is said, I will write my law in your
hearts, the spirit writes, but the heart is the place; and whatsoever is
written in our hearts is ours. To make this more plain by a natural
proportion: As a man that rectifieth and guides the hand of a child to write,
the writing is said to be the work of the child, and not of him that directed
him, though without such direction the child could not have done it: even so
the Lord does guide us in all things we do well; and what does he guide but
our wills? so as the work proceeding from our wills is ours, yet without the
guide of the spirit we could not do it. And in this working there is not a
double effect, one of the holy Ghost, and another of our selves, but we do; it
even as before there were not two writers, though the child was directed, but
the child only writ it.

Secondly, where it is said, If ye mortify, etc. ye shall live, it may be
demanded, whether by the same reason we deserve salvation by this mortifying of
our flesh^ as by walking in the flesh we deserve damnation. It is certain,
unless we do well we can not be saved; yet the holy Ghost shows, that there
is not the same perfection to do well in our natures, as there is in us
agilitie and dexterity to follow wickedness. For by our fall we are thoroughly
corrupted, as the Prophet Esaias speaks, chap. 1.6. From the sole of the foot
to the top of the head, there is nothing but wounds and swelling: but by our
regeneration in this life, we can never perfectly be renewed. It suffices we
have obtained the blessing of Jacob, Genesis 32.28.29. to have such power from God
as to be lame in sin all our life long. So Paul ( Romans 6.23.) says: The
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Christ:
whereby appears that the contraries themselves are not perfect: for sin of
it self deserves death, but being good of it self deserves not life, for it
is the gift of God, and so the consequents of these two cannot be perfect and
agree together.

Again, it is one question to ask, who shall be saved; and another to ask,
how we shall be saved: for true it is, that none shall be saved but they that
mortify themselves if they live: and for children, they are changed in a
moment by a supernatural power of the Lord. As it is said Esa. 33.14. Who
shall dwell with the devouring fire? He that walks in justice and speaks
righteous things, refusing the gain of oppression, shaking his hands from
taking of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shutting his
eyes from seeing of evil. And David ( Psalm: 15.1.) asks the question, and
brings in the Lord to answer it: Who shall dwell in thy tabernacles He that
walks uprightly, he that takes no reward against the innocent; and such like
as it follows there: as if the Lord should say: Such and none else (for the
words have an exclusive nature.) So if it be asked, who they be that shall be
set at the right hand of God in heaven? Mat. 25.34.41.
it must be answered: They that visit the members of Christ in affliction, and
lead their lives answerable to their religious profession. And if, Who they be
that shall be set on the left hand? the answer is: They that refuse to relieve
the Saints of God, and put religion on their faces as a mask to hide the foul
deformity and hypocrisy of their hearts. Therefore upon the question demanded,
Whether more in number shall be saved or damned, Christ resolves it Luke
13.25. showing that some shall have bestowed such pains, and walked so far
in the course of Christianity, as even to knock at heaven gates, and to
challenge the Lord to let them in, and yet he shall not know them: that
whatsoever profession they have made in the face of the world, as to come
before the Lord as a p^^ple, yet because they have not lived as a people, he
will not acknowledge them. So as true it is, that none shall enjoy the presence
of the Almighty, but they that have their lamps burning at the hour of their
death: Mat. 25.10.
none but they that have their foundation settled upon the rocks, Mat. 7.25.
as not to be shaken with the blast of any persecution: none but they who like
faithful servants by spiritual traffic have employed their talents to their
Lords advantage: Luke 19.24.
none but they that are able to testify by the fruits of the spirit, that
they have the spirit. But upon demand how we shall be saved, our answer is:
Only by the blood of Christ, as the cause and effectual means thereof: for
heaven is given operantibus, non operibus, to workers, not to works: as 2. Cor.
5.10. The Lord shall give to every man according as he has wrought; not for
that he has wrought: and Heb. 13.21. none shall see God without a pure
conversation, but not because of his pure conversation; for though we must be
perfect in works, yet this working must be wrought in us by God, as the
Apostle there speaks. So likewise none but the obedient child shall be heir,
not because he is obedient, but because he is heir, and yet only the obedient
child shall receive the inheritance. And even as we adore and worship Jesus
Christ man, but not his humanity, Hominem non humanitatem: so holiness of
life, speaking in the abstract quality, does not save, but holy men shall be
saved: so faith and works in the person justified must concur; but in the
matter of justification, faith only and alone has the place. If therefore it
be demanded whether works be necessary to justification: we answer, yea, as
absolutely necessary in their place as faith: for we can not assure our selves
of faith, but by the visible fruit of works; so as they be not Concausae,
causes concurring and iumping together, but they are Consectaria, consectaries
and consequents of faith.

Verse. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.

This is a confirmation of the reason before going, on both parts: for, as many
as mortify the flesh by the sprit, are the sons of God, and they that do
not so are the sons of the devil. So the force of the argument is, they that
are Gods sons are led to mortify the flesh, and being his sons, they are
inheritors of heaven: and this the Apostle assumeth and takes as granted, that
the sons of God must needs have eternal life. Whereupon the contrary
proposition is true; he that lives after the flesh, is not the son of God, for
if he were he would live after the spirit: but he that does not mortify the
flesh has not the spirit, therefore he is not the son of God. Hereupon
follows, if they be sons and not Gods, they are as Christ speaks John 8.44.
the children of the devil. Wherein we learn, that if we be asked by what
title and interest we can challenge or lay claim to heaven, it is by none but
by this, that we are the sons of God, and we are his sons only by adoption,
and we are adopted to it only in the natural heir and son of God Christ
Jesus, by whose blood we are justified, and sanctified by his spirit. Being
then adopted to this inheritance as heirs, we are not borne to it, for
adoption excludes birth, being not borne to it, it is purchased for us in the
obedience of Christ: we must learn then to resemble Christ in being obedient
to the will of God as he was, and show forth and express our obedience by
keeping his commandments, Mat. 26.42.
and keep them by leaving of gross sins, and walking according to his will,
with a full purpose of our hearts to perform it, always excepting our
infirmities and inborne weakness, which cleave so fast to us as we cannot
shake them off, nor be delivered of them till we overcome all in death. Having
then no title to heaven but by inheritance, nor no title to this inheritance
but by Christ, there is excluded all merits to deserve it: and only because we
are to be saved we must do well; for it is given us as the inheritance of
children, and not as any stipendary wages of a mercenary man. Herupon we must
wisely understand, that when Christ says, Mat. 25.35. Come ye blessed, etc.
for ye have relieved the poor, etc. that this releeuing of the poor, and such
other works of faith and love there mentioned, are not set down as causes of
blessedness, for these speeches (for) and (because) do not always infer and
bring in a cause, but they are such words and particles as sometime join the
cause with the effect, and sometime the effect with the cause: as when we say,
it is spring time, for it blossoms; not that the blossoms are the cause of the
spring, but an effect and evidence that the spring is come. So when we say, he
has a soul because he breaths, and yet the soul is the cause of breath, and
breathing but an effect of the soul: even so when Christ says, come and
receive a kingdom, for ye have done such and such particular works of love, it
is only a knitting of the effect with the cause: for God having preelected or
chosen us before all worlds to this salvation, gives us this his spirit, by
whose power and virtue we work these good things. And in this kind and
phrase of speech the cause is joined with the effect, as if it should be said,
Come you that have relieved the poor, that have comforted the distressed, that
have sorrowed with the afflicted, receive the kingdom, for it is your
inheritance. So as the speech of Christ has this meaning in it, You have done
good works to testify my kingdom to be yours, come take the inheritance
prepared for you in the preelection of God, for you are the inheritors of
heaven, because of these fruits and effects which you have showed in
comforting the aflicted members of Christ. We may not take it then that heaven
which is the inheritance of the saints, is given for any desert; for when we
have attained to the highest degree of mortification, and have done all that we
can, we are as Christ says, but unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.
True (say the Papists) unprofitable to God, but not to our selves. A miserable
evasion of a sottish distinctio^^^ for the scope of Christ is in that place to
prove from the less to the greater negatiuely, that if such servants whose
life and death were in their masters hands, (as bondmen were in those times)
doing their duties and service never so well, cannot deserve so much as thanks
at their masters hands, much less that they should emancipate and set
themselves free, and much less to be their masters heirs: then much less
(since there is no comparison between God in heaven and man on earth) can we
deserve at the hands of God, lying in the uncleanness of our first birth, and
ouergrowne with sins as we have grown in years, to be sanctified by his
spirit in this life, and glorified by himself in the life to come, for there
is no bondman so inthralled to his master as we are to God, even in respect of
our first creation, when we carried the glory of his image in our face, and had
as it were the crown of innocence set upon our heads, and yet we wilfully ran
from him to our shame, till he returned us again in his love: so as now all
that we do is duty and not desert: and why should he receive thanks that does
but what we ought? Yea (say the Papists) but yet we deserve something, because
we are not unprofitable to our selves. Absurd: for what master will think
himself beholden to that servant, who by his service only inricheth himself
and brings no commodity to his master? And yet by the meaning of the Papists,
because we get something under God and by his service, God must be indebted to
us. But hereupon we say, that true it is, we are not unprofitable to our
selves: for in Christ, not only the person but the work also is accepted, and
the person only in respect he is adopted, and this adoption is only in
Christ; but yet so, as we never have God beholden to us. Therefore when he
says, Come good servant and faithful, Mat. 25.21.
enter into thy masters joy: it is true, that the Lord does recompense the
using of our talents well; but this is so far as we are justified and are his
sons: so as first he loves the person, and then the work; and if he did not
accept the justification of the person, he would disauow the work: but being
his chldren, though we are far from doing that we ought, yet as a kind and
loving father he accepts it pleasingly.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 15.


IN this verse, and that which follows, the Apostle does confirm that he
set down before, namely, that we are entitled to eternal life by
inheritance; and to confirm and ratify that unto us, we have this privilege
to be Gods sons, and so heirs of heaven. The arguments he uses be two:
first, ye have received that spirit whereby God does witness that he does
accept you as his children in his natural Son Christ Jesus. And to prove we
have this spirit of a doption, he does it by the contrary: for, says he, like
bond-slaues ye do not now fear the ghastly looks of the tormenter, nor ye
have not now that hellish horror and fearful apprehension of Gods
judgments, whereby Satan uses to whip men's consciences, nor ye have not that
loud alarm of the killing law sounding in your ears, and seizing upon your
souls to affright you. Secondly, in the verse following, he proves it by a
double testimony: first, of Gods spirit which witnesses this unto us, and
which were blasphemy to think it could suggest false things: and secondly, by
our own spirit, which may assure our selves of it, by our godly and holy
conversation.

By the spirit of bondage, in this place is meant the holy Ghost, who by the
instrument of the killing letter, that is, the law, does propose and set down
such a condition of obedience, to which we are obliged and bound by our
creation, and yet are now utterly disabled by our corruption to perform it: so
as it is impossible to be kept, and yet ought to be kept, and lays such a
burden upon us, as neither we nor our first parents were ever able to bear,
since they declined from the estate wherein they were at first created.
Whereupon this spirit of God by this means setting the law before us as a
glass, wherein we may behold our selves, conumceth the conscience, of the
good not done, and of the evil that is done: thereby showing, that no flesh
can by this be justified before God; and shows and sets before our eyes
not only the sin, but the vengeance which the sin draws after it: so as
our conscience can not be but grievously wounded with that hellish horror we
have voluntarily made our selves subject unto. Now on the contrary, the spirit
of adoption is that work of the holy Ghost, whereby the incomprehensible love
of God in his Son is powered into our hearts, that he does auow and know us
for his children, so far as we are not now bondmen to fear the performance
of that impossible condition proposed by the law: but we are hereby assured,
that what the law commands, this spirit will either enable us to perform, or
dispense and bear with our imperfections in not doing it with that perfection
it requires, and so by consequent we ascertaine our selves that we are the
sons of God.

The parts herein to be observed are two: there being set down an opposing of
a double spirit of contrary natures, working contrary effects according to
their natures. The effect of the first being a dreadful and fearful
expectation of endless and hellish torments: the effect of the other being a
comfortable security, and breeding a heavenly hope, that we shall be blessed
of the Lord; out of which as out of a root springs and arises cheerful
obedience to God our Father, the other enforcing us only through fear to love
God as bondslaues.

Herein is questionable, whether by this spirit of bondage here spoken of, is
meant the spirit of Satan, or the holy Ghost, that should thus terrify and
affright us. But note, it must be understood of Gods spirit, which is the
author of working holy despair, and by consequent of terror, and is an
occasion of despair in the wicked: and this is as proper for the spirit of
God, as to offer the sweet comfort of Christ's bitter passion unto us. For by
this means and manner of terrifying, it brings both the elect and the
reprobate to despair, but to a diverse end. For the elect in this sort: that
showing it impossible and past our power to perform the law, even as
impossible as to build a tower to the heavens, or to remove a promontorie with
our finger, it brings us to a holy despair in our selus in respect of our
own deserts: thereby driving us to seek to cover our nakedness with the robes
of our elder brother Christ Jesus, and to remedy and cure our unrighteousness
in the righteousness of the blood of Christ. So as with the hearers of Peter,
( Act. 2.37.) the law ^^ging and pricking our consciences, we shall cry out
in a holy distrust of our selves: What shall we do? And this kind of despair
pr^pareth us to salvation: for the spirit shows us our poverty, and where to
buy gold that shall cost us nothing: it shows us our wretchedness, that have
nothing but rags to put on, and withal the wardrobe of Christ's righteousness,
where we shall have garments fit for the Saints of God: it shows our
Apostasy, how we have fallen, and by our fall have even broken and cut as it
were our own throats, and sends us to the Physician Christ, who is only
good at such a desperate disease: it shows our blindness, and withal the
eie-salue of the holy Ghost to clear us: 1. Ioh. 2.20.
it shows us our debt and the sergeant the devil ready to arrest us, and
then sends us to the God of heaven, in whose hands is all treasure to discharge
what we owe: it shows us how we stand upon the scaffold ready for the
hatchet, and then out of this astonishment sends us an absolute pardon from
heaven sealed with the blood of Christ, and subscribed with Gods own hand. So
as it teaches us only to mistrust and despair in our selves, and to seek to
be relieved and refreshed with that water of life, whereof having once drunk,
we shall never thirst again. John 4.34.


Howbeit on the contrary, this same spirit brings the wicked into a sense and
feeling of this same horror, and leaves them in the astonishment of their
conscience, so as Satan continually has their sins to scourge them with,
and their corruptions wherewithal to vpbraide them. And the cause why they be
left in this hellish plight, and suffered to be thus perplexed and tormented of
themselves, is their own infidelity, that they have stopped their ears
against that comfortable sound of the Lords mercy, and so poisoned their hearts
with sin, that the power of the word could not work upon them: and so the
Lord most justly has hardened them in their irksome and tedious hypocrisy,
that the sins they commit should be the punishments of sins past, and the
deserts of punishments that are to come. And as to that, that the holy Ghost
working this same fear and terror in the hearts and consciences both of the
elect and of the wicked, and should leave the reprobate even when they are
brought to the depth of despair, it were blasphemy to say or think, that he
does it for and to the same end tha^^^ than does: for Satan does it to prove
God a liar, as that being in that case it were not possible for God to save
them; whereas the mercy of the Lord is above all his works. But the spirit of
God does this, that God may be justified in the just hardening of that man's
heart whom he found sinful, and whom he was not bound to save; and so his
end is to take vengeance of his hypocrisy: for the Lord is as jealous of his
justice, as he is of his mercy. Satan promises salvation to whom God
pronounces damnation, and lulleth them in security whom he finds careless
to watch over their steps, never greatly troubling or moving any of his own,
till they come to such a deep exigent, and to such a narrow pinch even to hels
mouth, that they cannot go from him, and then they taste even of hell fire in
this life, and feel a fearful beginning of that shall never have end. Now
God threatens damnation to all; to his elect, that they may seek and hasten
to be shrouded under the shadow of Christ's wings, and to feel the virtue of
the hemme of his garment: to the reprobate, that they may be the more
hardened, Mat. 14.36.
because it is in the corruption of their own hearts, that they heave refused
the acceptable time of grace, and rejected the pearl which they might have
bought.

It will be said: But why should the holy Ghost leave them in this despair? He
is not properly the author of despair, but if the reprobate being brought to
this be not recovered, it comes of his own wickedness. As for example, a man
shows unto a triator his indignity, and having done this, with great and
vehement passions he shows him the detestation and ugliness of his offense,
and leaves him with some doubt and scruple of conscience as amazed at his own
wickedness: if the traitor upon this make himself away by violence as Judas
did, he that thus laid the quality and nature of his offense open before him,
Mat. 27.5.
is not the cause of this his desperate end: he was the cause and means of
making him to be afraid and angry with himself only, and that was lawful:
so the holy Ghost by laying open the riches of Gods mercy at the first, thine
own wilful rebellion to forsake him, Romans 7.12.23.
his giving of thee a law to bridle thee, and the h^^ and feruencie of thy
corruption to break through all laws, works this terror in thy heart that
art a reprobate, and shows as it were before thee the smart and execution of
thy sin. If now thou despairest and restest there, the cause is in thy self,
for thou saw light and louedst it not, and heardest the sound of retrait,
and yet weatest on to thine own destruction. Further, this spirit of God is
not the author of despair as it is despair, for a man should never despair
of Gods mercy: as God was not the cause of the lie in the false Prophets as it
was a lie, 1. Kin. 22.7
but he showed his judgment on them by giving them thus over to this sin. So
despair in the reprobate, wrought by the wickedness of their hearts, is after
this sort revenged by the spirit, in giving them over to the extremity of this
sin; so as it comes from the spirit not as an evil author, but as a just
revenger of their former sins.

Now the instruments the spirit of God uses to bring and persuade the
conscience to fear damnation, are two: first, the law natural, for in the
nature of every man something is ingrafted and written of every sin* that
howsoever it be acted and performed with pleasure, yet even in nature it
ends and is left with remorse, which does show that there is a God to punish
it. This was that which made the heathen to have an apprehension and
understanding of infernal furies, as that for some sins they should be so
exagitated and tormented with them as they could have no rest. For this cause
they termed them by special names, as the fury of Nemesis, that should plague
the proud man: Eumenides, because she was implacable and would not be
entreated: Alecto, because it was a torment that never ceased: Alasto, that
should pursue the vengeance as never to be forgotten: Tosiphone, that took
vengance upon murderers yea almost for every sin committed they had a
several fury, which was thought to punish it. Yea by this very light of nature
they likewise imagined some of these furies to burn the of fendours with
torches, some to sting with Adders. And what be these furies, says the
Philosopher? Nothing else but Suae quemque exagitant furiae, that is, Every man
is tormented with his own fury, which is his conscience: the property
whereof, is to present thy sin before thy f^ce, that out of thine own mouth
thou may ^ee judged: yea the heathen had such a deep impression of these
tortures, as committing some foul and heinous fact, without some expiation or
sacrifice they thought they should never be in quiet.

But the greatest instrument, which is the second that the spirit uses to
strike fear into the soul and conscience, is the law written, which is a dead
letter, and such a sentence that for desert pronounces damnation as often as we
read it: which we must needs conceive to be so, if we consider that the least
bad thought is damnation, though it be not coupled with consent to bring forth
an actual fruit of sin. What then? Is the preaching of the law the worker of
this terror? And are some by the book of nature so exagitate and troubled with
furies, as they cannot rest when they have slipped into some sin: and yet shall
there be some in these days that are so frozen in Atheism, and so ouergrowne
in the weeds of Popery* and so possessed with the power of the devil, that they
are not once touched or pricked in their hearts for their horrible sins, but
that living as devils, they hope to be saved as Saints? Indeed it is not be
doubted, but that now there is greater Atheism in some, and less sorrow and
remorse for sin in others, then was in the heathen, and yet it was the just
judgment of God then (as Paul says) to give up the heathen into a reprobate
sense, Romans 1.28.
that they might receive in themselves such recompense of their error as was
meet; and therefore much more in vengeance does the Lord deliver up these men
to be beguiled of their own fancies, and to become senssesse in their own
sins since they profit not by this book of the written law, pronounced by the
Lords own mouth, and delivered by the Lords own hand, the truth whereof ought
not to be called in question, though these men really confute it by their
lives, thinking there is no Christ to save, nor God to punish, nor conscience
to accuse, nor devil to torment, but with scurrility do scorn at the wholesome
disease of tenderness and terror of conscience, which they themselves at their
separation shall find so great, as neither themselves can still, neither in
truth can it be stilled. And howsoever many peradventure have commanded their
conscience to be silent, and put away the evil day far from them, and think
themselves safe enough if they may be let alone till the last day, yet we have
seen some of the eldest sons of Satan, after a long and redious hypocrisy
wherein they were fallen asleep, to have been so fearfully astonished in the
end, and plunged and cast down into so deep despair, as they even seemed to
hear the very echo of the damned spirits, which is a most hideous and terrible
sound in the ears of the most carnal man that is, and could by no means be
comforted or any whit eased, but have either hanged themselves as Judas did, or
otherwise died in a sense of hellish torment in this life. For as in a seared
piece of flesh there is always left in the top some crust, but under that
there is ever some pregnant sense: so if the Lord once pare away from the soul
that is cauterized and crusted, then is the fear and terror of those men
greater, for they feel the flame of the Lords indignation, which the elect
never do, having by a sanctified wisdom prevented this extremity, by seeking
remedy in Christ, who gives and never vpbraideth:

Now to prove that the Law is such a dead letter, as being rightly understood
it is impossible to keep thy self from despair, in respect of any thing
which in thine own person thou can deserve: observe, that this law of God
teaches, that lust in thy heart is absolute adultery, Mat. 5.22.28.
and that anger in heart is flat murder; wherein it goes beyond and surpasses
all the laws of any earthly Prince, which free the heart and extend only to
the act: whereas this law binds both the outward man from working, and the
inward man from compassing mischief. Now if thou come to weigh and examine thy
self in this balance, and take this law for a touchstone, to try whether
thou be gold or dross, thou shall find thy self too light and but refuse:
for who can say, I have not offended? who can say, I am not crazed? nay
whateuer thou art, thou can not clear thy heart of these and such like
passions of heat betokening wrath, and of corrupt thoughts bewraying thy
unclean heart. But if thou enter into this consideration, that though thou
think of such things, and thy heart reprooues thee, yet that in the strict
construction of this law, if thou have but a wandering or wanton thought, in the
preciseness thereof thou shall be damned, for all and every particular power
both of body and soul ought to be taken up for Christ, and wholly used to his
glory, so as if thou call in doubt the truth of the Scripture, though thy
heart abhors it, it is damnation. If thou examine thy self according to
this rule, and yet escapest from the sight of despair, it is hard, nay it is
impossible, for this is the sharpest edge of the law, and the most fretting
corasiue that eats out the dead flesh of our sinful hearts, that sounds the
bottom of man's vast soul, and touches the sins that lie between the
skin and the bones. Since for our very thoughts alone by the tenth
commandment without consent we are culpable of judgment, which S. Paul ( Romans
7.7.) expresses by speaking in his own person, I had not known lust, that is,
the fountain and seat whence lust does spring, except the Law had said, Thou
shall not lust.

Here then we must needs confess, since this ought to be every man's
examination, that if we do not examine ourselves after this sort formerly set
down, it is a sign we have not this spirit of adoption, because we have not
had the spirit of bondage. Now this is no examination of our selves to live
morally, as to receive the testimony of men that we are honest, in giving
perhaps a groate to the poor, and pardoning the forfeiture of an obligation,
and such like, and yet not stick to profane Gods sabbath, to contemn his
messengers, to pour out oaths, by Faith, which includes the whole blessed
Trinity, and say it is nothing: by the Mass, that most execrable idol, and
say it is sworn out of the country. Can a man think himself rich that is
indebted to all the world, and has nothing wherewithal to pay them? And can
such men that be very beasts and without sense before God, esteem themselves
virtuous and religious because they are only highly praised of men? They see
not their own estate, because they have not examined themselves according to
the former rule. When a man has swept his chamber he thinks all is clean,
but when the Sun comes it shows many a mote he could not before spy
out: so if the spirit would once shine into these men's consciences, they should
see not only motes, but most deformed and enormous sins in their hearts. And
how frivolous is it to stand upon man's witness without religion, which
pierces and looks into the soul? For otherwise, he that thinks himself
in best health carries his deaths wound in his bosom. The basest gold is
better then the purest led; and the greatest imperfections of Gods children,
better then the highest virtues of the wicked, and never shall they be exalted
that have not before been humbled. The law is a hammer not only to bruise the
conscience, but to break it into powder; which if it be not done, we shall
never have the spirit of adoption to seize upon us. The law commands, but
gives no power to obey; and is as if we should say to a beggar: Buy such a
manor, when he has never a penny to help himself, nor yet we give him any
money to do it: even so, purchase heaven with thy works, says the law, and yet
knows we are spoiled of all ability, and does not enable us to do such
works: all one, as if we should say to one, hold up the heavens with thy
finger, and yet give him no strength to do it: or as if we should say to the
blind, see, it is comfortable; and to the deaf, hear, it is profitable; and
yet give them no means whereby they should do these. So the law is but a dead
letter, and has but a doleful and dreadful sound, until the spirit come and
arm us with power and ability to perform what the law requires.

Lastly, where it is said, Luke 15.21.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again, observe, that all that are
converted, and with the lost son are come home again, have been once
brought to a terror and fright of conscience: which has been after a diverse
measure: for the Lord keeps some longer in the school of the law then he does
others, according as he finds their hearts and dispositions inclinable to
stoop and to be humbled, or else for example sake, as seems best to the
Lord. But yet every one of Gods chidren must come to this: that is, ( Act.
2.37.) being moved and pricked in conscience, to say and cry out, What shall I
do to be saved? I see my debt, where shall I get surety? I perceive my
nakedness, where shall I be covered? I am fallen, how shall I be recovered?
And being touched in their hearts, if they fall not into that exclamation, then
as it is said of Ely his sons, (1. Sam. 2.25.) they obeyed not because the
Lord would slay them: so for these men to be baked in their sins, and to see
their destruction and not to shun it, and by this means to despair finally,
is the just judgment of God, that he may be avenged of their great hypocrisy,
for mercy offered and refused or set light by, doubleth the punishment. Even as
in this nation by the blessed preaching of the Gospel, Satan is cast out in
the general profession of the Land: if now he labor to creep in again by
hypocrisy, and make us think religion to rest in shows, and consist in
ceremonies, growing more lean and ill-favored after we have devoured so many
years of store and plenty in preaching the word, we do err in our hearts,
and do arm our enemy against us, who at his reentrance will bring seven
spirits worse then he did before, Luke 11.25.
and will so fortify his habitation with hypocrisy, and other great and
monstrous sins, as there shall be more profannesse in this nation then ever
there was before.

But ye have received the spirit of adoption. In this the Apostle proves that
we are the Sons of God, because we are so adopted in the everlasting grace of
his blessed Son. And to prove we have this spirit, he does it by the
contrary, thus: we are delivered from the spirit of fear, and redeemed into
such a Christian liberty, as we now love God not for fear, but fear him for
his love. In this there are two parts to be considered: first, what this spirit
of adoption is: secondly, the inseparable effect that follows it, namely, an
assured confidence to come boldly before the Lord, even as children before
their parents, to crave pardon for our sins.

For the first: this spirit is the holy Ghost, assuring us by the word of
grace, that is, the Gospel, that the Lord has auowed us for his children in
that one and best beloved Son of his Christ Jesus; so that no extremities of
this life, nor sorrows of death, nor sin it self shall be able to over
whelme us. Therefore it is said in the Scriptures, that the holy Ghost sets
a seal upon the heart of his elect, Ephesians. 1.13.
and writes a deed in their consciences, which is but a draught of that
original deed, which is in heaven in the book of the Lords government. And
this is sealed unto us by the finger of the spirit, to free it from the forgery
of Satan, and by this evidence we make our title to the kingdom of heaven. ^.
Cor. 5.5.
Also it is called an earnest penie, because as in contracts by giving a penie
in earnest the party is obliged and bound to pay the rest: so this being as it
were the first fruits of the spirit, the Lord does assure us, that as verily
as we have received thus much in hand in this vale of misery, so this shall be
a pawn and pledge unto us, that he will give us the rest in the fu^^e^^^ (...)
is glory, under which assurance we rest and lie down in hope with joy
unspeakable. And as the first fruits in the law made the whole crop holy, so
this spark of the Lords grace, being kindled and set on fire in us, does
embolden us to an expectation of the full enjoying of our whole Lord Christ
Jesus.

This testimony often times is very weak, especially when Satan does sift and
winnow us as he did Peter, Luke 17.5.
so as we had need to pray with the disciples, Lord increase our faith. Yet as
a prisoner in a dark dungeon seeing but the Sun at a little grate, does know
and believe that the Sun shines upon the whole earth: so though we be
shackled and imprisoned in this flesh as in a dungeon, that we are not able to
behold the Sunshine of the Lord in full measure, which is the Sun of light
and of life, yet we have such a glimpse as we cannot be persuaded but it
shines upon our souls. And as the child in the mothers womb stirring never so
weakly, yet even by that feeble motion she is assured that it has life; so the
least light of the Sun of righteousness is most sweet and comfortable unto
us. Which doctrine as it ministers and brings consolation to a weak soul,
so must it be as a sharp spur unto us, that this righteousness may be
increased, and that this spirit of God may delight to dwell in us, that we
being grounded, and growing daily in a persuasion of Gods love toward us, it
may enforce us to love him more and more: and the strength and perfection of
this love, may and ought to make us resist and shun all contrary means,
whereby our increase and growth in faith may be hindered. And because this
spirit of the Lords adoption is inward and can not be perceived; and that many
be deluded by Satan's subtilty, and forgerie, foisting and thrusting in another
deed than ever God gave us, especially working upon the weak heart of man,
which being fraught and full of self-love, is easily persuaded of any good to
it self: therefore we must learn how to discern whether it be the true
evidence of Gods spirit or no which we have within us. And for that the Apostle
here sets down one effect and fruit of this spirit for all: that is, that
there is a confidence of any good conscience to come boldly before the Lord, as
a child before his father, to prefer our suites unto him, and to offer up our
prayers upon the golden altar, Revel. 8.3.
that is the mediation of Christ, by whose means and through whose obedience
and suffering they shall savor before the Lord as a sweet incense, and the
Lord shall put into them daily a new incense by the spirit, assuring us more
and more of his loving fauor^ and we shall not hide our selves and run away
when we are called, Genesis 3.8.
as Adam did, but being disburdened of that which does press us down from the
presence of God, we shall come cheerfully before him, and joy our selves, in
that the Lord will look so pleasingly upon us, Other effects of this spirit,
and yet arising from the former, are these: If the spirit work in us the same
affection toward God, that nature does produce in children toward their
parents: as first to love God: secondly, to fear him: thirdly, to reverence
him: fourthly, to be obedient to him: fifthly, to be thankful to him; all which
virtues be in good children, who do always acknowledge all they have to
proceed from their father, as the special instrument from God: and if we have
and bear these affections to God our father, as to love him for his mercies,
to fear him for his love, to reverence him for his goodness, to obey him for
his greatness, and to be thankful to him for his kindness, then may we assure
our selves, that we have the spirit of adoption, sealed up in us for our
salvation.

In that we cry Abba Father, learn, that no obstinate or resolute sinner
persisting deliberately in his sin, and his heart deliting in it, can once
open his mouth to pray, nor never did pray. The like whereof may be said of the
hypocrite: for though they may falsely persuade themselves, that offering up a
few words in form of a prayer, it is sufficient to purge the uncleanness of
their lives, and that impudently and in presumption they may call God, Father,
when their hearts be impure and unclean: yet ( John 8.44.) Christ calls them
the children of their father the devil. And though Satan may persuade an
obstinate and wilful sinner as he did Houah, Genesis 3.4.5.
that doing such an evil and wicked thing, they shall not hang in hell
(always threatening where God promises, and promising where God threatens,
until he take them in the lurch at the time of their death, and then he
ouerreckneth them) yet it is certain he cannot pray unless he have this
spirit, and this spirit none has if they delight and savor of sin: so as
though they cry, Peace, peace, to their own conscience, and serving the devil
will nevertheless vaunt themselves to be the sons of God, it is the Lords
justice that permits Satan so to blind them that they cannot see their
sickness to the death: for 1. John 3.8. it is said, He that commits sin
is of the devil. Can the poison of Aspes and the sacrifice of prayer proceed
both from the same tongue? No. Grapes cannot grow of thorns, nor figs of
thistles: and Esaias 66.3.5. the Lord says, that he that offers sacrifice
without trembling, that is, without reformation of life, it is as if he killed
a man, which is most unsavory to the Lord. So as lawful things and things
commanded be an abomination to the Lord, when the soul and conscience is not
answerable to the action and to the outward profession. Howbeit things simply
forbidden are sins both in the regenerate and unregenerate, and the prayers
of these men that thus can lie on their beds and imagine mischief, and yet can
open their lips by way of conference and speech with God, are no better then
those of the rebels in the North, who when they had published all their
mischief, which tended to the overthrow of our dread Sovereign, yet ended and
concluded their proclamation with, God save Queen Elizabeth.

Now concerning hypocrites, that they cannot pray but by imitation of
Christians, as Parots, look upon the rule of David, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
(says he) wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: that is, if I
delight in sin, my prayers shall not come near him: so as make what show thou will, if thy heart be not upright, it avails not. For as it is said, John
9.31. God hears no sinners, that is, no malicious and deliberate sinners,
which intend and compass mischief in their inward parts, howsoever in
hypocrisy they dissemble it. And it is certain, it is as impossible to pray
without this spirit, as to understand without a soul.

Further observe how this spirit begets in us such peace of conscience, that
makes us confident in craving our wants at Gods hand: as from the spirit of
adoption comes faith, so from faith issues and streameth invocation and
calling upon God by prayer. This faith grounded upon the love of God in Christ,
does assure us that whatsoever is good in heaven or in earth, God will bestow it
upon us: then steppeth in prayer, and according as the soul is burdned either
with a desire to be delivered from danger, or with an affection to have some
wants supplied, or to declare and express our thankfulness, it does take the
present occasion, and for sloweth no time to enter into the sanctuary of Gods
presence, and there to lift up our weak hands, and to send forth our cold
petitions; and that which was generally believed by faith before, is now
particularly challenged of God by prayer, that we may find and ^^ele the
former promise to be true by this particular instance of reaching forth our
requests to God by prayer. And the more to hearten and encourage us in this
exercise and Christian task, God gives and grants our requests, differing
in three respects from the gifts and benefits of worldly men. For first he can
give all things, in his power: secondly, in his wisdom he gives and never
repents: thirdly, in his goodness he gives and never vpbraideth. This is the
persuasion of faith, and therefore now if we spare to speak, we may well
spare to speed: whereupon the Prophet David says, I believed, therefore I
spoke: having his faith for most to prepare his lips to prayer. And surely the
cause why we call not upon God so often, or so boldly as we ought is, either
because our faith fail^s us that we think not to speed, or else because we
have but weak and faint hope to speed. For as the Philosopher says, Qui
timide rogat, docet negare, He that craves fearfully, draws on a denial:
for that faith that opens the eyes to see such treasures, opens the mouth
to supplicate and to pray for them: so as by this learn in one word, that the
Apostle will measure thy faith by thy prayers.

Whereby we cry. In this word cry, is implied three things: first, a
confident boldness: secondly, a great earnestness: thirdly, an importunacy
with perseverance. Boldness, in that we speak not softly as in fear, but
loud as in assurance: even as a favorite of an earthly Prince, that has a
promise to have and obtain what he can spy out; having special security to
speed, comes boldly to his Prince, and craves the performance of that was
pledged unto him by promise before. Earnestness, not to take a nay or denial
at the first at our fathers hands, but to go on with I pray you Father, Good
Father, I beseech you Father, and such like speeches of vehemence and feruency,
which is here expressed by the geminating and doubling of the word Father,
Father. Then with these must there be an import^nacy in prayer, which Paul
expresses Romans 15.30. by stri^ing or wrestling in prayer, showing thereby the
feruency of the mind and of the voice, even as Jacob did, Genesis 32.26.
that would not let the Angel go before he had blessed him: and according to
the example set down Luke 18.^. of the widow, who by her importunity (which in
the Greek word signifies impudency) so troubled and wearied with her cries as
it were with blows the unrighteous Judge, as she wrested her suit from him.
Christ in that parable teaching us that we ought to use a holy kind of
impudency in our petitions unto God, and never to give him rest till he has
yielded to our requests, which we make in faith, and present in hope.
Hereupon it is that the soul is very earnest with God, as either being laden
with some sin which it desires to be eased of, or privy to some wants which
it feign would have supplied, or in some apprehension of Gods judgment for
sin which it seeks to escape, or the love of God constraining it to be
thankful for the rich mercies formerly received, or else being assaulted with
some danger and temptation, craves to be ^^liuered: so as always the soul
has occasion to be quick and earnest in prayer; for causes to move us even
in our own particular persons unto this duty (besides the general cause of
the Church) do daily occur and fall out.

In that it is said, We cry, Father: here is questionable whether only God
the first person in the Trinity be to be prayed unto, and not the Son nor the
holy Ghost. To this we answer that the word (Father) and (God) is taken
essentially for the whole essence of the Godhead which includes them all, as
it is in the Lords prayer, or else it is taken personally: for that the Son
must be prayed unto, the place is plain, Act. 7.59. And they stoned Stephen
who called on God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And that the holy
Ghost must be prayed unto, appears by Saint Paul, who ends his Epistle (2.
Corinthians 13.13.) with this prayer, The communion of the holy Ghost be with
you. So as the word Father in this place is not meant of any one distinct
person subsisting in the name of Father, but it is to be understood of them
all, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; for as they be all offended
with us for our sins, so must they all be reconciled to us by our prayers.
And hereupon is it that Saint Augustine says, that the whole Trinity is
Father in respect of the creature; and he is only named here, because the
Father is the fountain of the Godhead, and the first in order, but not in
time: howbeit being understood in respect of their diverse subsistences, they
are several. Whereupon it is true that the word Father or God is sometime
taken personally, as John 3.16. where it is said, God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that w^^^euer believes in him should not
perish. And 1. Corinthians 8.6. Unto us there is but one God, which is the
Father, of whom are all things: in which places the word God is taken
personally, as it is also in the Greede, when we say, I believe in God the
Father. But the whole Trinity is called Father in two respects, first, because
he is the fountain of the Godhead, and the fountain of all love, election
and salvation, the will of the Father going before the will of the Son in
order not in time. Secondly, because howe^^^ we pray to Christ and to the holy
Ghost as we do to God, and howeuer all the works of the Trinity be undivided,
that they do all save, and not the Father only, yet they do it by degrees:
Christ saves us insubmitting his will to his Fathers will: the holy Ghost
saves us in persuading and leading us to go to Christ, and from Christ to the
Father; so as our prayers are made unto God in the name of Christ his Son, by
the direction of the holy Ghost.

Again, in that we name him Father: learn, that all our security and
assurance that our prayers shall be effectual, and that we shall speed in our
suits and requests, lies in this: that we are his children, and so all that
we do and perform pleases him no further then the person pleases him. And
therefore David, Psalm. 7. and 17. and 26. making a commemoration of his
virtues, as that there was no wickedness in his hands, that he had purposed
his mouth should not offend, that he had not hanted nor sorted himself with
dissemblers, does it not the rather to move God to hear him, and to incline
his ear to his petition; but by these testimonies of a good conversation and a
holy life, which in those places he brings in, he proves himself to be
adopted. So as to assure us we are Gods children, we are to get as many
testimonies of the spirit of regeneration as we can, whereby to comfort and
secure our souls, that we shall be heard, because we are beloved.

Abba. Some think this was understood, that God would be served only of the
Jews who spoke this language: but the Apostle by geminating and doubling the
word both in Hebrew and in Greek wherein he spoke, does teach us, that as God
was once only served in the Hebrew nation of th^^ ^^^^s, who had this special
privilege above other peop^^: so the time should come, and now is, that all
the world should be as Canaan to serve him in their several and special
language, and that all tongues should be pleasing and acceptable to God.

Romans chap. 8. verse. 16.


WHereby is meant, that we are so fure of our salvation, that except the holy
Ghost can lie, we cannot be damned. Where observe: first, that a man may be
certain of his salvation: for this witness and testimony given by the spirit
to out spirits, is that which every elect child of God does and must feel even
in this life. Secondly, they are here confuted, that persuade themselves by a
vain and false hope, that they shall be saved as well as others. For the
first: carry about (...) the speech of Saint Paul 2. Cor. 13.5. Know ye not
your o^^e selves, how Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? And 1.
Cor. 2.12. We have received the spirit which is of God; that we might know the
things that are given to us of God; not hope for them, but know them: and 1.
John 4.13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, because he has given us of
his spirit: and chap. 5.19. We know we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness. Now he that has the true knowledge that he has this spirit, he
may know he is the son of God, and so in Christ, and so out of condemnation:
as the Apostle says, in the first verse of this chapter: There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. So as then he that is the son of God
is sure of life, that is, salvation: but all the doub^ is, how we may be sure
we have this spirit, which will and may easily be discerned by walking in the
spirit, and by sauouring the things of the spirit. For if we sit in the seat of
the scorner, and walk in the ways of the wicked, suffering our thoughts to
range after that the flesh desires, and not relishing the foolishness of the
Gospel, to bring our affections in captivity to the obedience of Christ, we
may well dream of the spirit, but the spirit as yet has not lodged within us:
for where the spirit is, there it works, and works of a contrary nature then
those, which the wisdom of the world produces. Where those men are confuted,
that stand upon their own spirits, to assure them that they are Gods children,
their spirits being no sufficient witness, the heart of man being always
evil, and oft-times deceitful, as was the heart of the Pharisie, Luke
18.11.12.
who might have a good work in hand, but took no fit time to perform it, nor
propounded no good end to fulfill it, praying in the marketplace, and giving
his alms to be seen of men. But it is the testimony of the spirit of God
which must secure us, and by which we stand: and this must thou show me by the
visible fruits of the spirit in the reformation of thy life: for thine own
conscience will no more serve thee, then it did the Jews, who thought they did
God good service when they crucified Christ: Ioh. 19.7.
nor no more then it did Paul, who being a Pharisee, and before he was stricken
to the ground in his journey to Damascus, Phil. 3.6.
Act. 9.21. made havoc of the Church of God, and took a pride in persecuting
of the Gospel of Christ: whereby we^ ^^^y see, 1. Ioh. 3.19.
that every man's heart is enough to condemn him, but not to justify him.

But yet must we needs have the testimony and witness of our consciences, to
fasten us and ground us in this persuasion, that we are Gods children: for as
it is said, 1. Ioh. 3.20.21.29. If our own hearts condemn us, what boldness
can we have with God? And Paul speaking of his ministry, says: 1. Cor. 4.4.
I am guilty of my self in nothing, yet am I not thereby justified. So as the
best conscience of it self is not able to warrant us of Gods favor to
eternal life, but it is soon able to assure us of his displeasure to
damnation. For if the conscience be wounded, the heart cannot be cheared: and a
grieved spirit who can bear? Now as our conscience must generally signify
unto us our election, so particularly it must auow every action that we
perform. The conscience by excusing cannot justify, because there may be
error of judgment, and therefore must have a seal and warrant to it: that is,
it must be ratified and confirmed by the word: and though it cannot excuse,
yet can it and does it easily and often accuse: for whatsoever is done against
the conscience is sin, be it never so lawful of it self, or never so much
commanded: yea, though it be the sacrifice of prayer, wherein we are most
familiar with God, yet if it receive not an edge and sharpness from thy own
spirit, but that thy conscience does check thee, and pull in as it were thy
words again, it makes that thy prayer can never ascend to God; nay, it so
smothers it in thy heart, as it not only returns empty, but brings a
plague with it, which otherwise had been of force to have driven away any
present vengeance; wherein the conscience does amiss, and does rather wound us
than cure us. So as observe, that to the performance and accomplishment of
every good action, there must these two concur: the spirit of God, and the
conscience of the party. But yet let us be well advised where the conscience
does accuse us of such things as may justly be reproved, as of adultery,
bribery, usury and such like: for if we do directly resist this forewarning
of our souls, or do whet our selves on, when our consciences do call us back,
then have we this our conscience to testify (...) us, which does counteruaile
a thousand witnesses, having always these two properties: first, not to
conceal any truth: secondly, not to open any more than truth; for what the
conscience speaks, our selves shall subscribe to. And therefore if we shall
fear this check of conscience, and yet not fear to perform the sin, it
will come to pass that either we shall prevail for a time to bring our
consciences to a dead sleep and Lethargy, 1. Tim. 4.2.
to reprove us no more, which is the next step to damnation, or else our
conscience will pursue and follow us with Hue and Cry, as not to leave us till
we be taken: for resistance and withstanding of our conscience is a cloud not
easily ouerblowen, a fire not easily to be quenched, and an indictment hardly
to be trauersed: but our sins shall stare us on the face, and cry for
vengeance. Now if our conscience be brought asleep by our custom in sin,
either we shall die in this benummednesse and dullness of heart, a most
fearful sign of reprobation, and after death it shall weep it fill in hell,
or else if the Lord do show us mercy after the sense and feeling of sin so
long discontinued, he does it as it were by the burning fever of desperation,
for that is the cure of a Lethargy, and does so press us down under the
weight and burden of sin, as that horror shall be without, and terror within,
yea we shall seem to be cast into the deep of deepes, and every small sin
shall seem accompanied with the huge hammer of the Lords wrath to bruise us in
pieces.

Further observe, as the Lords spirit alone cannot bring us that heavenly
security and blessed assurance of our eternal peace we hope for, nor our own
spirits alone cannot do it, so it must be the testimony of both these
concurring and meeting together. For some are merely moral without religion,
thinking by a civil carriage of themselves to win the sight of God: others
have either a true zeal of a false religion, as Paul had before his
conversion, Romans 7.9.10. or else they may be religious in show, having a
counterfeit zeal of a true religion, as the Laodiceans had, Revel. 3.15. and
yet both these think in their conscience they shall be saved, when in truth
they are as far from the thing it self, as they are near to the conceit of
it. Another sort there is that deceive themselves most grossly, ^^^ken of
Proverb. 30.11. There is a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet they are
not washed from their filthiness, that is, from their open and enormous sins.
So as besides the opinion we must have of our selves that we stand in Gods
favor, we must show the seal of the Lord, that is, his spirit, or else there
is no sound joy or any comfortable security that we shall be saved. 1. John
5.10.
And for our actions, every of which must have the allowance of our conscience;
we must mark, that a good intent will not make a good action: for they that
condemned Christ, did it because he made himself equal with God, John 19.7.
John 5.18.
which was expressly against the law written, and therefore thought they had in
this done God high and honorable service: but Christ cries, Luke 23.34. Father
forgive them, they know not what they do. So Peter, when Christ foretells of
his death, had an earnest desire to advise his master to spare himself; and
therefore, Mat. 16.22. he took Christ aside and rebuked him: but Christ (verse.
23.) looking back with an angry countenance, bids him get him behind Satan,
as being only worldly wise, and not understanding the things that are of God.
So as we must know, to the performance of a good work, the allowance of the
heart and the warrant of the word of God must go together.

Verse 17. If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also
be glorified with him.

This is inferred by direct consequent to that that went before: as verse. 13.
where the Apostle exhorting to reformation of life, does it by a double
contrary, so as they ensue and follow one another thus; They that mortify the
deeds of the flesh are led by the spirit; by being thus directed by the spirit,
they are assured that they are the sons of God; by being his sons, that they
shall have an inheritance: therefore they that live a holy life must needs be
saved. And because it might be ouestionable how this title of being Gods
children is given unto us, he has resolved it before verse. 15.) by a double
argument, because the Lord in the Go^pell does offer us such grace as we may
come freely and boldly to him as to a father, and we stand not now in that
terror that was in the delivery of the Law, but we are freed from that bondage.

The second argument, was verse. 16. because the spirit does seal this evidence
unto us, that as our heart does know what is in us, so does the spirit also:
and this spirit does witness that we are children, and being children then we
be heirs, which is the scope the Apostle drives at in this 17. verse.

When the Apostle says, We are hei^^s of God, he sets down what manner of
inheritance it is that we shall have hereafter, not an earthly, but a kingdom
and a possession of eternity, as that the Lord will never leave us till he has
lifted us up to that celestial place where Christ himself sits. Psalm.
84.10.
It had been great favor if we might have been as David speaks, but
doore-keepers in the kingdom of heaven; nay it might well have satisfied us if
only our sins had been pardoned, or if we had been but the Lords friends or
of his acquaintance, so as any way he would have respected us considering our
rebellion: but besides all this, to be restored to our former honor, nay to
have greater privilege then ever Adam had in his first integrity, and to be
advanced to the Lords own throne; if all the hearts of men were one heart, the
full measure of this joy and the depth of this the Lords love could not once
enter in nor be conceived.

And fellow-heires with Christ. This is to set forth the certainty of the
place of our inheritance. God has life, for he is the fountain of it, but he
dwells in fire, Esaias 33.14.
and in a place not to be attained unto: therefore the Apostle sets down
here he^^ we come to it; namely in Christ: as it is 1. John 5.11. God has
given us eternal life, and that life is in the Son, and by his mediation is
conveyed to us. Secondly, in that we are fellow-heires with Christ, note the
excellency of the Lords favor, not only to give us life and to place us with
Angels, but even with his own Son. Whereby we see that his ear was open to
the prayer of Christ which he made ^^ttle before his agony: John 17.20. I pray
(says he) for all that thou have given me, that thou would (Father) (...)
them with the same love thou love me, and crown th^^^ with (...) glory thou
crownest me.

(...) of this arises two comfortable privileges, which the ^^^t have: first,
if we be heirs with Christ in heaven, much more are we heirs of the
transitory blessings of this life; and being heirs with him, we have
recovered the use of all the creatures we lost in Adams fall, so as we have
interest in them all, how ever the Lord in wisdom has severed and
distinguished them in a property: yea we have such interest in them, as the
world should not stand, not the Sun shine but for the elects sake. And all
the wicked in the last day shall answer for every crumme of bread that they
have eaten, for they do but usurp upon the Lords creatures, in as much as
being excluded from the tree of life, they are thereby excluded from all things
that should maintain life: and though now the Lord permit them to abound in
these earthly treasures, yet they shall have double torment for their single
joy; for they are never in their own house but when they are in hell: as it
was said of Judas, Mat. 27. 5. Act. 1.25. when he hanged himself, that he went
to his own place.

The second privilege we have is this, that being heirs with Christ, these
is nothing but shall be made by God to further our salvation: even as Saint
Paul being ravished as it were with the constant hope of this inheritance in
the conclusion of this chapter, giving the challenge in this spiritual
conflict, to see if there be any thing can be able to separate him from the
love of God: for we are Lords of all the creatures, saving of Angels, and our
fellow heir Christ Jesus is head of Angels, and they ^^e but ministers for our
good. As for the wicked, they shall be as well able to save themselves without
God, as to hurt us having God, and the worst they can do, is but to send us to
God. And as for Satan his darts he casts at us, they are turned aside in
the armor of Christ; and the floods he casts forth to devour us shall
never come near us, Reu. 12.15. 2. Cor. 12.8.
and his buffettings are preservatives against presumption, as Paul witnesses
of himself.

If we suffer with him. This is a transition or passing over of the Apostle to
persuade us to affliction, for we would have the head crowned with thorns,
and the members clad with veluer, but it may not be so, for there must be a
conformity and resemblance with the head and the members. Now this is the
second reason the Apostle uses, to make us sure of this heavenly ^^keritance,
namely, that we must first be afflicted. The cause why this is brought in, is
this, Paul (verse. 1.) had given the greatest comfort to a Christian that could
be, when he said, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
Now there are two things that make the very elect to demurre and stay upon
this, whether there be any condemnation to them or no: first, the apprehension
of their many sinful infirmities, as if they should say, Is it possible the
life of God should be in me, that I should be shapen after Gods image, that
Christ should be my sanctification, and yet that I should be subject to so
many grievous infirmities? To this the Apostle answers; True it is, there be
in them many things graciously qualified by the prefence of the Lords spirit,
yet during this our seafare and pilgrimage in this life, there must be a
combat and a strife between the deceit of sin and the strength of grace:
howbeit by patience and perseverance we shall overcome, not some part of the
world but even the whole world, and our own concupiscence, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
which is stronger then death; not but that there shall be left some fragments
and relics of corruption in us: for Paul here does not say: There is no
matter of condemnation left within us, but that uncleanness is so washed away
in Christ, and we are so sanctified by his spirit, as there remains for us no
condemnation, God being satisfied in his Son, Sath an being vanquished, and
the powers of our sinful flesh being tamed and subdued. The se^^ (...) thing
that makes us to doubt whether condemnation (...) not due to us, is the
apprehension of our many afflictions, wherewith we are tossed and encumbred in
this life: as when we shall consider that we are made blessed by Christ's
curse, and healed by his stripes, then we break forth into this: And is it
possible, that I am one of these, and yet am so miserably entreated in this
life? Has Christ ^^^^e through the sorrows and agonies of this life? Has he
book in sunder the bands of death, and all to make me way to that glory
wherein he now sits, and shall l^et be so burdened and so sore oppressed
with anguish of spirit and griese of body? This cogitation and thought works
and ingendreth a fear in the weak soul lest God should be angry and much
displeased with them, because he feeds them with the water of sorrow and
bread of affliction, and makes them (as the spirit speaks) pass through
fire and water, that is, through many miseries, diverse in kind and extreme in
measure. But thus the holy Ghost to prove the first verse of this chapter true,
shows this to be the high and beaten way to heaven, and that there is no way
but that which Christ has gone before us: for somewhat for godliness we must
be persecured, Ioh. 5.17. Heb. 12.6.
and being chastised of the Lord, it is certain we are no bastards. So as the
bearing of this cross must and ought to be another seal to assure us of the
inheritance which we shall have, and not to be dismayed though it go hard with
us in this life: for we must think it no disgrace nor disparagement to be of
the honor of the same order our elder brother Christ was of: that is,
appointed and set forth daily for the slaughter, and laid open to the viperous
tongs of many glorious and proud Pharisees: but as Christ had his cross as it
were his ladder to lift him and carry him up above the heavens, as the Greek
translation is: so must we look by the same rounds to ascend to the same
place. Out of this therefore arises to all the godly double comfort: first,
that we shall be no otherwise used of the Lord then Christ his natural son
was, upon whom the very sea of his fierce wrath did fall: secondly, that as we
have Christ a fellow and companion in our sufferings, so Christ has us
companions and partakers of his glory.

If we suffer with him.

Here are two things to be considered: first, the precise necessity, and as it
were a fatal kind of destiny, whereunto God has made all those subject that
shall be saved: namely, that they must taste of the cup of affliction, and
drink of the dregs thereof: expressly set down in these words: We are heirs if
we suffer. The second is the double fruit and benefit we reap by this
affliction: first, that Christ has tasted more deeply of tribulation then we
shall: secondly, that in recompe^^ce of our sufferings we shall hereafter be
partners with him in ^^^^state of blessedness.

For the first understand, that in the words, If so be and etc there is not
contained a cause of our being heirs of God, but a condition, set down by S.
Paul. 2. Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution: for we are not to be saved because we are afflicted; but we are
afflicted, therefore we shall be saved. Neither are we heirs of God because
we are chastifed; but we are chastised and corrected, because we are not
bastards. Heb. 12.8.
And this is the way sanded out unto us, whereby we must come to heaven, and
march like soldiers toward that glorious city, namely, under the standard of
affliction, and bearing the colors of our victorious captain Christ. This was
the lesson that Christ first taught, that whosoever would be his scholar,
should be well whipped, he must go and walk, but under a cross; Math. 10 38.
wherein mark, that that which of it self is simply to men a disswasion, is
with God the principal motive of the conscience of man.

Further observe, that every heir must suffer; not that every one of Gods
children must be called to martyrdom, or that all must suffer in the same
measure: but this is it, that whosoever soundly and substantially professes
the Gospel, must make this teckoning with himself, and so cast his account,
that if it be needful, and God may have glory by it, he must not fear to
lay down his life, and to spend his blood for the truths sake. We see by
experience daily, that many there be that fight many battles, and run through
many skirmishes, and yet have neither scarre nor maime; neither yet is he the
less valiant, or in any thing to be esteemed a faint-hearted soldier, because
his courage and resolution was to adventure his life: and this he takes as
advantage, that he has tried his manhood and yet received as wound: howbeit
though he have escaped thus, yet was there never any soldier but tasted some
of the streites and exigents of var, if he have served there any time, as
either watching by night, marchings by day, hunger, cold, or such like. Even so
fares it with us in this continual spiritual warre-fare and combat: for if
the world cannot persecute us as Esau meant to have done to Jacob after his
fathers death, that is, take away our lives, Genesis 27.41. Genesis 21.9.
yet at the least will it do as Ismael did to Isaac, mock us and speak
virulently and slanderously of us for the Gospels sake; which kind of
affliction never any yet of Gods children, no not Christ himself could escape.
And therefore Christ when he marketh them with the coal of unworthiness, Luke
14.26.
that will not forsake father and all to follow him, means, that for his sake
we must not only cast away unlawful things, but even lay aside things lawful,
that ^^ther temptations on the right hand, that is, prosperitie^; no^
^^^ptations on the left hand, that is, adversity, must make us shrink, as
asharmed to bear the cross of Christ, or to maintain his truth: but we must
always keep the corn so clear from thistles, as we must love the Gospel for
it self, and not regard our selves in respect of it.

Further understand, that we must be so far from calling the Lords love in
doubt, for nurturing us in chastisement, and for reaning us from the world by
the rod, as that by this his usage of us we are to have an infallible
certainty grounded in our hearts, and an heavenly security that we are
heirs: for it was truly foretold, John. 17.14.
that the world would love none but his own, and if a man find himself free
from the hatred of the world, he may justly fear he has no interest in
heaven. When Christ was borne ( Mat. 2.3.) it was foretold the shepherds, that
they should find the babe in a stable laid in a cratch: Luke 2.12.
now if they had found him in a royal palace, and the child in a sumptuous
cradle, they might well have suspected the Angel had deceived them, and that
that child had not been Christ. So if a man were directed by him that knew it,
that the way he was to go were craggy, and he should find it smooth, he
might well fear he were out of the way. If therefore thinking we are in the
way to heaven, we find it easy and delightsome, we may doubt it is not that
way the Lord has chalked out unto us: for the right way is the straight way,
through which we must pass, full of thorns that we cannot escape scratching:
Luke 13.24.
and the way to Canaan is cumbersome, over hills and mountains, and lies
through the wilderness, where we shall find many wants; yet may we not be
discouraged, but the rather assured, that we are going to the promised land. To
prove the verity and truth of the Gospel, there is no other way (as Christ
teaches) then by offenses, because it is hated, Mat. 18.7.
reviled and maligned: for if it were beloved, and embraced, and entertained of
Princes, if the world did love it, it could not be the Gospel, the Lords own
mouth has spoken it. Since then we may secure our selves in the truth of the
Gospel by the hatred of the world; so we being hated and accounted the of
scourings of the world for the Gospels sake, may assure our selves we are Gods
children. Now as there is a^^ecise necessity of suffering, so this is our
comfort, and our rest whereon to stay, that we are entangled with no other
conditions, neither is there any other burden laid upon us, then was before
borne by our head Christ. So that as we desire to be baptized with the same
baptism that he was, so must we willingly drink of his cup, and partake of
his shame, if we will have part in his glory. Of this order of Christ, which
is, imprisonment, buffetings, and such like, was Paul, when in a christian
courage he vaunted that he carried about him the marks of the Lord Jesus: and
this livery did all the Apostles and Disciples of Christ wear, Act. 5.11.
who presently after his ascension, for their open profession of his truth,
were cast some into prison, and some put to one death, and some to another.
Act. 12.2.
And shall we think there be other steps for us to tread in, and that we
may take our ease in the flesh, and yet be quickened in the spirit? No: for as
it is all our desires to go to heaven, so must it be our affections to go
the same way that Christ went, otherwise it were a great disparagement to him,
if we be persuaded that the Lord loved his Son, and so loved him, as he
would advance him by the nearer and most proper way; nay, if God should
testify his love any other way to us then he did to Christ, as it were a
strange love, so should it make us strangers from Christ; for to this place of
royalty we must ascend by the same rounds that he did.

If we suffer with him. Not if we suffer with the world: whereby understand and
learn, that all that are afflicted shall not be saved: but on the contrary,
none shall be saved unless they be afflicted: for a man may suffer all the
plagues to be devised on the earth, and yet after go to hell to suffer more.
Some suffer with the world, such as Peter speaks of, 1. Pet. 2.20. that are
buffeted for their demerits and misdeeds, on whom the Lord does satisfy part
of his justice in this life. These are poor in the ^esh, but proud in the
spirit: for the misery they sustain can nothing humble them, unless perhaps
sometime they will weep for cursed heart, as Esau did when he lost the blessing:
Genesis 27.38.
but they are so hardened in obstinacy, as they are past fearing the heaviness
and weight of the Lords displeasure: so as there is a worldly affliction that
leads to death, as well as a godly suffering that prepares the way to life.

Now again, some suffer with Christ, and such be they as suffer either to
profit by the Lords afflictions, as that they be sent as chastisements to
reclaim them from some sin past, and so they amend or, else as preservatives
against some sin to come, and so they are made more watchful: or else if we
suffer for the Gospel, because we will not communicate with the world. Now
though all afflictions ought to be esteemed just in respect of our infirmities,
yet sometimes the Lord regards not this alone, but makes it more honorable:
as when we are troubled for the Gospel, that we being but vile worms, and but
dust and ashes, should either with loss of goods, which are but lent us, or
with our lives which are the Lords, do the Lord of heaven some honor to
maintain his truth against such as do malign it, that the wicked may see we
strive for a more precious reward then is set before the eyes of mortal men.

We shall be glorified with him. We would think it a small honor for flesh
and blood to suffer with Christ for company, and to stay there: therefore
observe hence by the Apostles speech, that we are not to look and to fix our
eyes on the beginnings of affliction, but to regard the end, that patience may
have her full perfection. Look not upon Lazarus begging at Dives door, but
lying in Abraham's bosom. Look not to the beginning of Joseph, Luke 16.22.
who was so far from his dream, Genes. 37.9. that the Sun and Moon should
reverence him, that for two years he was cast where he could see neither
Sun nor Moon; but behold him at the last, made ruler over all Egypt. 1. Sam.
24.1.
Look not upon David as there was but a step between him and death, his life
was so thirsted after, nor as he was abused by Saul's flatterers; 1. King.
2.2.10.
but behold him feated in his royal throne, and dying in his bed of honor
with his son Solomon about him. Look not upon Christ borne basely, after
persecuted from Jerusalem, when he came to teach encountered and resisted by the
proud Pharisees, a little before his death in such an agony as an Angel from
heaven was feign to comfort him, Luke 22.43.
his doctrine esteemed false, his life notoriously sinful, betrayed by his
own Disciple, led as a sheep to the slaughter; a man without blemmish, and
yet as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 53.2. Luke 23.26.
a branch arising from a dead stock; carrying a Cross, under which he was so
distressed as another was feign to ease him; going up to the cross, nailed
hand and foot, scoffed and reviled as he was upon it, crying as if the sea of
the Lords wrath had burst forth upon him: beholding him in this estate, and
there was never any creature so miserable: at last carried as a dead man, laid
in a grave, not only dead, but three days under the dominion of death, so as
his Apostles fled, and the devil thought all had been quiet. But afterward
behold him raised up again, ascending to the heavens, Mark. 16.19. Luke 24.51.
then he became head of Angels, then a dead man by a few fishermen conquered
all the world; so as Emperors submitted their ^^ownes, and sought their
salvation in (...) Cross of Christ, So we must look upon the Martyrs, who
died in their holiness, and were put to death for their holiness, not as
having reeds in their hands in sign of baseness, and bolts on their feet,
and stripes on their backs, as evil doers, but as Renelat. 7.9. standing
before the throne and before the Lamb, with palms in their hands in token of
victory, arraied in white robes in sign of innocence, and in long robes in
sign of stateliness; for these are they (says the spirit of God) that came
out of tribulation, and therefore he that sits on the throne will dwell
among them. We must therefore always bend our thoughts, and set our eyes not
upon the present affliction, which is tedious to the flesh, but upon the end
and success, which shall bring spiritual consolation; not upon the cross
which is wearisome, but upon the crown which is delightsome; not upon the race
which is long and crooked, but upon the prize which is weighty and precious;
not upon the combat, which may be to the blood, but upon the conquest which
shall be certain and glorious. And if we can subdue our affections truly to
this meditation, all our troubles in the greatest extremity shall seem light,
and we shall go from the whip as the Apostles did with more rejoicing then we
had before, Act. 5.41.
because we may be sure our end shall be blessed; for if we suffer with him, we
shall be glorified with him.

Now for the glory here spoken of, it is not comparable with the sorrow we
sustain here; for this glory is eternal, whereas afflictions are but
temporal; not possible to be conceived in heart, nor uttered by speech; it is
in show beautiful, in sense wonderful, in weight excessive, in measure
without bounds, in dignity without comparison, and in continuance without end
^^^^ea it is such and so great, that as one torment in hell shall make a
reprobate forget his wordly pleasure, so the least taste, ye one drop of this
glory, shall make the heirs of God forget all their miseries; and for their
single and temporary afflictions here, they shall have double and infinite
joys in heaven.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 18.


IN this verse the Apostle proceeds to prove that he set down before;
namely, that being companions in Christ his sufferings, we shall also be
copartners with him in the blessed light. He proves it can be no small glory
we shall partake of, since it is the very same that Christ himself enjoys
(always keeping the correspondencie and proportion between the head and the
members:) for we shall be carried up into the highest heavens, and we shall
stand before the throne, viewing the glorious face of God, and having the
fruition of his blessed presence. The greatness of this glory, howbe^^ it
needs rather meditation then explication, yet something shall be spoken of
it, that the veil may be taken from our eyes, that we may sound and faddome
in some sort the bottom of Christ his ^ole in his glory, which of our selves
we cannot do, no more then the Jews could into the ministry of Moses.

This place fitteth with that 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but
for a moment, brings unto us an everlasting excellent weight of glory. Where
consider two things: first, that between these afflictions and that glory,
there is no comparison in the greatness: it shall be a weight, excellently
excellent, as the word signifies, whereas afflictions are but for a an hour.
Secondly, the glory shall be more durable in respect of eternity, whereas the
other are but in this life only.

For the first, consider it in two degrees: first, the particular joy every
child and man of God shall have in his death and dissolution; secondly, the
exceeding glory he shall be filled with when all things shall be perfect, and
God shall be all in all. The first of these has two parts: first, it
contains an absolute immunity and freedom from all infirmities of body and
soul, according as it is said: All tears shall be wiped away: for the body
shall be free from labor, care and such like; and the soul shall be free from
the suggestions of Satan, by covetousness and other corruptions, wherewith
the best and choicest of Gods servants in this life are wonderfully assaulted.
Secondly, the body sleeping in the earth, the soul shall be absolutely
sanctified from sin, and live in the favor of God; so as there shall be
added unto us a present entrance into the Lords joy, which none can comprehend
but they that feel it. Luke 23.43.
This in the Scripture is called the entrance into the Paradise of the Lord:
and Paul (2. Cor. 5.8.) desires to remove out of the body, that in his soul
he might be with the Lord Jesus, who rests in such a place, as has in it
whatsoever may move either admiration, or may give contentation; and is
described ( Revel. 21.4.) to be destitute of sorrow, crying and pain, and to
have the foundation of the walls thereof garnished with all manner of precious
stones, and to be lightened only with the glory of God, needing neither Sun
nor Moon. It is also called Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. Ioh. 14.2. Revel.
19.9.
the presence with the Lamb, the gathering of us into the company of
innumerable Angels, and the mansion house of our Father.

The second degree of this glory, is at the restitution of all things, which
the Apostle here speaking of, verf. 21. calls the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. This stands in two parts: first, in the resurrection of our
bodies, when they shall be made incorruptible and glorions, and shall need no
natural provision nor maintenance: for they shall shine as the Sun, and the
Sun shall then be seauentimes brighter then it is. The second is, that God
shall be all in all, that is, the whole Godhead shall immediately reign, and
the humanity of Christ shall more manifestly be subjected, which is to the
greater glory of it, that his god head shall be so great: for then there shall
be no more office of Christ Jesus to procure any more good to his children, but
the benefit of the former shall continue for ever: for then his enemies shall
be all put down, and then the Son shell resign up his kingdom to his
Father: that is, all enemies being vanquished, and that one enemy Death being
abolished, he shall reign no more: not that God reigns not now, for he
reigns in the person of his Son as Mediator, but then his office shall end,
and he shall reign only as God. For these are but the days that the Lord
Jesus does woo us, and makes love to us: Reu. 19.7.
but then shall the marriage be solemnized: and for the better setting forth
of this with all magnificence and greatest state, all creatures shall be
restored, that they may serve and attend at the celebrating of this feast.

Now for the second part, that is, the comparison of the glory and afflictions
in respect of continuance; we see that no affliction lasts but for the
present, but this glory is eternal; Gods love toward us eternal before the
world to predestinate us, eternal after the world to glorify us, that as the
first had no beginning, so the last shall have no end. So as we may consider
of two eternities, though to speak properly there is but one: the first before
the creation: thesecond after the worlds dissolution. Now between these two,
there is a certain time for the world, and a thousand years in respect of
eternity is but as one day: nay, as Moses says, ( Psalm. 90.4.) A thousand
years are but as yesterday that is past. 2. Pet. 3.8.
So as counting the world five thousand years, it is but as the length of five
days past; and of these five thousand years what are fourscore, which is a
great age for any man to live to, and a far greater time then ever any man
was afflicted in? It is not much more then a moment, no way an hour: and
therefore these afflictions are no way comparable to the eternity of that glory
we shall have hereafter, not so much as a drop of water to the whole Sea, or
one grain to all the sand. And yet we speak now as if a man should never but
be afflicted even from his cradle to his death, living the full age of a man,
which never befell any. In Esaias 54.8. is showed, what seventy years be, and by
the account of the spirit of God himself, they be but as the least minute, for
the Lord there says: For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee, but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee: and this moment was
seventy years, for so long were the Jews in captivity. I^^. 25.12.
So as affliction by this reckoning during the whole years and life of man is
but a moment, and a great part of this moment is past before we can be said to
suffer affliction: for it is but a confused kind of pain that children
sustain: and again there was never any affliction so great, but there was
some either intermission or remission, either the tormenter was wearied, or the
whip was wasted, or they that were tormented died.

Now if the glory after our enduring of these afflictions should last but so
many millions of years, as there be stars in the heavens, there might yet be
some more, and easier, and equal comparison between them, because at the last
this glory should have an end; but it far exceeds all number, and it is not
possible for our thoughts to reach or to conceive any end of it. For this glory
is like God the giver of it, that must be embraced for the excellency of it,
and thirsted after for the eternity of it.

Now as the Apostle here persuades the necessity, and yields the reason for
patience in our afflictions, Heb. 10.35.
by the eternity of the glory which waits upon us as the just recompense of
our reward: so must we learn to dissuade from the pleasures of sin, by the
greatness and continuance of the sense of torment that waits on them. And
this standch in two points: the first, is called sensus poenae: the feeling and
smart of punishment which is aggrauated and made heavier in three respects:
first, in the universality of it, that no part shall be free from torment: but
every joint in thy body, and every power of thy soul shall be pained and
vexed, which is not so in this life, save only in a fellowfeeling of one
member with another, for never any man was tormented in all the singular parts
of his body at one instant. Secondly, in the extremity of it, that as they
shall be tormented in all parts at one time, and that continually: so one
damned spirit shall be vexed more then another, for as there be here degrees of
sins, so shall there be hereafter degrees of smart and punishments: as
Christ speaking of Jerusalem, said: It shall be easier for Sodme then for this
city, and yet Sodom was in hell. Thirdly, in the necessity of it, Mat. 11.23.
the greatness of this their torment being much increased, in that they shall
have no means to ease and lift up or relieve themselves, for they shall be
bound hand and foot that they cannot stir, as we may see by the usage of him
that came to the Lords feast without his wedding garment. And for the eternity
of their torment, Mat. 22.13.
if they should suffer no more years then there be creatures on earth, it
were some comfort, because they might epsy some light of deliverance; but when
there shall be no more heavens, and when God shall leave to be God, and to lose
his glory, then the damned ghosts shall be eased. The second aggrauation of
their punishment is in this: damno loci, in the loss of heaven: for it shall
not so much vex them that they be tormented, as that they have lost those joys
they see the Saints of God enjoy. This shall make them murmr and gnash their
teeth: and upon their apprehension and conceauing of that they have lost, shall
follow the remorse and sting of conscience, that in their life time they
despised to labor in mortification and newness of life: for there are none
damned, Revel. 20.12.
but their own hearts shall tell them they are justly damned.

Verse. 23. And not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits
of the spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even
the redemption of our body, etc. to the 26. verse.

The Apostle still enlarges the weight of glory spoken of before, proving it
to be so great, that the very frame of heaven and earth and all other creatures
do wait for the restitution and deliverance of mankind, at which time they
shall receive their original excellency. Now Paul uses an argument from the
less to the greater, that if the beasts and other insensible things which be
accursed and subject to this corruption, by reason of the bondage whereinto man
by his fall was inthralled and cast into, do labor as it were in travel till
men be glorified, and themselves for our sakes restored: then how much more
should we wait for the revelation of this glory, we that are sealed with the
first fruits of the spirit, and which in the Gospel may behold as it were in
a glass a great glimce and show of this glory? sigh after and wait for this
great and glorious day; not that we should wish simply to be unclothed, but as
the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 5.2.3. to be clothed upon with our house from
heaven, and not so much that our selves might die, as that sin might be
extinguished and our sanctification perfected.

Howbeit in this affection of ours there must be two things: the first, sighing
and groaning: the second, a patient waiting for that we hope for. Where consider
what that is we wait for and sigh for: the Apostle here calls it adoption,
that is, the accomplishment of that glory whereto we are in Christ adopted: or
as himself expounds it, the redemption of mankind: even as David was King when
he was anointed, but he stayed long for the real possession of it: and as
Abraham had the land of Canaan given him, which was performed 400. years after.

In waiting and expecting for this redemption, observe and hold it as a
principle and ground, that howsoever the Philosophers have dreamed of a simple
immortality of the soul alone, yet that we know and learn, that except the
body which we bear about us be restored also, the immortality of the soul is
abolished, otherwise it were a lame and imperfect restitution, and otherwise in
vain had Job said, chap. 19.26. Though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, that is, body and soul at the last day:
which is also plainly expressed here by the Apostle in these words,
Redemption of the body.

Further, observe hence the dullness and blockishnesse of man, that is to take
example and to be taught his duty even of the insensible creatures, who in
their kind by the very instinct of nature can groan for the day of man's
redemption, and yet man himself though spurred on and provoked can hardly be
drawn to that duty: which may teach every one of us to be more watchful in
our Christian exercises, that we may learn to know, and desire to approach
near the day of our redemption, lest the creatures that want the use of reason
rise up against us to condemn us, for they fail nothing so much in their
duties as man does; Pro. 30.25.
nay Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant and Pismire, who by his
sommer-labour provides for a hard and stormy winter. Christ will have us
learn innocence of the Dove, and wisdom and providence of the Serpent: and
the Apostle here will not have a Christian man short of the creatures, who
tra^ell in pain to be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God; and therefore much more must we sigh for
this redemption of our body, wherein we our selves have the greatest interest.

Further, in that the Apostle says, We do sigh in our selves: we learn, that
it is the duty of every Christian to be touched at the heart, and to be pricked
in his conscience, as generally for the wickedness of the whole world, so
particularly and more narowly for his own sins: for these be they whereby
God is dishonored: and therefore thou must not slightly wish or earnestly pray
for (though this be well done) a change of this corruption, and a restitution
both of the creatures and of man their head into the state of blessedness and
incorruption; but thou must even in a corner by thy self break forth as it
were into a passion of affection, with sighs and groans, even such as may fill
the heavens, to wait after and to thirst for that day wherein God shall triumph
in the fullness and perfection of all glory, and wherein man shall stand and
continue in an incomprehensible degreee of happiness. But alas we are so
entangled with the baits and nets of this vain world, that our affections
sway us to a clean contrary course, thinking our feet are never sure enough,
nor have hold enough on the earth; so pleasant do we esteem our habitation
here, that we would think our selves most happy (though heaven were never our
inheritance) if we might always live here compassed about and environed with
these false delights. Which does too much bewray our want and defect in
meditation on heaven and heavenly things, and shows what a scantling we keep
in Christianity, outwardly only to profess it, and never to enter into the
chamber of our hearts, to see whether it be furnished with such holy,
Christian, and religious sighs and groans, as set forth and commend the
affection of such a Christian, as upon the comparison of these short troubles
with that eternal weight of glory which shall come, has already planted his
heart in heaven.

Lastly observe hence, that it is not possible for the reprobate, but it is
proper and peculiar to the elect only, to lift up their heads in hope and
expectation of this redemption: which is signified by the Apostle in two
phrases and speeches here used, namely, that such sigh as first have received
the first fruits of the spirit; secondly such as wait for adoption; neither of
which do ever befall the reprobate, for they may spring up and flourish for a
time, but they have no root, nor take no sap from the spirit: and happily they
may be weary of the world, Genesis 4.13.
as Cain was of his punishment, by they have no anchor of any other hope,
unless they joy to go to hell: which ought to move us with all heedfulnesse
to look to our ways, and to labor our ingrafting into Christ, for the world
passes, Heb. 1.11.
and both it and we are folded up as a garment, and to dust we must, and yet
out of dust we must arise. And if while we be in the body, we can be burdened
and sigh, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, then are we most
happy, and happy in that alone: but if thou find thy self empty of such
affections, that thou can not sigh for thy redemption, which shows thou
do not hope for thy salvation, then art thou of all men the most miserable,
and the estate of the beasts is better then thine, for they sigh for the
liberty of Gods sons, and they shall have part in this blessedness, and thou
shall see it, and then shall moan thy self thou want it; Job 10.18.19.
for if the earth might be thy grave, and thou might perish in the dust,
thou might yet conceive happiness in senslesnesse after this life ended.

For we are saved by hope. In this the Apostle proceeds to prove that as it
is necessary for a Christian to groan, so is it also to wait for the day of
redemption; which he does after this sort: We are saved by hope, that is, all
our salvation stands and consists in hope, for hope apprehends and lays
hold on things absent and invisible, Heb. 11.1. Ephe. 3.9. Pro. 13.12.
according to that speech, Our life is hid in Christ, that is, so hid as it
will be found, though as yet it be not seen: now hope that is deferred, must
needs (as Solomon says) be the fainting of the heart: and therefore for fear
of this fainting, the Apostle releeueth our hope with patience.

Where we learn, that it is the duty of every Minister to salve up all
breaches, and to resolve all doubts that any way may perplex the heart and
soul of a weak Christian: after the example of the Apostle here, who to
relieve the infirmities of the faithful against the storm of affliction,
sets before them the crown of glory which they have won in the field by
their fighting. And because this glory was not present, but follows the
battle; and when the combat is ended then comes in victory; he shows,
though this glory and reward be not subject to the sight, yet Christians have
an affection in them, which is hope, that nourishes and staieth their
expectation for a time, the heart in the mean time leaping, and being
established through hope that it will come: and yet that they may not be
discouraged in their hope, though this glory come not so soon as it is looked
for, he gives them the plaster of patience, which shall sustain and support
their hope, for he is certain that has promised, but not to be prescribed a
time by us, but he must take his own time, and our patience must prevent all
distrust. Even so must the feeders of the flock deal with their people in all
cases of doubt and wanering in matters of faith and religion, so to compass
and beset the soul with reasons and arguments, as it may rest secure, and have
the food of comfort ministered unto them against all doubts and perils that may
arise. For such ought Ministers to be, Mat. 13 52.
as are able to bring forth of their treasure both new and old, cures and
remedies, both against the ancient wiliness, and the fresh and new subtilties
and temptations of that old serpent.

Further observe, we must not understand this speech, We are saved by hope, as
we do this, We are saved by faith. For nothing does concur in the matter of
justification with God above but faith: so as the meaning and sense here is:
that our salvation consists in those things that we hope for; and it were
better tranflated, We are saved in hope, than, we are saved by hope: Heb. 11.1.
for faith is the ground and foundation of hope: for what can we hope for,
unless we believe it? As the ground of faith is the word and promise: for why
should we believe but in respect of God his promise? Faith tells us, we beat
not the air: hope bids us, hold on our race, finish the course, fight the
cumbat, and then expect the crown of glory. Yea faith is sustained by hope,
that it do not waver, and contained by hope, that it do not hasten, but wait
the time, and it is confirmed by hope, that we may hold on the faith. Mat.
15.22.
Example of this we see and have in the Canaanitish woman, who suffered three
denials at Christ his hands, each of them doubled with several reproaches, and
yet fainted not, neither was her importunity fruitless, but she reaped the
benefit of it, namely the health of her daughter, which grew by her faith;
which faith of hers was relieved by her hope. The like may be said of Jacob,
who wrestled with God by faith, Genesis 32.26
and in a Christian hope told him flatly to his face, he would not let him go
till he had blessed him.

Hope that is seen, etc. That is, we hope not for that we have already, but
for that we expect to have hereafter: and yet we may not think but by the eye
of faith we have seen him that is invisible, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor.
3.18. We do behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lordwith open face:
whereby is meant, that though we have seen a great part in respect of the
beginnings; and although we know we are called and elect of God, yet this is
but in part as in a glass: for we have but the witness and testimony of the
spirit, and do not here see him face to face perfectly and clearly.

Further understand, that there is a difference between sight and faith, as it
is said 2. Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith and not by sight: that is, though we
have not God presently in the view, yet by faith we hope to see him. Whereby we
gather, that faith and hope shall after this life be abolished, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 13.13. Now (as speaking of the present time) abides faith,
hope, and love; but the chiefest of these is love: as if he should say: Among
these three Christian virtues, Love in respect of the continuance is chiefest,
because it cease not in the life to come, as faith and hope do cease: for
since these tend to such things as are promised and are to come, when they are
come, to what purpose should we have faith and hope? for the presence of that
we hoped for excludes hope; but yet shall we always perfectly love God, and
love one another.

Learn moreover, to beware and take heed Satan steal not away our hearts,
and rob us of this hope of glory, to think we may be happy enough in these
visible things, as in the enjoying of possessions, and heaping up of goods, and
climing up to earthly honor. If we did consider the things hoped for to be
far more excellent, and more permanent then these vanishing delights, we
would have other thoughts and better affections toward our heavenly City. But
we are so besotted in the present sweetness of the pleasures of this life,
that if the Lord would still settle and establish our mansion here; that the
gourd might still grow over our heads, Jonah. 4.6.
as it did over Jonas head to keep us from heat, and that we might still
flourish as the Bay tree: we would resign and give up all our interest, and
cease to claim any title to heaven, or to make any haste to the throne of God:
which comes to pass, because we only walk in the admiration of these
outward things: as the Cardinal of Bourbon said: He would not give his part in
Paris for his part in Paradise. Whereas if we would weigh it truly, they ever
deceived him soonest that most trusted in them: Luke 12.20.
as the rich man, that promised to his life ease for many years, because he
had multitude of riches, was the same night by sudden death deprived of all.
And if we would enter into true comparison between the joys of heaven, and
these prison-ioyes we have on earth, we should find far greater difference,
then there was between the Manna in the wilderness, and the flesh pots of
Egypt; Number. 11.5.6.
and the bread the lost son eat in his fathers house, Luke 15.16.23.
and the husks he eat abroad with swine.

Further learn, that hope is not only of that it sees not, but it hopes
clean contrary to that it sees. As Abraham hoped for fruit of Saraes body,
Genesis 18.13.
when he knew her womb was as a dry stock, and that it fared not with her as
with other women. Even so fell it out in David: Samuel comes and anointeth him
king: here he hopes for that he has not, nay, 1. Sam. 16.13.
clean contrary to that he saw before his eyes: for snares were laid for him,
the builders refuse him as a fir stone, both Prince and people hated him: 1 Samuel 22.1.
nay, the fat Bulls of Basan did rage upon him: amongst the basest he was in
derision, and a table talk as himself says, Psalm. 35.15.16. Doeg and other
of his familiars that went into the house of God with him, lift up their heel
against him: yea, God himself was against him, as he cries, Psalm. 22.1. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The very pangs of hell did compass him
so, as he said in his haste; All men are liers, Samuel has abused me: and yet
he hoped against hope, and against these fears, Psalm 116.11
that the Lord would advance him; and so in the time appointed it came to
pass. Even so must the godly do, they must ground and build upon God, and
though they can epsy out of the waterish and dim humor of their hearts no
light of deliverance, yet must they still cleave to him in hope; and though we
be never free, but either Ismael persecuteth us with his tongue, or Esau hates
us in his heart, yet we must not be dismayed, nor any whit repine at the
prosperity of the wicked: but even this must cause us to raise up our hopes,
that because things be brought to this confusion, and religion is so lightly
set by, therefore there must needs be a restitution, and an inuersion and
change of this order.

We do with patience abide for it. Where observe, though we must wait with
patience, yet we must sigh and groan: for this agrees well enough with the
other that went before, in respect these things we see are nothing comparable
with that we shall have. And in respect of this steadfast hope of the
expectation of this blessed day, Moses refused to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, Heb. 11.24. Dan. 5.11.
and Daniel refused to bow down to that beast that was set up to dishonor
God. Yea by reason of this patient hope we may see how the martyrs from time to
time have submitted themselves to many torments not only in patience, but even
in triumph: as one of the faithful servants of God, who for his profession was
cast to a Lion, said: I am the grain of Christ Jesus, here I am ready to be
ground with the teeth of this beast, that I may be a fit loaf for the Lords
table. And whence came this Christian courage and resolution, but only because
he saw God which was invisible. So may we say of all the rest of Gods children,
who have refused the honor of the world, as to be the sons of Pharaohs
daughter, and to sit with Princes, and have chosen rather to suffer persecution
with Gods saints; Heb. 10.35.
that they have done it in this respect, as having regard to the recompense of
reward set before them, in a hope that cannot fail. Let us therefore not scrape
so greedily in the earth as the blind moles do, nor wallow our selves in the
mire of this world like swine, nor root our affections in the things of this
life* but let us sigh with desire, and wait with patience the general
redemption of the sons of God, and restitution of the creatures to their
first perfection: at least let us look to our own particular departure out of
this life, for there is no privilege nor protection can come from the court of
heaven, but depart we must, and how soon we know not: the Devil would feign
take us in the lurch, and the world will entice us to defer the buying of
oil for the keeping of our lamps burning, till the Lord do knock: Mat. 25.10.
but let us ever be furnished for the way, let our faith hold us, and our hope
contain us within the compass and assurance of our salvation. These be the
days of our pangs and pilgrimage; happy shall that day be, when we shall be
delivered, and when our journey shall be ended. Here we have to walk a most
tedious and craggy course; happy shall that day be, when we shall come to our
heavenly country. Here we sight a troublesome, though no doubtful com^ happy
shall that day be when we shall be crowned as conq^^rors: here we sow with
sorrow, happy shall that day be w^^^ we shall reap a plentiful and
perpetual harvest with much ^^y here we are full of wounds, and our eyes
stand full of tears, happy shall that day be when our wounds shall be healed,
and our tears wiped away.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 26.27.




THE Apostle proceeds to minister consolation in all those afflictions we
must pass through, and shows that there is no cause we should shrink or
faint, since we are maintained and supported by a heavenly power, against which
the gates of hell cannot prevail; for the Lord does assist us by the holy
Ghost, which does excite and stir up in us gronings, that is, heavenly
prayers, which do reach and pierce the very throne of God, and which being
made according to his will, we must needs obtain whatsoever we shall request.

In the words observe three things: first, generally that the ^^^ly Ghost does
relieve us in our infirmities and weakness: se^^ndly, by what means he does
it, namely, when we are low brought, by stirring up in us such vehement and
fervent prayers as cannot proceed from any natural man, nor the power of man,
but from a power far above man: thirdly, the powerful working of these
prayers, namely, that being made according to Gods meaning, the Lord must needs
show himself exorable and to be entreated, and it is not possible they can
return empty from the throne of grace.

For the first, consider that it were impossible for us to stand one minute, if
no other power did sustain us but flesh and blood; for even in the choicest of
Gods children faith is very weak, and our hope very weary, and flesh and
blood through self love desires ease, and does moan it self, and is
fearful to see or to suffer the cross: yea Satan does buffet us by our
inward infirmities, for sin lies heavy within us, and this makes us to
groan, outward afflictions make the flesh to smart, the world tempts us on
both hands, one way with the peace of the wicked, another way with the troubles
of the godly, alluring us to the vain glistering shows of the one, and
terrifying us from the ghastfull and hideous sight of the other. So as having
sin within us, Satan without us, and the world about us, all enemies to the
peace and rest of our souls, every hour should we perish, were we not
supported by the mighty hand of this invisible spirit: and therefore flesh and
blood has no cause to be proud, but ought in truth to glory in it own
weakness, because it has such an helper, and so strong an helper, and so
certain a helper as is this spirit, which is nothing else then the very power
of God himself, as it was said to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee.

Further, in that it is said, He helps our infirmities: observe that he does
not free us fully from them, or remove them fully from us, but he does only
help and relieve us in them. And this is that Christ prayed for in his bitter
agony, John 17.15. I pray unto thee Father, says he, not that thou would
give them an exemption and freedom from trials, but that they may be so kept
from evil, as ever they may find some comfortable deliverance. So in another
place Christ says unto his Apostles, Mat. 9.15.
that when the Bridegroom was with them they could not mourn, he sparing
them for that time: but afterward he says, Hitherto have ye lived in peace,
have ye a sword, if not, buy one, for tribulation shall come: and then he said,
A little while I will be from you, that is, during the time of my death, but I
will send a better comforter: and then follows, The world shall rejoice, but
ye shall mourn; mourn though ye have a comforter, but not mourn until ye
have a comforter: which sets forth the riches of the Lords mercy, that
provides a remedy before we receive the wound, and lays himself as it were
in our bosom before he sends us cause of sorrow. To this purpose is that
Paul speaks, 2. Corinthians. 4 8, 9. we are afflicted on every side, yet not in
distress; in doubt, but we despair not; persecuted but not forsaken; cast
down but perish not, because by the same spirit that was in Christ the inward
man is renewed daily. And this was the answer which Paul himself received from
God being sore buffeted by Satan, 2. Cor. 12.9.
Content thy self (says the Lord) my grace is with thee, therefore strive
thou and I will help thee. This also is prefigured in the combat between the
Angel and Jacob, Genesis 32.25.
who had his bone in his thigh shrunk, but yet would not forsake his hold till
he had a blessing. So as by this combat we are sure to receive such a blow as
we shall halt all our lives after, to this end, that we may seek for Jacobs
staff, the blessing of the Lord to strengthen us. And this was Moses comfort
when his hands were faint and weary in holding of them up in prayer, so that
they fell down, Exodus 17.12.
then did the spirit of the Lord support them, and prompt him with excellent
and effectual words of prayer. Yea this must be the comfort of us all, that
though we fight to the blood for the Lords cause, not one drop of it shall
perish; but as the Lord does keep our tears, so much more will he keep our
blood in a bottell, Psalm. 116.^.
that we may be made precious white in the blood of the Lamb.

Now for the second point, which is the means how the spirit helps our
infirmities, that is, by stirring up prayers and groans. Observe first, that no
man can pray of himself unless he be taught of God: secondly, that the holy
Ghost does minister unto us that power in prayer which no man is able to bring
and perform of himself; howbeit we may not construe the words as if the holy
Ghost himself did pray, but only that he suggesteth unto us fit words and
matter, and prompteth us to pray.

For the first, understand that it is not postible for any man of himself to
pray, unless he be helped and renewed in his spirit, for prayer must be made
in the mediation of Christ, which flesh and blood never thinks of, nay, which
flesh and blood does but mock at. And this disabilitie in prayer, and
unaptness to perform it, is even true of them that be enlightened and called
to the faith, unless also they be impulsed and driven on by the spirit.
Howbeit, by this so excellent an instrument as the spirit, the Lord does pour
into our hearts such a constant and steadfast assurance of his love, as we come
and humble our selves before him boldly, and beat our breast, and pray from
the book of our conscience, confidentlie unfolding the whole heaps of our
miscries before the Lord: yea, we come unto him having even a sight and
contemplation of his majesty, and we stand not upon words, but a broken and
contrite spirit makes us speak plainly, the interpreter of our meaning being
the holy Ghost: so as we in this exercise confer with God, and speak as it
were with the mouth of Christ, who makes our supplications as sweet as incense
in our and his Fathers nostrels. So as it is no such slight matter, nor so
easy a work to pray aright, for of thy self thou art speechless, and can
not utter one word, unless the spirit untie the strings of thy tongue; and
though happily thou speak, yet is thy understanding senseless, that thou
know not what to ask unless the spirit teach thee: nay were thou never so
well taught, if the spirit make thee not acquainted with Christ, Revel. 8.3.
that he may present thy prayers to God, all else is in vain and fruitless.

Further, in that the holy Ghost is said to make request for us: we are
admonished (unless it be for weak Christians and babes in Christ, that are
not grown in the word of grace, unto whom a book of prayer is allowed as a
Catechism) that they that be old scholars in the school of Christ, ought to
strive and endeavor to grow from prayer to prayer, as well as from faith to
faith, that as their judgments are increased in knowledge, so their hearts may
increase in feruencie and affection toward God, and that they may bring forth
their hidden treasure of the Lords spirit, in enabling them to conceive a
prayer, and to pray as their present necessities shall require. For this is
that the Lord looks for, that as he said by the Prophet Zachary, 12.10. that
he would in the last times power out the spirit of deprecation and of prayer
upon the sons of men: so men should endeavor to be familiar in this duty
without book, and not content themselves to pray either a stinted prayer, or
a stinted time: but as it is said, Hebr. 6.1. we must leave the beginnings,
and be led forward and strive to perfection. For if notwithstanding such
plenty of food these many years, there be still such leanness in thy soul,
that thou art not able to feed thy self, nor to express and utter thy
necessities in a corner before the Lord, how can thou look for any blessing,
that have been so sluggish, and have so carelessly entertained the spirit of
God in this acceptable time? If any sudden calamity hang over thy head, or any
secret sin press thy conscience, how can thou think to be relieved? nay
thou can not but judge thy self unworthy to be helped, if thou art unable
without a book before thee to utter thy grief and to pray for help. Thou
must know thy temptations are particular, and thy sins are particular, and a
general confession is not a proper salve for any particular sore: but as in
this and this sin thou have offended God, so particularly for this and this
sin thou must call for mercy. And what if that special grace thou prayest for
be not in thy book, then thou go away empty, for thou art not likely to
obtain that thou do not ask for. For howsoever the Lord does ofttimes
prevent us with his mercies, and gives before we ask, yet when he shall
perceive such negligence in us, that we desire but as it were a common and
general head-peece to shield us from all assaults, and do not arm our selves
in every part, especially knowing our old enemy the devil lies at all
advantage, this makes the Lord weary and unwilling to help us, who otherwise
easily inclines his ear to the prayers of the faithful.

When it is said: With gronings that are unspeakable: we are by this to
comfort a distressed conscience: that if afflictions do come so fast upon us,
as the waves, one in the neck of another, and our spirits be so over whelmed
and cast down, that we are not able to conceive a prayer for the anguish of
our souls; in this case if our hearts do but bleed and groan, though no word
be uttered, yet is it a prayer precious and acceptable in the Lords sight. We
read of Ezechiah, ( Esa. 38.14.) that he was not able to speak one word, but
did chatter like a Crane, and mourn like a Dove in his sickness, he was so
oppressed with sorrow in the bitterness of his soul; yet was this a prayer, and
a prayer heard of God, and himself delivered, and fifteen years added to his
life. So oftentimes our prayers are so peppered with salt and fire, that is,
our soul is so anguished, and our spirits so appalled, that either we speak
abruptly, or only knock our selves on the breast, Luke 18.13.
as did the Publican; yet this sounds in the Lords ears, and comes
pleasantly before him: for words in prayer are but to make us understand what
we ask, the Lord understands our meaning without words, yea knows our
wants better then our selves. And as the mother pitieth her child when it is
fallen sick, and is able to tell where the pain lies, and to ask such
things as it wants; but when the disease is grown so fore, that for
extremity it cannot utter the pain by speech, but lies complaining by groans
and cries, with the eyes fixed upon the mother, this doubleth the compassion,
and makes her very bowels to yearne with pity: Even so the Lord, more kind
then a mother, lends his loving and tender ear to our bitter complaints; but
being astonished with grief; that we cannot but only cry out in hope and
expectation of some help, and we lie pained not able to express it, this does
more enlarge the bowels of his compassion, and then he gathers our reares
into a bottle, and wipeth our eyes, and puts his hand into our side to heal
us, and regards as preciously such manner of speechless utterance, as any
prayer uttered in feruencie and vehemency of words. Which is a most singular
comfort for Gods chosen, that the clouds of affliction can never be so thick,
but a hearty sigh will scatter them: yea, come what will, no time can be so
evil, nor tyrant so bitter or cruel, that can stay us from groaning, though
through weight of torment they may stop us from speaking: as David says, Psalm.
38.9. I power (O Lord) my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not
hidden from thee: for none can refrain the heart from sobbing. Yet must we
not abuse this comfortable doctrine to our fleshly liberty, to make us
sluggish in praying to the Lord, and think only a mental prayer, or a desire
conceived though not uttered, to be enough: for this speechless prayer is
only permitted in the bitterness of the heart, and when the venime of
affliction has seized upon the outward man, in such a case, and in such a
time, if we cannot speak with Anna, (1. Sam. 1.13.) we may with her wag our
lips be we never so old. Otherwise we must say with David: Psalm. 57.8.
Arise my tongue, and then arise up my glory: for there is no instrument so fit
to set forth our wants, and it is no excuse for thee to say: the Lord knows
thy heart, for so does he know thy wants also before thou ask, and by that
reason, neither the panting of the heart, nor the pains of the lips should be
requisite:

For the third point, that is, for the effect and efficacy of our prayers,
that they coming from the spirit must needs speed and have good success,
observe when it is said: The Lord knows the meaning: that there is a special
property of this word to be understood: for (knowing) is taken here for
(approving:) as Romans 7.15. What I do I know not, that is, allow not, nor
approve that Ido: so Mat. 7.23. Depart from me, I know you not, that is,
approve you not, for he knew them well enough. So Psalm. 1.6. The Lord knows
the way of the righteous: that is, approves it: and in the same sense is it
taken in the Proverb. 12.10. The righteous man knows the soul of his beast,
that is, approves it. Why then this is the lesson: that if our prayers have an
allowance and approbation with God, we may be sure we shall reap the fruit of
our lips, and that our requests shall not return empty unto us, but shall be
as the dove, that brought an Olive in her mouth, signifying that the floods are
ceased, and that we may walk on the dry land.

The reason why our prayers must needs speed, is, because the same spirit that
makes us pray, does make us only to pray for those things that stand with the
Lords glory, and therefore must of necessity be granted, for God cannot deny
himself, and he and his glory are inseparable. 1. Ioh. 5.14.
And this is witnessed by S. John: This is our assurance, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us: and we know that we have the
petitions we desired of him. So that it is not the worthiness of our prayers
that draws Gods bounty to us, but the bounds and compass wherein our
prayers are limited and circumscribed, that is, aiming at nothing else, and
referring all to the will and pleasure of God, which we may be sure shall come
to pass. Even as Jacob said, Genesis 32.11.12. Thou will deliver me, O Lord, from
my brother Esau, for thou have said, thou will do me good: and (2. Sam. 7.21.)
David says: O Lord, I know thou will bless my house, because of thy word, for
thou have spoken it. Many there be will say: I have prayed often, and cried
incessantly for the increase of faith, and yet I find it as weak, and my
flesh as sinful as it was before. And thus Satan persuades thee thou prayest
not according to Gods will: for if thou had been his, and had belonged to
him, he would have given thee faith at thy first request. But thou must beat
back this temptation, which is but to lull thee in security, by this answer:
that thou must think thy lot and thy portion to be no better then David's, who
( Psalm. 69.3.4.) brake forth, saying: O Lord, I am weary with crying, and mine
eyes fail while I have waited for my God: for the Lord will have thee to
continue in prayer; not to weary thee, but to try thy patience how long thou
can wait: so as if thou speak and the Lord seems not to hear thee,
double thy prayers upon him, for he makes himself deaf to make thee more
quick and fervent. If he listen to thee, and yet thou obtainest not, persevere
and continue, for at last the Lord will incline to thy petition, and from his
throne will he send thee a cheerful message. In Saint Luke we have an example
of one that asked but three loaves, Luke 11.8.
and by his importunity got as many as he would. So may the p^^ore widow be
our pattern, Luke 18.5.
who by her multiplying of her sure wit^ many words, obtained right of the
unjust Judge: and therefore much more shall we by our instancie with the Lord
obtain what in faith we shall desire: for out of the very words of the Apostle
here we may learn, first that it is certain we shall have it, though it be
uncertain when it shall be cast upon us; for Christians must endeavor to
strive to this, to have Jacobs spirit and resolution, that though the Lord
fight with us, and would feign shake us off, yet not to let him go till we
have forced a blessing from him, and have our petitions granted. And we must
have the strength of the woman's faith in the Gospel, Mat. 15.22.
as not to fear three denials of Christ hand to hand, for her constancy and
perseverance were rewarded double, first with the commendation of her faith:
secondly, with the health of her daughter, which was the thing she craved. And
even so at length shall our prayers be requited with the perfect cure of all
our infirmities.

Secondly, mark and assure thy self, that if thy prayers made now be not
presently heard, thou shall be rewarded in a time thou least look for, and
when thou art utterly out of hope of that thou did crave: as we may see Luke
1.13. Zachary and Elizabet no doubt prayed in their youth for the fruit of
their body, but they were not then heard, for the Lords time was not yet: but
when Zachary as priest was exercising the public ministry of the Church, and
both he and his wise stricken in age, then the Angel comes and tells him, the
Lord had heard his prayers, and that his wife should have a child. Which may be
a great encouragement to us to grow perfect in this exercise, and that the
work of prayer may be easy to us, because there is not a word falls to the
ground, but either it rebounds presently upon us again with a blessing, or
that blessing is reserved for a better time when it trebles the joy in
receiving an unexpected benefit. No doubt Jacob had fetched many a sigh for the
loss of his son Joseph; Genesis 37.34.
but if Joseph had presently returned to his father before he obtained the
honor in Egypt, it had nothing so much cheared Jacobs heart, Genesis 45.27.
as it did when he saw the chariots sent to fetch him, that he might see him in
his state and dignity. So for the Lord to carry in his remembrance and to keep
as it were a book of our prayers always open before his eyes, and either to
heal us when we are past cure, as he did David, when he heard him out of the
deep of deeps: or in his good time to put us in mind of our own prayers by
the fruit doubled in our bosom when we thought our harvest past, can not but
exceedingly stir us up to magnify his goodness, and to employ all the powers
of our soul to please him.

Thirdly, we pray for many things which we cannot obtain, and yet we must pray
for them, for if we cannot have our desire here, it shall be fulfilled in the
life to come: as when we pray that Gods kingdom may come, that we may be
delivered from temptation, and that we may not sin, which only shall be
performed in the life to come: for God according to his own disposition of
times has ordained that we his creatures should apply our selves unto, and
therefore has taught us by his spirit as well to pray for the end as for the
means. Faith in this life being the foundation of our hope, and our hope being
perfited in the life to come through the love of Christ: so that as here we
pray to have our faith strengthened, our infirmities cured, our sins pardoned,
and Gods graces renewed in us daily, which be apples of such a tree as we taste
of in this life: so here we pray also that sin may be abolished, the number
of Gods elect gathered, and the work of our sanctification perfited, which is
the end and perfection of the former, and which is reserved for a better life,
when both our own prayers and the intercession of Christ for us also shall
cease.

Fourthly observe, that God so hears thy prayers, that though he do not
grant formam the form, yet he grants finem the end of thy prayers. Even as
Christ when he prayed in the garden, Father if it be possible let this cup
pass from me: now shall we say that Christ ever prayed and was not heard?
Mat. 26.39.
God forbid: and yet the cup did not pass from him, yet was he heard, as
the Apostle to the Hebrews says, in that he feared; for though he was not
delivered from death, Heb. 5.7.
yet was he freed from the horror of death, for an Angel was sent to comfort
him. 2. Cor. 12.8.
So Paul when he prayed to be delivered from the buffetings of Satan, he had
his desire thus far, the Lord grants the end of his prayer, that is,
strength to abide it: exempted he could not be, but this was it, the power of
the Lord should be in him so much the greater as his temptations and
afflictions were increased: so that none must be discouraged nor grow cold
though their first or second voice in prayer be not heard: for by this we
learn first to continue in prayer, and in this does the Lord secretly hear us
that we break not off. Secondly, the Lord does for a time withdraw his ears
from the words of our mouth, that we may know the deliverance prayed for
coming from God, we are not to appoint him the hour. Thirdly, we stay a time
before our hands be filled with our requests to exercise our patience, that our
desire be not like the longing and fainting of a woman. Fourthlie, that by this
small absence of the Lord in not hearing our prayers at the first, we may
learn to depend upon his providence. Fiftlie, that we may use them the better
when we have them, and receive them with the greater thankfulness, because
things wished for, as they are gratefully received, so are they carefully
preserved.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 28.


Here the Apostle proceeds to open another fountain of exceeding comfort to
the faithful, which is, all things work for the best to those that love God:
but every faithful man is assured he loves the Lord: therefore to him all
things work for the best: and if all things, then afflictions. He proves it by
this reason; to those that be predestinate all things turn to the best: but
they that love the Lord are predestinate; therefore to them all things turn to
the best. And to prove this he sets down a reason, verse. 29. Those that be
called in the eternal purpose of God, them has he predestinate to be like the
image of his Son, Heb. 2.9.
that as he passed by the cross, and from the cross to glory, so shall we,
being children of the same Father, and who are borne and bound to resemble
Christ our elder brother in this point chiefly.

To declare how afflictions work for the best in Gods children: we must
understand that afflictions be of two sorts, either remedies to correct our
corruptions and heal our infirmities, or else exercises of Gods graces in his
children, that he may try them how much they will suffer for his sake. For the
first kind of afflictions, we cannot doubt but they do work for the best,
whether we consider them as chastisements for sins past, or as preuentions of
sins to come. For sins that are committed, the rod is necessary (for he is a
bastard that is not corrected) that we may see and loath the cause of our
affliction, that is, our corruption: as it is said 1. Cor. 11.32. We are
chastised of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world: And
to David the Lord says, Thy sons I will correct for their sins, but my
loving kindness shall never depart from thee: for the punishments of these our
sins are pardoned in the sacrifice of Christ, but so is not the chastisement;
for this proceeds from the love of God, and Christ only satisfied the wrath
of God. That it comes from the love of God, appears by the example of
David, to whom when the Lord had sent Nathan the Prophet to tell him his sin
was pardoned; 2. Sam. 7.15.
yet withal, part of his message was, that the sword should never depart from
his house, which fell out in his daughter Thamar that was ravished, and in his
son Absolon that was desperately hanged, and in the child begotten in adultery
that presently died. And this was only to awake him out of that security
Satan had cast him into; for it is certain, where the Lord smites not, there
the Lord loves not: and therefore 1. Sam. 2.25. it is said, that because the
Lord had a purpose to slay the sons of Eli, therefore they obeyed not the
mild voice of admonition used by their father.

Now for those afflictions that be sent as preuentions of sin, as poverty,
ignominy, restraint of liberty, shutting up the womb and such like, they
also turn to the best in Gods children: for many do let themselves blood
before they be sick for fear of sickness, and the superfluous spreads of a
vine are cut off, that it may bring forth better fruit. And thus does the
Lord mint and diet his children, lest by riches they should grow proud, by fame
become insolent, by liberty wax wanton, and kick against the Lord when they
be full; and lest by having children they should make idols of them, to cocker
them up to damnation, the Lord scanteth them in these blessings. Look upon
David, who confesses he had gained much by affliction. See what difference
there was even in Nabuchadnezzar, before he was pulled out of his seat, and
after he had fed with beasts: before in his prosperity, the strength of his
hand, and the power of his majesty had built Babel, Dan. 3. and 4. but after
he had been cooled in the wild forest, then he lifted up his eyes to heaven,
and praised and honored him that lives for ever. Such is the stomach of
flesh and blood, that it will break out into many insolences against God,
against his church and children, unless he cut as it were out teather short,
that we have but little room to feed in: and therefore in great mercy he
suffers us often times to want, lest we should was proud with abundance, and
changes our oil of gladness into a countenance of heaviness, because we
could not before tell how to use our mirth.

Secondly, consider how those afflictions turn to our good, which are sent for
the exercises of Gods graces in us: namely, beerein to try how far we love
God, whether we love him when he deals with us roughly, as well as when he
deals mildly and liberally with us: and this is called the fiery trial,
wherein we shall not be consumed like dross, but refined like gold. And this
affection appeared in Job when he cried, Job. 13.15.
O Lord though thou kill me, yet will I love thee: for many times the Lord
sends his arrows against us, and the venime of his wrath lies for a time in
our bones, and he sets us up as marks to shoot at; unto whom if we
willingly submit our selves, the power and danger of his shafts shall be
appeased, before they hit us, and the poison of his indignation shall be
cleansed away before it rankle in us. Genesis 22.2.
Thus fared it with Abraham, whom the Lord did not simply afflict for his
sin, but for the trial of his faith and feruencie of his zeal toward God,
to see whether he loved Isaac the son of the promise, better then God the
Father of the promise. And behold, to the comfort of the children of Abraham,
in a resolution of three days journey, he fainted not to execute the Lords
commandment, trusting the Lord with his own salvation: for he knew if his
son Isaac should have been sacrificed, himself should have been damned:
whose obedience when it was thus thoroughly tried, the Lord says, Since thou
have done this, I will make thee the father of the faithful, which was a
confirmation of the promise was made before.

But there is another special kind of affliction that searches more narrowly
the corners of our hearts, and tries more fully our obedience and love toward
God: namely, when the Lord vouchsafes us that honor to suffer for the cross
of Christ. In this he exercises our cold prayers, and varnisheth our rustie
hope, and stirs up our dull meditations, to think how precious in the sight
of God is the blood of his Saints, when they die not only in their holiness,
Psalm. 116.15.
but are put to death even for their holiness. And therefore Christ gives
this counsel, Luke 6.22.23. When ye are hated of men and persecuted for
righteousness, then rejoice and be glad; or as the Greek word signifies,
skippe at that day like fat calves, because our reward is great in heaven. So
as these afflictions that lead to death, further and hasten us toward the life
to come: and even for this life they turn to our good, as Mat. 10.29. He that
forsakes father or wife, or riches for my names sake, I will give him an
hundred fold more in this life, that is, in that base estate and condition of
persecution, wherein he stands for the profession of my name, I will give him
an hundred times more comfort, more contentation, and more peace of conscience,
then he should have had in an hundred wives of such as were never so dear unto
him, in an hundred fathers of such as were never so kind unto him; and more
perfect joy, then he should have had in all the treasures of the world, be they
never supleasing and precious unto him. So as observe, though the Lord
promises not a requital of thy loss in quantity and in number, yet he does
it in the good will and blessing of God, wihch is the spec^all quality, that
makes such things we enjoy permanent and comfortable unto us. This David had
found in his own experience, Psalm. 127.1. and therefore teaches us to know,
that except the Lord do build the house, in vain do the workmen bestow
their labor, and unless he keep the city, as good set open the gates; for
the watch without him do nothing. Witness the prison doors that flew open,
and the chains wherewith Peter was fettered, that flew off, when the Iaylor
had done the best he could, Act. 12.10. And this is that Amos labors to
persuade the people in his Prophecy, that let the spring be never so forward,
Amos 4.6.
nor the bread which is our food never so sauorie, if the Lord do but blow
upon it, it cannot nourish us. So Paul says: 1. Tim. 4.12.
that godliness has ever the promises of this life, that is, religious
prosperity, and the hand of blessing from above: and it has the promises of
the life to come, that is, to be translated from this dim light of Gods
favor which we find here, into the full fruition of Gods glory which we
shall possess hereafter. Look upon the poor widow of Sarepta, though she
had but a little oil, 1. King 7.14.
yet had she more then the rest when Eliah came to her: for theirs consumed,
and hers through the secret blessing of God, served her turn and wasted not.
Dan. 6.17.
So Daniel in prison fared better with bread and water, by reason of Gods
cheerful presence with him, then did the king with all his sumptuous and
princely diet. And in our natural judgments we can say, that he has more,
that has but a bottle of wine that runs by drops, then he that has a
whole cesterne full, that is broken: for the providence of God never leaves
those that be his, and his eye is upon their wants to supply them. And as Paul
says, Colos. 1.16.17. By Christ all things were created, he is before all
things, and in him all things consist, that is, have their being for his
glory: for no man can complot or contriue any secret snares for our life, no
man can breath out any threatenings against Gods Church as did Saul, Act. 9.1.
Matt. 14.1^.
not execute any cruelty upon the forerunner of Christ, as did Hero^ but
Christ has his full glory in it. Let us therefore k^^^ our persecutors can do
us no harm: for as our being is for Ch^^^^ to must our bodies be yielded up to
Christ, we stand in him, and his power in these afflictions is seen in us, so
as when they hate us and revile us, and torment us, they are but as A
pothee^ies to make drugges to heal our infirmities: they are but as Masons to
hammer and polish us in the quarry of this world, that we may be fit stones for
the heavenly building: yea they are but as fire to refine us, being of our
selves drossie; as furbushers to varnish us, being through fleshly ease rustie;
as scullions in the Lords kitchen, to scour the vessel of his household:
lastly, they are those, that have received a commission from God, contrary to
their own intention, to do us good, for when they are come to the perfection
of their tyranny, they can but kill the body, whereby they hasten our
blessedness in the soul.

Here may be demanded: if all things work for our good, whether the
infirmities that be in us do us any good or no. The answer is: Yes, many ways,
but principally three ways. First, they remain in us to subdue the pride and
presumption of our hearts, that would advance it self against God, if it were
not humbled by the sight of it own corruption: as Paul must have a buffeter,
lest he grow insolent, 2. Cor. 12.8. For the Lord will trust us no more with
perfection, since Adam lost it in Paradise, and therefore he exercises us with
infirmities, lest we should step into our mother concepit, to think our
selves Gods. This is proportionablie to that spoken of Deuteronomy. 7.22. That the
Lord would root out the Canaanites from among his people by little and little,
Psalm. 59.11.
not all at once, lest the wild beasts should grow in upon them. These
Canaanites be our infirmities, the wild beasts are self-loue, pride of life,
and such like, which would wax strong within us, if we were thoroughly purged
from our weakness. And thus we see the Lord cures poison by poison, keeps
out gross sins, by keeping in natural infirmities, even as the best treakle
is made of poison, and the skin of a viper, is the best cure against the
sting of a viper.

Secondly, these our infirmities serve to cure our ingratitude; for if the Lord
should bestow upon us all his benefits at once, we would soon forget him. We
see how the Lo^^ (...) up the red sea to make passage for the Israelites, Exo.
14.^^. which one would have thought should have bee^ as (...) sigh^ on their
finger always in their sight; and yet Psalm. 106.7. ^^^t is said (...) the
Hebrew phrase, they made haste to forget it, though it was so miraculous a
work. For this cause David prays, Psalm. 59.11. O Lord do not destroy the
enemies of thy Church, that is, slay them not together, lest the people forget
thee, but do it by little and little, that the people may often come unto thee:
yea David himself in many places confesses, that the prolonging of the Lords
mercies give as it were an edge and sharpness to this spirit of thankfulness.
And such is the nature of man, to wait no longer in humility then he has hope
of benefit. The lost son had no sooner fingred his portion, Luke 15.13.
but his fathers house was unsavory to him, and he must needs ruffle it in
another country. For as willingly we would wait no longer on the Lord then he
is giving: so when he has given us somewhat, we would be out of his sight
while we spend it. And this makes him more scant in his blessings then
otherwise he would be, because he will teach us to depend upon him, both till
we have them, and while we use them, and that employing them in a spiritual
kind of traffic to gain credit to the Lord, he may furnish us afterward
with better store.

Thirdly, our infirmities serve to restrain our spiritual sluggishnesse, and
security of the flesh; for where no fear of the enemy is, there the weapon
rusteth: so as we are sifted and tempted by Satan that we may find our
infirmities to be relieved by the Lords power, and that we may pray for his
gracious strength to withstand him, and in Christ to overcome him; and that by
our experience in fighting with Satan we may become wise and watchful, for we
do not pray to be delivered from temptations, but not to be left in them.
Our infirmities indeed are the fuel that Satan lays, and they are as it
were the coals he blows to consume us. Now every Christian when he feels
such a fire of enmity within him against God and his law, bestirreth himself,
and strives by a clean contrary blast of the spirit to quench these coals,
and enters such a comba^^ (...) ^^seth in death, which we would not do if
there we (...) not so^^ ski^^ of sin and some remnant of corruption left
(...) us, but we would fall asleep like idle servants, and hide (...), that
is, the strength of Gods graces in us. Job, Job 13.15.
though he were never (...) painful a Christian, yet never more commended the
power of God in him then by his fight hand to hand with the devil, in
resisting and keeping off such blows of blasphemy and despair as Satan would
have had him cast at God, and would have had to stick in himself. Paul when
he fought with bulls at Ephesus, never obtained such a victory as when he
left Satan in the lurch, and left himself persecuting of the Gospel: nay
after his conversion there was left a sting in his flesh, lest either he might
wax sluggish or become proud. And therefore it pleases God to honor our
infirmities with the courage of fighting, and by them to keep us waking, that
we may discern the storm when it comes, and cast our ank or on Christ where
it shall never be unloosed.

Here the craft and wiliness of flesh and blood will so one take occasion of
licenciousnesse: as to say, if our infirmities serve to do us good, and turn
to Gods glory, because by this means we see our weakness, then it is good to
make much of them: even as Porphyrius commends the treason of Judas against
Christ, because by Christ his death salvation is brought to many. But miserable
and blasphemous is this opinion: for this were to turn the grace of God into
wantonness, for though our infirmities do further us many ways to salvation,
yet in it own nature sin is always sinful. God can make Satan a Physician to
cure Paul; yet is he ever Satan, that is, an enemy. God can make the tyranny
of Pharaoh as a trumpet, to stir up the Israelites to cry to him for help;
Exodus 2.23.
yet does this nothing diminish from his malice to Gods people. Luke 22.47.
John 17.12.
God can make Judas by a kiss the executioner of his decree; yet does he
continue the child of perdition. So as we must strive against our infirmities,
because they be in themselves simply evil, though qualified and tempered with
the Lords hand they turn to our good. Adultery, it was a horrible sin in
David, though it was made profitable for his soul, in bringing him to such a
low degree of humiliation as is set down Psalm. 32.6. For the heavens to be
brass as not good in it own nature, but it is a vengeance of we want the
first and latter rain, whereby to ripen the fruits of the earth; yet at the
prayer of Eliah, 1. King. 17. and James 5.16. it rained not on the earth for
three years and six months, that the Lords mercy and power might the more be
seen: yea the Lord can create light out of darkness, yet darkness is alwaie
darkness. Adams fall it was good in that end God had ordained it, namely, Genesis
3.14.
to prepare the way to raise us up a Savior of the seed of the woman, but it
was a most damnable sin as Satan and Adam meant it, for they did it in
rebellion against God.

Further, we must consider how the persons be qualified to whom all things
turn to the best; it is to them that love God; which is the most excellent and
Christian commendation that can be, this our love issuing and streaming from
that fountain of the love of God. Even as all waters come from the sea as from
the wellhead, and return thither again, boiling out of the veins of the
earth: so God sending forth the streams of his love into our hearts, it must
even from the very bottom of our hearts return to him again, for we have
nothing but what we have received. Now there was never any Senacherib nor
Iesabel, but said they loved God; therefore this true Christian love of God,
that it may be seen not to be counterfeit, is accompanied with six
properties: first, with a care to keep his commandments, for such is the rule
of Christ, If ye love me keep my commandments; which we must do, so much
the rather because the Lord has given and forgiven us much, having made us of
enemies friends, as Abraham was termed to be the friend of God, having
brought us home when we wandered in the wilderness of sin, Luke 1^.2^
as he did the lost son: having fed us when we wanted and had no means to
succor us, as he did Eliah: 1. King. 17.6.
having clearelie set off the debt which we did owe, and cancelled the
handwriting which was against us. If we should not perform obedience to such
a God, and wear his commandments as a frontlet before our eyes, our
condemnation could never be too heavy, nor our stripes too many. Howbeit every
blasphemer sieth against his own soul, that dare say even in the height of
his wickedness he soueth God: for can a woman prostitute her body to a
varlet, and mingle her flesh with his strange flesh, and yet truly say she
loves her husband? it is not possible: no more can any man truly call
himself the child of Abraham, if he do and perform the works of the
Devil. Secondly, John 8.44.
this love of God must breed in us a base estimation and account, nay rather a
contempt of these earthly things, in respect of Gods love. To such a pass had
Paul brought his judgment and his affections to, Philipp. 3.8. when he
esteemed all things but as dung in comparison of the treasure of the life to
come, and that he might win Christ. So Moses refused the pleasures of sin in
Egypt, in respect of the assurance of Gods love manifested in his afflicted
servants: Exodus 2.11.
and Peter and other of the Disciples were so ravished with joy at the call of
Christ, Math. 4.20.
that they left their nets, and forsook the world to follow him. And this is
that indeed which we shall all find at the last to be the truest comfort,
for riches are transitory and will beguile us, honor is slipperie and will
deceive us, the world is moth-eaten and wears away, at least we our selves
are but claie and soon perish; but the love of God in Christ endures for
ever. Thirdly, this our love of God is accompanied with a fervent zeal of his
glory, and more delight we take herein then in the enjoying the wives of our
youth. This was the commendation of the Church of Thy atira, Reuelat. 2.18. and
by this was their love of God discerned, by their increase in the works of
charity, faith and patience, and by their zeal of Gods glory, that they
profited and went forward in religion more at last then at first. This kind of
love is described Cantic. 8.5.6. to be stronger then death, the coals thereof
to be fiery, to express the zeal and vehemency of it; whole floods of
affliction cannot drown it, neither can any treasure buie it. Such was the
love of Paul and of Moses, that wished themselves accursed to save their
brethren, Romans 9.3. Exodus 32.32.
because they thought it more glory for God to save many, then to save one
Fourthly, this our love of God must make us presently hate all things whereby
God is openly dishonored. This was it that so fiercely inflamed the wrath of
Moses, Exodus 32.19. that when he saw idolatry set up by the peoples dancing
before the calfe, he broke the Tables of the Law, and burned the calfe, and
strewed the powder of it on the waters, and in detestation of their
superstition, made the children of Israel to drink thereof. Hereof comes
that, Ezech. 9.4. that they that have the mark in their foreheads, that is,
such as are sealed up to salvation, do mourn and cry for the iniquity of
the times. And such was the affection of David, when he said: Mine eyes gush
out tears, because men dishonor thee O Lord: and in another place he
protests, that he does hate them with a perfect hatred that love not the
Lord: and again, that no notorious and incorrigible sinner should dwell with
him: Now fifthly, as we must hate Gods enemies, so must we love his friends: as
1. Ioh. 3.14. it is said, We are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren: Mat. 25.34.
and Christ sets down a plentiful reward for a cup of cold water given to
a distressed brother. Now who these brethren be, Christ sets down to be
such as do the will of his father: so as it is not the affinity in the flesh,
but the bond of the spirit that must unite us. And on the other side, we must
hate none in respect of his creation, but in respect he peruerteth the use of
his creation: for they bear the image of God which is lovely, but they deface
and scratch it out to their own damnation. So as we must hate not virum, sed
vitium, the wickedness of the man, and not the wicked as he is a man. Sixthly,
our love of God must draw us into the field for defense of his Majesty: for by
this shall the master know his servant loves him, if he cannot digest to
hear him evil spoken of: yea by this shall it be known, whether our way be
to Canaan or no, if we ask where it lies in the wilderness, and if our blood
rise to hear Jerusalem evil spoken of, and to hear the Lord (who is the
keeper of that city) reviled and blasphemed. Such were the spirits of Eliakim,
Shebnah, and Joan, 2. King. 18.37. that they rent their clothes, when they
heard Rabshakeh rail upon the living God: and Ezechiah when he heard it, was
grieved at it, and spread himself before the Lord, to call for a holy revenge
of that fury. And so must every true hearted Christian esteem the name and
credit of God far more tender then his own, and learn of Moses to be mild
in ouerlooking an injury done to our selves, Number. 12.3. Exodus 32.19.
but to be jealous and zealous in recompencing seven fold to them that tear in
pieces the glorious name of the Lord Jesus.

Now we of that has gone before must infer the contrary: that is, as all
things work for salvation to them that love God, so all things work for
damnation to them that hate him. All which may be drawn and reduced into these
two things: first, those that concern this life: secondly, those that concern
the life to come: and these may be reduced into these four. First, the graces
of Gods spirit, so much as they receive of it is only to make them
inexcusable: for they shall surely perish, though they be in the blade near to
ripeness: the reason is, because when the holy Ghost has given them as it
were a purge, to work upon them, setting before them good and evil, they not
as weak stomached, but as cursed hearted; do cast it up again like beastly
dogs. Secondly, the doctrine of salvation, which has this singular virtue to
bruise and mollify the flintie heart, only hardens theirs, and makes them
rage like the dragon: for Christ Jesus is but a rock of offense unto them;
preaching is but foolishness, and the word a favor of death unto them; and in
the Sacraments they do but crucify Christ again. Thirdly, the benefits of
this life do make them drunk, that they can not see their misery: for in
their fullness they do neigh like horses, and in their hearts they say, there
is no God; they eat and drink, and rise up to play, making their life but as
a May Game. Fourthly, the miseries of this life, though therewith they be
sometime mollified, as Esau was when be lost the blessing, yet this is but like
the iron put into the fire, and so softened for a time, but being taken out, is
made by that more hard then before.

Now for the reason, why afflictions turn to the best to such as love God, it
is, because by his eternal purpose they are called to be saved: so as the
cause why God ordained some to the inheritance of his glory, was only his
purpose and pleasure that it should be so: for Christ as Mediator is not the
first cause of salvation. For the Scripture says: So God loved the world, Ioh.
3.16.
that he gave his Son, whereby is evident and apparent, that he first loved
it before he gave his Son: for first, Gods purpose was to save some; this in
time he executes by creating man and woman in such estate as they might fall
by their own will, he nothing enforcing it, nor compelling them thereunto.
Now when they were fallen, then was there need of a reconciliation, and now God
bethinkes him of a Mediator: so as in the order of causes, the atonement which
is in Christ, must be after the fall: for the foresight of the good or evil in
a man, is no cause for God either to save or to damn any, so as no man can
determine the cause why God loved Jacob and hated Esau, to be because of the
goodness of the one and the wickedness of the other; and yet it is true that
Esau was damned because he was evil: but why he was appointed to damnation
rather then Jacob, no cause can be given, but the Lords eternal and
inviolable purpose. For otherwise Paul would never have cried out ( Romans 9.20.)
against the reason of man, that he should not plead with God, who has the
power to form the vessel after what fashion he pleases: for if the foresight
of good or evil had been the cause, it had been easily sounded, and the
Apostle would soon have set it down. Hereupon we must gather an argument,
that salvation is merely of mercy: for whatsoever is the cause of the cause,
is the cause of the thing caused: as the Sun is the cause of the
fruitfulness of the earth, and God is the cause of the Sun, therefore God is
the cause of the fruitfulness of the earth: so through the righteousness of
Christ we are all saved; but Christ is made righteous merely of the Lord:
therefore of the Lord we are all saved. But this is to be understood, of God as
of the first cause, not as of the nearest cause. So that to conclude this
point: every man may give a reason of his salvation, namely, because he is
beloved in Christ, but why he was apappointed to be beloved in Christ, no man
is able to assign or set down a reason, but we must all bow in humility,
and resort only to the purpose of God here spoken of by the Apostle.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 29.


THe Apostle here proceeds to prove, that all things, even afflictions,
work for the best to those that are ordained in the eternal purpose of God to
be saved, after this sort: those that are sure to be conformable to the
glorious image of the Son of God, to them all things do work for the best:
but they that are called in the Lords eternal purpose are ordained to be
conformable and made like to the glorious image of his Son: therefore to
these all things work for the best.

Quos praenouit, whom he knew before: that is, Quos vt suos cognouit, whom he
knew and approved to be his own, such should resemble his Son in glory,
that is, should partake and taste of the same glory, though not in the same
measure: according to the speech of S. John in his Epistle: We shall be like
him: he does not say, equal to him: for Christ must have the pre-eminence of
an elder brother.

Hence observe the indifferencey of the love of God, that he uses but one and
the self same course of discipline in his house for all his children: for as
he trained up his first, and eldest, and best beloved son, so will he train
and bring us up. And how Christ was used here on earth the Scripture is
plentiful; and his own mouth testifies, that he was worse then the beasts of
the earth, for he had not wherein to hide his head. And therefore unless we
do despise the sufferings of Christ, or think that God loves us better then
he did Christ, and has provided an easier way for us to walk in: let us know
that it is our portion to abide the indignities of the world, and to be hated
of men; nay, if whole seas of troubles fall upon us we need not be dismaled,
for reuilings are made unto us as precious balm, the whip is become but as
soft silk, the pangs of death but as messengers of a sweet sleep, and through
Christ the grave is unto us as a perfumed bed.

Secondly, observe hence the power and virtue of Gods love toward us, who will
still have us bear about us some notable mark of excellency and of
immortality: for as at the first we were created like to the image of God
himself, so in our second birth and restitution we are made to resemble the
image of the Son of God: and our resemblance of Christ stands in two
things, which formerly have been touched: first in walking through the sierie
afflictions of this life, which we may the better do, remembering that being
the sons of Jacob, there is a ladder that reaches from heaven to earth,
whereon the Angels are always ascending and descending, Genesis 28.12.
ready to minister to the necessities of the Saints. Secondly, in climing up
to the seat of glory, after the Dragon has spent his malice in sending
forth of his mouth whole floods of waters to drown us, Reu. 12.25.
which did nothing else but only wash away our filthiness, lest otherwise we
had been like to that old Serpent always groueling upon the ground. For
certain it is, we must either resemble the Son in obedience, or the Serpent
in malice: and if we think the inheritance of a son inferior and of less
value and consequent then the curse of the Serpent, then let us run on with
Pharaoh in the heardnesse of our hearts, that the Lord may show his power in
us, and after he has forborne us a while in patience, Ro^ 9.17.
cast us to the destruction prepared for us.

Verse. 30. Moreover whom he predestinate, them also he called: and whom he
called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

Here the Apostle proves his former speech and assertion, by setting down and
declaring those subordinate and second means or degrees whereby the Lord does
accomplish this his purpose and decree. The degrees be four: whom he foreknew,
first, them he predestined: secondly, after he called: thirdly, then
justified: fourthly and lastly, them he glorified. After this sort speaks S.
John, He that believes, is already translated from death to life: so as the
whole force of the Apostles argument is this, They that shall certainly be
glorified, to them all things work for the best, otherwise the Lords purpose
should be frustrate, which cannot be, by reason of the degrees of executing
this his purpose, which never fail.

Here consider generally two parts: first, his fore or daining us to glory:
secondly, the inferior degrees whereby he does execute this his purpose to
glorify us. In the first consider three things: first, what this foreknowledge
of the Lord is: secondly, what is meant by this, to be like the image of his
Son: thirdly, what is meant by the first borne among brethren.

For this which is the first, namely the foreknowledge of God, it is the very
same which the Apostle called before (his purpose) whereby the Lord meant to
know us for his own in his everlasting love, which is the very highest cause
of our salvation. For that there is no other first cause, may be understood in
this, that we are not to seek the first cause in Christ, nor the first
ordaining us to life in the mediation of Christ; for the Lord had a purpose to
save some before ever Christ had a purpose to be a Mediator, though not in time
yet in order: and that nothing but his foreknowledge made the Lord to know us
in love, and to account us for his own, we may see it in our pattern Christ.
What could induce God that man's nature should be united to the very nature
eternal? Was it possible that the humane nature of Christ could deserve it?
No: but it only was the Lords purpose that it should be so; which being true
in constituting and ordaining the head, is also to be considered in the
members, that even so and in the like manner the simple and only purpose of God
should show it self in fore ordaining us. Now the worthiness of man was no
cause of this: for Paul says, Romans 9.11. the Lord loved Jacob and hated Esau,
before they had done either good or evil; and says, it is therefore a mystery
to be adored rather then to be scanned by reason. If we will search after the
general cause of man's salvation or damnation, it is the manifestation of the
Lords justice on some, and the declaration of his mercy on others; for if all
should have bin saved, then had there bin no justice with the Lord: and again,
if all had bin condemned, then had there been no mercy. Howbeit, if we descend
to particulars, as, why the Lord ordained such a one to be saved or to be
damned; no reason can be given hereof, but his eternal purpose, which is
only hidden in his own breast. For we must not expostulate with the Potter,
why he made this vessel to honor and that to dishonor; much less must we
contend and plead with the Lord about it. This learn thou, the Lord hardneth
the reprobate, either by the substraction and drawing away of his mercy, or by
giving it so and in such a manner as they do not profit by it, but only makes
them the more without excuse, because they have seen the light, and yet have
loved darkness more then light. And if it be asked, why this mercy of the Lord
hardneth them and not mollifieth them, and why the Lord does not pull them out
of the fire, it is because he found them corrupt in Adam. But if it be asked
why they are appointed to damnation, here we stop our mouths, and have refuge
to no other cause, but to the Lords eternal purpose. After the same sort do
we faie of salvation, for to such as shall be saved he gives mercy, and makes
this mercy to work upon their hearts, and finding them fallen in Adam he
raises them up in Christ but why he does this is not known to any but to
himself. Howbeit in this his purpose to save us, he has ordained we should
find mercy in Christ by the degrees here set down, by calling, by iusufying,
by glorifying us; and yet to speak properly, this fore knowledge (...) God is
not the cause of any thing, for Adam did not fall because God foresaw i^; but
Adam fell, therefore God foresaw it.

For the second point, what is meant by this, Like to the i^age of his son some
expound it that shall be made like and conformable to his cross, which is very
comfortable, though not (...) apt and fit for the place it self. Heb. 2.10.
For if the Prince of the Gentiles was consecrated through afflictions, if by
this means the Son himself learned obedience, as it is Heb. 5.8. much more
must we; not that we shall be afflicted in the same measure, or for the same
cause that Christ was, for he suffered for our souls, and felt the smart for
our sins, yea and sustained the very wrath of God to his extreme anguish and
horror: Reu. 19.15. 2. Tim. 3.12.
but thus far we must resemble him, that if we will live godly we must suffer
persecution. Howbeit this likeness and conformity to Christ his image here
spoken of, must be understood of his glory, because of the words that follow,
mentioning the steps and degrees that lead to this glory; he calls, he
justifies, he glorifieth, even as he did his Son, for we are ordained to the
same glory, Ioh. 17.22. signified by the prayer of Christ for his Apostles and
all that should believe, that his father would love them with the same love, and
crown them with the same glory he crowned him; which is the most joyful
message that can come to the ear of a Christan heart, to be assured we shall
hereafter be lifted up and advanced far above the third heaven.

For the third point, namely that he is the first begotten among brethren,
consider three things: first, how he is our brother: secondly, what privilege
he has being eldest: thirdly, what privilege we have above all other
creatures by this brotherhood. For the first, he became our brother by this,
that the eternal word of God did assume and take upon himself our flesh, Ioh.
1.1.2. that we might be his brethren. For as to be a Mediator to God for us he
must have a divine humanity, and an humane divinity: so to make us brethren
that we might have his spirit, could not be but by taking our flesh. Between
God and man ever since our first fall there has bin enmity, such and so great
as none can see him and live: for Exodus 24.17. it is said, that the sight of
the glory of the Lord, even in the mountain of Sinai, was like a consuming
fire: Esa. 33.14.
and as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Who shall dwell with everlasting fire? This
fire therefore must be quenched, and an entrance must be made for us to the
mount of God, which is only in Christ our elder brother: howbeit we are become
his brethren, not by incarnation, nor by his humane nature, for then the
reprobate should be his brethren as well as we, for he partaketh of their
flesh as well as of ours. But as this brotherhood comes by the flesh in some
respect, so principally by being mystically engrafted naturally into his
body, so as we are one flesh with him, even like man and wife, Ephesians. 5.30.
who are so termed and called in respect of a special and sanctified union
and fellowship that is between them, otherwise all men and all women are one
flesh. So then our brotherhood with Christ comes not by any gross
coalition or mixture of our natures, but by spiritual regeneration: as the
Apostle to the Hebrews said: He that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, Heb. 2.11.
are all one: so that we are his brethren, not by his flesh simply, but because
we are sanctified by his flesh. Whereby we learn to reverence and adore the
infinite and everlasting love of God toward us, that he would thrust as it were
his Son out of heaven, that he might descend to draw us thither, and that he
must come down in such baseness to be clothed with our nakedness, and to put
on our infirmities.

For the second point, which is the privilege he has being eldest: observe,
that the first begotten under the law had two privileges: first, he was the
worthiest person: secondly, he had a double portion. As Ruben ( Genesis 49.3.) the
eldest of Jacobs sons should have had, but that the dignity of his person
was translated to Judah, and the privilege of his portion to Ephraim and
Manasses. This likewise appears Deuteronomy. 21.17. where it is commanded, that the
first borne of a man's strength shall have a double portion, for it is his
right. This then we must allow to Christ, who has two titles given him: first,
he is called the first begotten of all creatures, Col. 1.15. because he was
before any cerature, being from eternity according to his divinity.
Secondly, he is called the first begotten among the brethren, because he was
the first in man's nature that God loved, after the fall of Adam. Here know,
that Christ as he is the Sonne-man, is the natural Son of God, not according
to his humanity, but as he is Christ-man: for though his humane nature was not
taken from God, yet as one person being man, licet non ratione humanitatis, he
is the Son of God, even as Mary is said in the Scripture to be the mother of
God, in respect of the union of his person. Another privilege further Christ
has, that he as son of man has received all power from God to judge the
world, Ioh. 5.22. The father has committed all judgment unto the Son, not
that his manhood alone shall judge, but Christ God and man shall give the
judgment: even so we pray and list up our hands to the man Christ Jesus, not
to his manhood, non humanitati sed homini: for the humanity separated from
the divine person of Christ is but a creature. Again, Christ as our elder
brother is the head of Angels, not as God only, but as man. Hereupon also it
is, that he has a name at which all knees shall bow, and this name is given
him, so as he has it not as God, for being God nothing could be given him,
Phil. 2.13.
so as he has it not as God, for being God nothing could be given him, but he
has it as man and God, for his bare humanity could not deserve this, neither
yet to be governor of all the world.

Now for the third, which is, the privilege we have by being his brethren,
they are chiefly three. First, we are by this heirs and fellow heirs with
him of all things in this life and in the life to come, as appears verse.
16.17. of this chapter. Secondly, by this follows, and from this comes the
sovereignty we have ouerall creatures: as 1. Cor. 3.22. Whether it be the
world, or life, or death, all things are ours, for we are Christ's, and Christ
is Gods; and being under Gods wings, no man neither dares, and though his
stomach be never so good, yet he has not the strength to hurt us, for the
Lord will keep us as the apple of his cie. Thirdly, by this, though the
Angels be far above us in nature, yet we have one of our nature better then
they, that is, Christ; and through him they do all become our ministers, Heb.
1.4.7. Christ is made more excellent then the Angels, and he makes them but
his messengers.

Now for the degrees whereby the Lord does execute this his eternal purpose: for
the first of them, which is calling, it is wrought by the holy Ghost as the
principal cause, and by a double instrument the holy Ghost uses: first, the
preaching of the law, whereby we are brought to a holy despair of our selves
by the sight of our own corruption, that we may seek for remedy in the
profound sea of the Lords unsearchable mercy. The second the preaching of the
Gospel, whereby he anointeth our eyes with the eye salve of the holy Ghost,
Col. 2.13.
that being dead in sin, and not so much as dreaming of salvation, the sound
of the Gospel does awake us that we may hear, that hearing we may live.
Hereupon it is said, that the Lord does draw men and pull them unto him, as
Christ says, John 6.44.
No man can come unto me unless the father draw him, that is, does separate
them from the cursed generation of the world, and sets his inward seal upon
them, that is, his spirit, and brandeth them in the forehead with a visible
mark of holiness of life, that every man may know them to be the Lords.
Hereupon also it is said, that the Lord does open the heart with the key of the
Gospel, as Act. 16.14. he is said to open the heart of Lydia: and as Psalm.
40.6. he boareth the ear, and softeneth the heart, and moisteneth it with his
grace, that above all things a man shall esteem of the pearl of the Gospel,
and be brought chearefully to sell all he has to buy such a jewel as shall
bring him righteousness to save his soul: so as this calling of the Lord is
to this end, to manifest and to secure a man in his soul, that the Lord has
given him to Christ out of all the world.

Here may be objected: are not all universally called by grace? We answer; No:
for first, all men are not called effectually: secondly, some are not called
at all. Some are called externallie by the Preachers mouth, and salvation is
offered them by the ministry of the word and sacraments, and the kingdom of
God is come to their doors, and peace is showed them, and the glory of
Jerusalem is set before them: Math. 22.3.
but yet we see of them that were bidden to the marriage, there were three sorts
not effectually called: first, they that being called carelessly refused to
come, being possessed with the cares of this world, and with voluptuous living:
secondly, they that cruelly persecured the inuiters and messengers of the
Bridegroom, not only refusing to come, being called, but disdaining to come,
as scorning such cheer, and faring every day better themselves at home:
thirdly, they that came hand over head, never looking to their feet before they
entered into the Lords house, nor never changed their attire, but came without
the wedding garment of a holy life. So we read that of the four sorts of
ground that receive the word and the seed thereof, Mark. 4.4.
one sort only shall be saved; not that we must understand it as if of four
hearers there should be but one saved; for the Lord may have mercy upon a whole
congregation to save them: but three sorts of them filled with several
affections that vouchsafed to come and to stand before the Lord as hearers,
were reprobate, that is, such as did not beautify the profession of the
Gospel with a holy life. And truly of them that come and feed upon the word
and yet be reprobates, it is wonderful to see how far they go even in the
right course; for first they may be enlightened generally in the knowledge of
the truth, and may taste of the heavenly gift, yea and be partakers of the holy
Ghost, Heb. 6.4.6. and yet may fall away, never to be renewe^ by repentance.
Secondly, they may have faith ( Luke 8.13.) for a time not counterfeit, yet not
truly sincere, for in the day of trial they fall away like fruit from the tree
with a blast of wind; yea they may take joy in the word as Herod did, Mark.
6.20.
who was glad to hear John Baptist: and with Herod they may for a time do many
things at the request of Gods Ministers, Mark. 16.20. And for outward
reformation, swine we know may be washed: so may they leave off and discontinue
some gross sins for a time, when Satan being for a season cast out of them,
does not work so forciblie in them: as Math. 12.34. the Pharisees and Sadduces
may for novelties sake come to John's baptism, and for a time speak good
things when they are evil, and yet be but a generation of vipers; yea they may
wish with Balaam to die the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10.
justifying in their own conscience the course of holiness; and which is
more, they may partake of all the graces of God saving that one grace of
sanctification, and yet they may seem to be sanctified, as Hebrews 10.29.
they tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the new
Testament an unholy thing were with they were so sanctified.

Now others there be that are not called at all, and these be of two sorts:
either those to whom the Lord has denied the very contemplation of the book
of nature, as children that die as soon as they be borne, who if they be
elect, it is by a supernatural power of the holy Ghost; if they be reprobate,
it is just in respect of their natural filth and corruption that did cleave so
fast unto their bones, for in that they die it proves they had finned, and
sin proves there is a law, which law being broken brings death, for the
wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.
The second sort is of them, who though they be called by the book of heaven
and earth, as the Gentiles were, Romans 1.20. who do see the eternal power of
God in the creation of the world and other his works, and living to a more
understanding age, are even by the light of nature without all excuse; yet are
they not invited by the voice of the Gospel to rise from the dead, but die in
their sins as the Canibales, Barbarians, and the Jews since their Apostasy,
to whom there pertains nothing but a fearful expectation of judgment.

Hereof follows and is to be observed, that it is contrary to the scripture
to think that it was the will of God from eternity that all should be saved,
for then it was his will likewise that all should come to the knowledge of
their salvation; for whom he has ordained to the end, them has he also
ordained to the means: whereas to the reprobate, the sound of the word if they
do hear it, is but as the noise of bells confusedly iarring in their ears,
and yet many there be that never heard it. Why, but it is said, 1. Tim. 2.4.
that it is the will of God all should be saved. True, all men, not every
singular particular man, but of every singular condition of men some, not all
of all kinds, but of all kinds some: according to that speech of the
Evangelist, Mat. 4.23.
Christ healed every disease in Jury, that is, every kind of disease, not
every particular disease. Now if all men come not to the knowledge of the
truth of God, either it is done by the will of God, or against his will: to say
that it is against his will were impious and blasphemous, for this were to hold
that something could offer violence to the will of God, and as if he might not
otherwise have purposed, which must be far from a Christian heart to imagine.
If then this be done with his will, then it follows that his will is
changeable if he once meant to save them, for we see some even like dogs
ready to rend them in pieces that offer them the pearl of the word, whom if
the Lord had purposed to save, Mat. 7.6.
they should not continue persecutors of the truth, as Paul says of himself,
1. Timoth. 1.12.13. It pleased Christ Jesus to put me in his service, being
before a blasphemer, a persecuter, an oppressor, and I was received to mercy.
And where it is said, 1. John 2.2. that Christ is the reconciliation for the
sins of the whole world, it is to be understood for the sins of all sorts
and degrees of men gathered out of all the parts of the world: and this Christ
himself interprets Ioh. 17.9. when he said, Father I pray not for the world:
and undoubtedly he will never save them he never prayed for; for whom he
excluded from his prayer, them he never meant should have benefit by his death:
nay he had been bound in duty to have prayed for all, if all had been elected
to salvation. Now if it be asked why men are damned, the answer is easy; It is
for their sin: howbeit it was purposed in the Lords uncontrollable decree,
that they should be damned before they ever sinned; and being corrupt in
themselves, the Lord hardneth them, either by withdrawing the means, or the
power of the means: the first by ignorance: the second, by denying them
understanding hearts. So as if it be demanded why the Lord hardened any; it is
because he found him corrupt in Adam: if why he damneth any, it is because he
found him a sinner in himself.

Whom he calls he justifies: that is, does absolutely pardon him all his
sin, and absolutely impute unto him all his Sons righteousness, that as
Christ for us was made sin, so we in Christ might be made righteous: so as
justification is the translation and removing of our sin to Christ, and the
translation and removing of his righteousness to us. To our sin he opposes
his obedience, to the punishment of our sin he opposes his satisfaction,
otherwise he had not fully acquitted us by fulfilling the law, unless he had
satisfied his Fathers wrath for our breach of the law in our corrupt birth. For
if a man could now fulfill all the law of God, yet should he not be saved,
because he was borne corrupt, and could not possibly satisfy for that was
past; and in performing the law afterward, he should do nothing but his duty.
But this is our comfort, that the Lord seeing our weakness has in his love
passed by it, and seeing our thoughts to be always evil, takes no account
nor reckoning of us; but were sembling the image of his Son, the Lord
reckons with him, and strikes off our debts in setting them on his score,
who has paid the Lord his full due, even to the utmost farthing, being in his
birth clean, in his life holy, and in his death obedient.

Whom he justifies he glorifieth. Romans 10.7. Who shall ascend into heaven? for
that were to bring Christ from above; or, Who shall descend into the deep? for
that were to raise Christ from the dead: for so much virtue and power of Christ
as is needful for us, we taste of here: but our glorifying is reserved and
follows in the life to come, having it here only in spe and not in re, in
hope but not in hand. This glorifying here spoken of is meant, not that we
shall have at the last day of our separation, when the world shuts her
doors upon us, but of that glory we shall receive at the day of judgment;
which is plain and evident by that went before, verse. 21. namely that we
wait for the restoring of the liberty of the sons of God, and for the
freedom from the bondage of corruption. Howbeit in the glory of our
separation, two things are to be observed: first, Reu. 2^.4^.
that we shall be freed from all fears and tears, and shall have sin
abolished: secondly, we shall enter into our Lords rest: but the glory of the
last day is far greater, and rests in three things: first, in the
resurrection and a waking of the body, when it shall be made conformable to the
body of Christ, when it shall not live by the soul only, nor be maintained by
outward and external instruments of bread and such like, but it shall live as
the body of Christ lives, and be glorious like the Sun, which shall then
exceed it self in glory. Isay 65.17. 2. Pet. 3.13.
Secondly, there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, and in this new heaven
shall dwell the souls of the Saints of God, and all things else shall be
restored to their first majesty. Thirdly, which is the greatest of all, we
shall then have the beholding of the very face of God, and there shall be no
marks set to keep us from the mount where the Lord dweleth, Reu. 21.12.
as there was Exodus 19.12. but as Paul speaks 1. Corinthians. ^3.12. we shall
then see him face to face, and know him as we ^re known of him, and see him
as God all in all; that is, ^ee shall behold the glory of God not standing upon
the veil of the flesh of Christ, for then all mediation and intercession shall
cease: and this is part of that Christ prayed for a little before his death,
John 17.24. that we might see that glory he had before the world was made, for
then we shall see Christ-God and the whole Godhead immediately reigning, yet in
Christ the Son of man and in us, but so, as we shall no more lean and rely
upon the prayers of Christ, for then he shall reign no more as the Son of
man in the midst of his enemies, for this government shall cease, death which
is the last enemy being then abolished, and he then shall reign over them
vanquished as God. Howbeit the fruit and benefit of this his mediation shall
endure for ever, and the subjection of his humane nature shall then more
appear, because of the glory of his Godhead which shall then be seen fully,
even such and the same as he had before eternity: yet shall this salvation
more increase the glory of his humanity, when we shall understand and see it to
be personally united to the son of God, who with God the Father and the holy
Ghost shall be all in all.

Now the fruition and possession of this glory shall work three effects in us:
first, it shall breed in us an infinite love toward God: secondly, an infinite
joy in God: thirdly, an infinite praise to God. Infinitely shall we love him
that has advanced as to such honor as is endless, and to such fellowship as is
matchless; our hearts shall be filled with joy, and yet not able to comprehend
or express it, Mat. 25.23.
therefore it is said, Enter thou into thy masters joy, for this joy is too
great to enter into thee: and besides the joy we shall have in our own
salvation, we shall conceive as great joy for the salvation of others, which
is called joy celestial: and we shall have yet more joy then before, to see
the Godhead so glorious, the Lamb advanced in our flesh, and to be one person
with God. And this is above all ioies, because we shall love Christ far above
our selves, for the zeal of Gods glory shall even eat us up, and it shall be
so great in us, as it cannot be so great for our own salvation: and then out
of this love and joy, as out of two fountains joined in one, shall spring and
arise such continual praise to God for this glory, that we shall incessantly
sing to God in the Temple, which is God himself, so as we shall praise God in
God, and this shall be as the Prophet Esaias says, from new Moon to new Moon,
and from Sabbath to Sabbath, that is, for ever: for this love of God is from
eternity in respect of our predestination, and to eternity in respect of our
glorification: and this is that we sigh and groan for, and for which while we
are in the flesh absent from God, we continually pray for.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 31.32.




THe Apostle before set down, that God the Father by his eternal purpose has
foreacknowledged us, and foreloued us with an everlasting love in his Son,
and not us only, but all those that to the end of the world shall love him;
and manifest and show forth this their love by a sincere worship and religious
care to keep his commandments: and how that the Lord as he has ordained us
and them to the same glory, so at the fullness of time by the dispensation of
his wisdom, by his spirit he does call them by the instrument of his word, by
the same love does justify us in his Son, and will glorisie us with
himself. Now he being overcome with the thought and meditation of these
things, breaks forth into a wonder and admiration: that seeing it is thus,
that the Lord has taken it upon him never to leave us, till he has advanced
us to heavenly places, even the seat of the Lord Jesus, what shall we say? The
answer is given with the question: this we must say, that since he is our God,
as appears by that which went before, then is it impossible, (we being thus
backed, and having the Lord our bulwark) that any creature can be of that
force, or be so against us, no not the devil in hell with all his power can
hinder us from the fruition of this glory. In the other words; who spared not
his Son, etc. there is a further consolation set down unto us, to make the
heap of comfort greater: that since the Lord gave as it were judgment against
his own Son, and set him forth to a shameful death for us, and this when we
were his enemies, and strangers from the life of God, how can it be he should
now deny us any thing to further our salvation, being made friends with him,
and reconciled to him through his Son?

This doctrine needs rather deep meditation, then large explication: for who
does not assume to himself sufficiently to understand it, being but thus much
in effect: that since God in his everlasting purpose has thus manifested his
glory and mercy, and has ordained the end, which is his glory in our
salvation: and to bring it that it may come to this end, has subordinated and
set down certain causes, as calling and justifying, it is impossible any
thing should hinder our salvation?

If God he on our side. Hereupon we must not think, that if God be on our
side we shall have no enemies: for because God loves us therefore we have the
more enemies, and therefore we are persecuted and subject to the hatred of the
world: as Christ himself expresses, Ioh. 17.14. The world hates them,
because (says he) they are like me. So as in this place the Apostle does not
mean, that we should expect any immunitie and exemption on from the e^mitie
and malice of men, but that we having this heavenly security and assured
certainty of the Lords protection, neither Angel, nor man, nor devil, nor
torment shall be able to over come us. For this is that Paul speaks of: All
things are by Christ, Col. 1.16.
through Christ, and for Christ, that is, all things are created by him, all
things are preserved through (...)* and maintained for his glory: so that our
salvation being always joined with his glory, neither shall men breath, nor
the devil rage, but to glorify Christ; which glory of his is greatest in our
salvation. We therefore in a spiritual confidence of the Lords love, do
challenge all men, and all things that ever were created, that what violence
soever they offer us, or what punishment soever they inflict upon us, it is so
far from presting us down, as it makes us spread higher, and furthereth our
salvation: for God is with us, and while the bridegroom is with us, we cannot
mourn. The evil they can do, is but with the dragon to fight with us; and as
the enemies of God to persecute us, and though they be led to do this by the
malice of their hearts, yet they serve but as the Lords rods to chastise us, and
as Apothecaries to make drugs to cure our infirmities; but so, as they cannot
put in one dram more then the Lord knows of, for he has the tempering of
the cup, as it is said of Solomon, The Lord weighs the enterprises of men,
and their actions are in his hands; and the woorst they can do us, is but
this, to shorten our days, by that means to hasten our joys. Hereupon we are
to gather, and to lay up this comfort, that if the course of nature should be
altered, yet even in this confusion of nature, if we call upon the Lord, his
ear is ready to hear, and his hand to help us; nay, if there be any
special judgment and vengeance determined against a city or a people, the
presence of the Lords children does even bind his hands, that he can do
nothing while they be there: as Genes. 19.16. till Lot was snatched out of
Sodom the fire could not fall from heaven to destroy it. So that if heaven and
earth conspire against us, if sea and sand should imagine us mischief, if the
Princes of the world should set their armies against us, and like grasshoppers
in multitude should lie waiting for our lives, if the sorrows of death, and
the pangs of hell should compass us, yet this is our shade and comfort, that
we live under the wings of the Almighty; and that we are to the Lord as
precious as the tenderest part of his eye: and he that comes so near him,
the breath of his mouth shall confume him: and in the midst of all these
calamities, we shall stand like mount Sion, and shall fear no more then the
heavens were afraid, Psalm. 125.1. Psalm. 91.11.
( Genesis 11.4.) when Nimrod and his company would have built up a tower unto
them. For the Lord has given his Angels charge over us, and not a hair of our
head shall fall without his providence; but as the wicked have many ways to
hurt us, so has the Lord far more means to help us.

Who spared not his own Son.

This is another consolation ministered unto us, to stay us from fainting in
afflictions; that if God has given us his Son when we were his enemies,
then much more now being reconciled unto him, will he give us with his Son
all things else.

In this consider two parts: first, what it is that is said here: God
delivered up his Son to death: secondly, that if he give him, he will give
all things else. In the first consider two parts: first, the person of him that
was given up: it was his own Son: secondly, who the persons be for whom he is
given up: namely, for all the faithful.

In the first, which is the person of him was given up to death, does appear
the wonderful love of God, that would vouchsafe to bestow upon us rebels and
runnagates, no worse thing then his own Son. Great was the love of Abraham
toward God, Genesis 22.8.
that so commanded his natural affections, as to offer up his son Isaac at
the Lords commandment unto death, having but one son, and he given him by a
special favor to comfort his age, and him whom he loved, being virtuous and
religious, when he had no hope to have any more sons, and this being the
son of the promise, in whom both himself and the whole world should be
saved; that this child should not be banished from him, but put to death and
killed, not before his face, but with his own hand, this was a great love for
flesh and blood to fall into. But yet far greater is the love of God toward
us, who loving Christ a thousand times more then Abraham could love Isaac, Ioh.
3.15.
because between heavenly and earthly things there is no comparison, that God
should deliver him up, not to the whip, but to the gibber; not by commandment
as Abraham did, but of his mere and voluntary love and motion; not into the
hands of them that sorrowed to see him afflicted, but into the hands of
butchers, that cared not how cruelly they dealt with him; and this not for his
friends as Abraham did, for he was called the friend of God; but for traitors
that would have pulled the Lord forth of his own seat; and not to death
only, as Abraham did his son, who by the loss of his life should presently
have gained heaven, but to a most cursed death and detestable; and this to be
performed not in a mountain or secret place, where there should be sew
beholders, as Abraham's was to have been done, but even before the face of all
the Jews, to hang as a most odious and notorious sinner, to suffer his
accusation to be no less then for blasphemy, to have him so debased as to
have Barrabas, who for an insurrection and murder was cast into prison, Lu.
23.18.19. Mat. 27.22.
in the choice of the people preferred before him, who not only was condemned
by Pilate, prosecuted by the malice of the Jews, convinced by false
testimonies, scorned at by them that bad him help himself when he was in such
extremity as he could scarce speak, but that even God his Father should
arraigne him in heaven, having all the sins of the world cast upon him, that
pressed him at one time to the highest and lowest part of hell. Whereupon
consider, that for the sins in our person all the horrors of hell did
compass him, and all the torments of the damned did seize upon him, Reu. 19.15.
and God for the time accounted him his enemy, and brought him to that exigent
and extremity, as he was forced to cry, Father, why have thou forsaken me?
for if he had not bin the Son of God, it had bin impossible to have sustained
or endured it; and yet being the Son of God, he was driven so low, as an Angel
was feign to be dispatched from heaven to comfort him; and all this to befall
him, who in himself was not in any one particular sinful, being clean by
birth, and holy by conversation. True it is, the high Priest was angry with
him because he took him as an offender in his own person, but God was angry
with him, as esteeming him a sinner in our person, that he which had not
deserved being smitten, we that had deserved might escape. And this does set
forth the love of God, the fullness of it and the depth of it being not to be
comprehended of all the hearts of men joined in one, though every one of them
were wiser then Solomon, but is only to be reverenced and adored of all.

Further, in this delivering up of the Son of God to death, we may observe a
reconciliation of two extremes; infinite justice, and infinite mercy, both which
the Lord performed in this action. Infinite justice, in that the Lord will be
paid all his debt; for rather then he will be unsatisfied, the blood of Christ
shall pay all: for what dishonor had it been for the King of heaven to have
suffered the Serpent to have so insulted upon his Majesty, and wretched man to
have so rebelliously defaced his image, and so presumptuously charged him with
malice and envy, and yet to have set him scotfree? If the Lord had borne these
indignities at our hands, it had too much blemished the power of his justice;
and therefore he could take no less satisfaction then a sacrifice of blood: and
that this blood must issue and stream out of the veins of the heart of Christ,
has showed him to have set an infinite price and valuation upon his justice;
yet has the Lord withal herein set forth his most perfect, infinite, and
endless mercy, that though he would not forgive the debt, yet he paid
himself, for God did suffer: and this is such a thing, as no mortal man in
the same action is able to show forth. We read of one Zaledicus king of the
Locrenses, that went about such a matter; who making a law, that who so
defloured a woman should lose both his eyes, it fell out his own son was the
first that brake it: whereupon the king would have had the law executed upon
him, prefering the love of justice before the love of nature; but what by the
obtestation and entreaty of his nobles instant upon him, and what through
fear of tumult and insurrection threatened if he would not dispense with the
law in this young Prince, who was of great expectation for his towardliness,
and in great favor with the people for his virtue: at last the king resolved
to satisfy the law, and yet to show mercy to his son; and therefore whereas
the law was, that such an offendour should lose both his eyes, he caused one of
his sons to be put out and one of his own, showing mercy in putting out one of
his own, and justice in putting out one of his sons; but this was not
perfect, for then in mercy he should have put out both his own eyes, or in
justice both his sons. And no marvel, for how can flesh and blood imagine to
reach the wisdom of God, when our understandings are but as the stubble
carried to and fro with the wind, and we our selves but as dust and ashes,
that cannot reach the depth and dignity of so glorious a Prince?

Now for the second point, for whom this Son of God was given up: it is said,
for all, that is, for all believers, for so Christ expounds himself, Ioh.
17.20. And therefore execrable is the opinion of Andreas a Lutheran, who holds
that God delivered up his Son for an universal salvation, meaning thereby to
save all, if all will be saved; for they that will not believe (says he)
condemn themselves. But we say, the purpose of God was not that Christ should
die effectually for all: for first, he never died for those he never prayed
for: and John 17.9. he prayed not for the world. Secondly, if Gods purpose had
bin to have given him to death for all without exception, then how is it that
some are already damned, and others have no faith and shall be damned here
after? either his purpose being to save them is frustrate and void, or else God
cannot do it, and so something should resist the power of God, which is
blasphemy to think. If God had such a purpose, and after seeing the
incredulity of man, he should change his mind, then the execution of his will
should depend upon the incertaintie and instabilitie of the even, which does
derogate much from the al sufficiency of God; and therefore we say that he
was crucified for none but for such as have their garments dipped in the blood
of the Lamb, but for such as have their faith burning like a lamp, but for
such whose works proceed from an undefiled heart, and whose prayers through
Christ his help ascend to the everliving God.

Further, consider in these words, He delivered him up to death: that this very
phrase and manner of speech is attributed to Judas, who is called Traditor, a
deliverer up, or a traitor. How shall we then determine of this? Shall we
challenge God to be evil because he delivered him up? or excuse Judas because
he executes that which God had purposed? God forbid; for neither is God to be
accused that Judas wrought with him in the same action, nor Judas to be
excused for delivering him up according to Gods purpose. Your wicked hands
(says Peter, Act. 2.23.) have crucified him whom God in his determinate
counsel had delivered up. Why then shall Judas be blamed being but the
instrument: Because as Judas did it, it was most wicked, he doing it by the
instigation of the devil, his heart being possessed with covetousness and
blinded with infidelity, yet was it good in respect of the end whereto God had
ordain it, though as it proceeded from his poisoned heart, it was most
execrable: for always the action of the instrument bears the name, or is
denominated from the affection of the instrument: and therefore Judas betraying
his Master for thirty pieces of silver, it was a most damnable sin in him,
and the turning of it to the salvation of the faithful was only the work of
God. It may be said, God did appoint Judas to do it, for nothing is done but
by his appointment, how then can Judas be blamed? We answer this by a double
comparison or similitude; the soul gives power to a lame limme or member of
the body, to move and to stir, yet may not the power of the soul be blamed
for the lamenesse of the limme; for the lamenesse thereof does not enter into
the soul, neither proceeds from the soul, but from the body, though the
soul be the cause of the motion. Even so the Lord moved Judas to the action,
but the imperfection and sin in the action proceeded not from the Lord, but
from the devil that had corrupted his heart. And no more then the brightness
and heat of the Sun can be said to be the cause of the stench of the ca^kas,
or the corruption thereof can reach to defile the Sun: no more can the
holiness of God excuse in any action the wickedness of man, or the
wickedness of man defile his holiness. The incestuous wickedness of Absolon,
the mischievous purpose of Achitophel, 1. Sa. 16.21.22. Genesis 37.27.
the hatred of Joseph's brethren, and the malice of the Jews in the
apprehension and death of Christ, were wicked and evil in themselves, though
God turned their ends contrary to that they were intended.

For the last point, If he give him, he will with him give all things: observe
that no man can partake of the benefits of Christ, but first he must partake
of Christ himself; and therefore they that hold we do in the Sacrament of
the Supper only partake of the benefits of Christ his death, and not of
Christ himself, do grossly offend: for we do eat spiritually the very
body, and do drink the very blood of Christ, and by this we are made
partakers of his soul, and by consequent of his humanity, and by this of his
divinity, for they are never separated, and by this of Christ God and man, and
by consequent of all his benefits: for these benefits be like an etc. in the
end of a sentence, that implies a necessary addition of many things not
expressed, and yet must needs be understood as depending upon the former. So
that if we have Christ, he comes not naked nor alone, but he brings all he
has with him; his purity, his obedience, his sacrifice, his power and
whatsoever else may make a Christian man perfect.

Secondly, observe hence, that no man can partake of Christ, but with him he
must likewise partake of all his benefits: answerable to that speech of the
Evangelist: Mat. 6.33.
When we have the kingdom of God, other things shall be added: for salvation
never comes alone. And therefore damnable is that opinion: that a man may eat
Christ really and indeed, and yet not partake of his benefits, because he does
not eat him effectually: for this should argue there is no life in the flesh of
Christ: contrary to that Ioh. 6.54. He that eats of the flesh of the son of
man, must needs have life.

Thirdly, observe hence, that all is gift and no merit, and a gift purposed of
God to be bestowed before ever we deserved any thing: for though we in duty
must labor in the course of mortification, yet in vain do we wash our
selves, thinking to be accepted for our cleanliness: for it is God that gives
the beginning in his Jove, and the increase in his spirit, and the end and
perfection in his Son. And therefore he that leans to himself shall surely
fall: for if flesh be thy arm, and thine own works the ladder whereby thou
think to clime to heaven, when thou art passed the ground, then shall the
rounds break, and thy fall shall be to thy confusion: for in the gift of
Christ alone we are beloved.

Verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God
that justifies.




The Apostle has before proved, that if any thing should make us tremble and
stand in fear of damnation, it should be one of these two: first, either the
sinful imperfection of our nature: or secondly, the inevitable necessity of
affliction. Now that we being in Christ, the remainder and relikes of that
corruption which we shall only shake off in death, cannot make us subject to
the curse of God, he has proved from the first to the seventeenth verse going
before. Secondly, that the rod of affliction resting on our backs, is no
argument of the wrathful face of God, but only the chastisement of a Father,
he proved from the 17. to the end of the 32. verse. Having proved these two
points, he now makes a most comfortable conclusion, demanding a question by
way of a challenge, and does most confidently himself answer it. Who can lay
any thing to our charge? If Satan shall accuse the brethren, Zach. 3.2.
whom the Lord notwithstanding will reprove, yet who dare condemn and give
sentence against us, since Christ for our sakes is dead? secondly, is risen:
thirdly, sits at the right hand of the Father: fourthly, and makes
intercession for us.

First, for his death, how this saves us from damnation: it is two ways:
first, in respect of the grieuousnesse of his death: secondly, in respect of
the worthiness of his person, that did sustain and endure it. The
grieuousnesse of it rests in these two: first, that visibly he was nailed to
the cross, and there was a separation of soul and body: secondly, that
inuisibly the marks of the wrath of God were upon his soul, he suffering for
a time so may torments of hell, as ever all the damned shall do. The
worthiness of his person appears in this, that he was the Son of God by
eternal generation, who for his obedience and humbling of himself in the
shape of a servant to so cursed a death, might worthily have merited the
salvation of a thousand worlds. So that as death came in by sin, which
stingeth a man to damnation, and whereby the devil reigned over all: so by the
death of the son of God was death overcome, sin abolished and the devil
vanquished; and as by sin came in death, so by death went out sin. Hereupon
we beholding Christ crucified by a lively faith, 1. Cor. 15.21.
we shall be freed from the impoysoned bitings of the old serpent, even as the
Israelites were healed of their wounds and stings, Ioh. 3.14. Number. 21.9.
by looking on the brazen serpent in the wilderness.

For the second, which is Christ his resurrection: we have this comfort, that
no sin is unsatisfied or vnexpiated, since he is delivered from the power of
darkness and of death under which he was kept, and still should have been
kept until all our debts had been paid to the utmost farthing. Heeeupon we
believe, that Christ carried all our sins with him into the grave: but what
became of them afterward, we know not, nor need not to inquire, for he rose
without them. And this was represented in the scapegoat, ( Leuit. 16.21.) who
having all the sins of the people laid upon him, was sent into an
vninhabitable place, where he was never heard of again, set down to be in the
wilderness, by the hand of a man appointed.

For the third consider two things: first, what is meant by his sitting at the
right hand of his Father: secondly, what benefits we reap by his sitting
there. For the first, understand it is a translated or borrowed speech: for can
we think that God has a hand, whose power is diffused through all creatures?
and being an infinite spirit has no definite place. And as here Christ is
said to be sitting, so else where he is said to be standing: as Act. 7.56.
Stephen saw the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. In which there
is also a borrowed speech: for we must not think he either fitteth or stands
at a certain place: but the phrase is fetched from the custom of great
Princes, who use to set them on their right hand, whom they mean to make their
equals, as Genesis 41.40. Joseph was set at the right hand of Pharaoh being made
ruler over all Egypt: and 1. King. 2.19. Salosom set Bathsheba his mother on
the right hand: so is it said by David in the Psalms, the Queen fitteth on
the right hand of the King. So as the meaning is, Psalm. 45.^.
that Christ Jesus has received from God the copartnership of sovereign
authority over all natures whatsoever, and as he is man, being also the Son
of ^^d and our elder brother, is advanced over all, and has received a name
above all: so as now the Father rules nothing but (...) the person of his
Son. Secondly understand, that this sitting at Gods right hand, though it was
due to his humane nature and flesh from the moment of his conception and
uniting the flesh to his divine nature, yet it is properly assigned to him
after his resurrection, or rather after his ascension. For having in the form
of a servant performed all obedience, then did the Father crown his obedience
with this excellent glory, and then was this sovereignty bestowed on him. Which
must teach us much more patiently to wait upon the Lord, and not to expect our
reward before we set forth, or while we be running: but when our race is
finished, and that we have borne the heat of the day, and have fought a good
fight in the Lord. Thirdly, for this his sitting, that is, the receiving of his
absolute authority, though Christ as God never received it being equal to God,
much less after his ascension, yet after his ascension he was in some sort
advanced in his divine nature: for as the Scripture says: The Son of God
descended: meaning thereby, abased himself, Romans 10.7.
and his glory did not so fully appear, being hidden in the cloud of his
infirm flesh; yet as the Apostle says, by his rising and ascending was he
mightily declared to be the son of God; and by that was more manifested to be
so, Romans 1.4.
then he was upon the earth. This also he shows himself, Job. 17.24. when he
prayed to be glorified with the same glory he had with his Father from the
beginnig; not that it should then be bestowed upon him, but then miraculoussy
declared to have had it from eternity. Howbeit this his sitting here spoken
of, is properly meant to be exalted in his flesh, because this authority is
given him as Mediator. And in this respect Christ may be said to be greater
then himself, and less then himself; because his flesh is beneath his
divinity, and his Godhead far above his humanity. And by this power given him
he is glorified in the Godhead, in the manifestation of it in the flesh, by
abolishing all his infirmities, and replenishing his flesh with all manner of
graces, Colos. 2.8.
as it is said, l^^ him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead.

Concerning the second point: namely, what fruits come t^^ us by this his
sitting at Gods right hand, they are principally three: first, we learn by
this, that he does enrich his Church generally, and every member particularly,
with so many graces (...) the holy Ghost as shall be necessary to the glory of
the head, the edification of the whole body, and the salvation of every
particular member, according as it is set down Ephesians. 5.26.27. that this Church
might be without spot or wrinkle, and without blame. Secondly, by this his
presence with God he does defend and protect his Church from all enemies
whatsoever, so as the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And this is
our comfort, that since all power is given him, he that has felt our
infirmities has the tempering of the cup of our afflictions, which we may
boldly drink of, and not refuse it no more then he did the bitter cup his
Father gave to him; and assure our selves that no tyrants hand can touch us
further then he permits him, which shall never be above our strength, for
Christ has power enough to perform it, and God has will enough to do it.
And since while he was in his humanity on earth the devil could not enter into
a heard of swine without his license and permission, Math. 8.32. and that as it
is said in the Reu. 5.3. he does so seal the door as none can enter in unless
he open it: what shall we think he will do now, being in his glory and at his
Fathers elbow? And while he was in the flesh, being able by the word of his
mouth to stay the raging of the sea, Mat. 8.26. much more now can he and will
he repress the rage and fury of our persecutors when it please him. Thirdly,
he shall sit at the right hand of the father until all his children be fully
glorified and his enemies destroyed, which are of two sorts: first, such as are
to be abolished, as death: secondly, or such as perfectly are to be vanquished,
and yet perpetually to be tormented, as the devil and the damned spirits, for
to them shall it be a day of horror and of howling.

Now for the fourth, which is his intercession or his making request for us,
consider two things: first, what is meant in that he is said to make petition
for us: secondly, what benefits redound and arise to us by these his requests
for us. For the first, that he is said to pray for us, it is the exaltation and
advancement of Christ Jesus in the office of his eternal priesthood, whereof
there were two parts: the one to expiate or offer sacrifice for sin: the
other to pray for the people. Now Christ was such a Priest, as the power of his
sacrifice continues for ever, and no more sacrifice is to be offered up, as it
is said Heb. 10.12. this man (meaning Christ) after he had once offered one
sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right hand of God. Howbeit the
second duty of his Priesthood, which is to pray for us, remains still, but
after an other manner; not as he did upon the earth, when he prostrated himself
to the ground, and lifted up his eyes to heaven with trembling of heart and
anguish of mind, offering up prayers, as Heb. 5.7. with strong cries and
tears unto God, being himself then but as a servant to his Father: but he
exercises this office now not by any submission of gesture, but by
representing and setting before the eyes of his Father his sacrifice fresh and
bleeding, which turns his Fathers countenance from our indignities and
misdeeds to look upon himself, as Heb. 9.24. He is entered into heaven to
appear now in the sight of God for us, standing there to be beholden.

For the second, namely what benefits we have by this his intercession; and
they are three: first, by this he fulfilleth all the types and figures of the
law, that hereby he might fully declare unto us that he is the everlasting
Priest, prefigured by them that were under the law, as Heb. 10.19. he is said
to enter into the sanctuary of heavenly places: that as ( Exodus 39.7.) Aron had
precious stones, in which the names of the children of Israel were written, six
in every stone, and twelne in his breast, in every one of them a tribe, that
he might remember them to God in his prayers; so Christ bearing in his breast
our selves as precious stones, is thereby put in mind to remember us to his
Father; and though our fathers having the veil before them, were forbidden to
enter into the holiest; yet we through the veil of the flesh of Christ ( Heb.
10.20.) are permitted to come boldly to the face of the most high and holy God.
The second benefit is, that all our prayers be sanctified, and do ascend to
the seat of God through his petitions, that is, through his appearing before
his Father they shall be heard of his Father. Hereupon Paul faith, Romans 5.2. By
him we have access to the throne of grace to offer up the sweet sacrifices of
our selves by Christ, who has made the way for us; let us therefore approach
unto him with confidence: and this is that spoken of in the Reu. 8.3. the
Saints pour forth their incense, that is, their prayers, which is given to
Christ having a golden censor, that he should put a new incense upon them upon
the golden altar, which is himself, that they might have a gracious savor, and
a sweet smell in the nostrils of his Father. The third benefit of this his
intercession, is that which we shall never fully feel nor perceive till his
last prayer be granted he made Ioh. 17.21. that we might be one in God and
himself, that is, when we shall have a full contemplation of the majesty of
God.

Lastly observe, that Christ shall make this intercession for the Saints till
all his enemies be overcome, and all his children arraied in stately and royal
garments, and then shall his prayers cease: for why should he pray any longer
when his prayer is granted? but by this we may see, that salvation of souls is
no such easy matter as the world imagines, since it requires this continual
exercise of the Son of God to make request for us: and if Christ in love and
compassion do it for us, much more ought we to do it for our selves.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 35, 36, 37.






THE Apostle upon the heavenly and Christian security set down in the
premises, infers and brings in a most constant and comfortable resolution
upon a stout magnanimity and spiritual courage by him conceived, that is, that
it is impossible any thing should make us fall from the favor of God which is
in Christ. The reason is this; in those things wherein we are more then
conquerers, we cannot be removed from Gods favor; but in these seven things
here reckned up, tribulation, etc. all which are as needles in the flesh, and
wherein he comprehends all other, these being the worst, we are more then
conquerers: therefore neither anguish, famine, etc. can separate us from the
love of God. As if he should say, howeuer it be that men call not in question
Gods love while they live in peace and enjoy the pleasures of this life, yet
let us see how far adversity may throw and deiect a man from this comfortable
security; that since Christ sits at the right hand of his father, and there
shall sit till all his children be fully glorified, let us take the greatest
extremities that can light upon the flesh: Tribulations, that is, any kind of
outward trouble: or anguish, that is, such inward perplexity or distress in
soul that we are at our wits end, like Lot, Genesis 19.8. that must either give
forth his daughters or the Angels to the filthy Sodomites: or persecution by
famine, that is able to break a brazen wall, it breeds such rage in the bones:
or nakedness, that is, that we be so impouerished or beggered for the truths
sake, as we have nothing to cover, nor wherein to hide us: or the sword, which
is most ghastly for the quick dispatch it will make: all which joined
together, may be reckoned up for the continual portion of the church of God,
both before Christ and after: 1. Pet. 4.17.
for we need not suppose or imagine that this may come, since it is so written
Psalm. 44.22. that men do nothing but offer up the godly every day; and the
wicked make no more account of them but even as sheep to the slaughter. And
since the coming of Christ the trial must be the greater, as Saint Peter
speaks, because the spirit is greater: so as now judgment must begin at the
house of God. But what is the issue and end of all this? we are in these
extreme calamities more then conquerers, so far are we from fainting or
falling: and the Lord in the midst of these shall either send us miraculous
deliverance, as he did to Daniel, Da. 6.22. when he stopped the mouth of the
lion, that he could not hurt him: or else he will so qualify the miseries
that shall bear upon us, with such extraordinary comfort, that we would not
exchange our adversity to ensnare our consciences with conditions in serving
of God, and if the worst come that we be given up to death, the heavens shall
be open to receive us, and the Angels shall be ready to carry us into the
bosom of God, Luke 16.22.
and our enemies shall stand astonished to see the courage of our christian
soul so willingly embracing death in which is life, and out of our blood shall
rise an hundred professors more: for the blood of Martyrs is the seed of the
church, when we our selves shall triumphantly ascend to the seat of the
Almighty.

For the parts of the text, they be these: first, the Apostle sets down a
demand by way of challenge, and therefore implies a person in these words:
Who shall, etc. as if he should say, I give the challenge to the stoutest
champion what ever he be, whether he be the devil that lives in hell, or his
eldest son, or all his sons that be on earth: otherwise if the person that
should accept this challenge were not understood, he should more properly have
said: What shall separate us, etc. Secondly, he interposeth and brings in a
testimony out of the 44. Psalm, to show that he does not put it by
supposition, that these troubles may come, or may not come: but that of all
other the church of God is not likely, but sure to sustain them in the
inevitable necessity of Gods decree, as if we that be heirs of the covenant
were created for nothing else. Thirdly, having described the necessity of
these miseries that shall befall the elect, the demand or question is most
triumphantly answered, when he says; In all these we are more them conquerors.

For the first, which is the demand it self, it cannot be made plainer: only
in the words, To be separate from the love of Christ, we must not understand it
actiuely but passiuely, not of the love wherewith we love Christ, but of that
love wherewith we are beloved of God in Christ. For though our love to Christ
is so substantially rooted in our hearts, as that it is ( Cant. 8.6.) strong as
death which ouercometh all things, hard as the grave that swalloweth up all
things, like the flame of God, that whole floods of water cannot quench; yea
such as we will not depart with for any money, and such and so great, as it is
true, that nothing thing can separate us from the love of Christ: yet this is
to be taken and understood of the love of Christ to us, as appears by the end
of the 37. Luke 22.60. 2. Tim. 4.10. 2. Tim. 2.13.
and 39. verses. So as if it were possible we should forget Christ, or renounce
him as Peter did, or forsake him as Demas did, yet he cannot forget us: for he
is faithful that has promised.

Psalm. 44.22. that we that are Christians do as verily look for these
miseries, as we do for the rising of the Sun, the Prophet setting it down as
an absolute purpose of God not to be prevented nor auorded, and not only
permitting it as a thing which may and may not come. In which words consider
two points: first, what is the cause in Gods sight, why the world afflicts
the Church: secondly, in what grievous sort it is afflicted.

for they names sake: that is, because thou opposest thy self against
Anrichrist, and do not fall down nor bow to Baal, nor do not fashion thy
self after the world, in swallowing up their iolities and delights. Wherein
observe, that true Christians are not only subject to common miseries, as those
that bear the face of fleshly Adam, but to some peculiar calamities that never
disquiet the wicked: and this only as they bear the image of that heavenly
Adam Christ Jesus, from which the world is exempted; even as the chafe and the
wheat, they both feel the flaile, but the chafe is free from the millstone,
from the fan, and from the oven: for of these only does the wheat taste:
and happy is he that is ground fit for the Lords table; for though the chafe
feel not the bitterness of the mill, nor the hear of the oven: yet mark
what becomes of it, Hark. 9.50.
it is like unsavory salt, good for nothing but to be cast forth, and is
either trodden under feet, or carried away with the wind, and so vanishes in
the air. Such is the case and estate of the wicked, for when they are
separated as tares from the corn, either the Lord treads upon them in his
wrath, or burns them in his displeasure, or blows them from his presence
like the stubble.

We are killed for thy names sake: that though God does never chastise any man
unjustly, because he may have occasion enough to afflict him for his own
corruption, whereby he may be humbled: yet herein appears his infinite
wisdom, that he makes the cause of our sufferings to be more honorable,
bearing this title and superscription, for the name of God, the purity of
religion, and because we will not communicate with the world in their
superstitious devotions. So as the Lord changes the nature of the
chastisement, and imputes it as borne for none of our wickedness, but for the
glorious profession of the Gospel, the wicked not punishing in us our sins,
but Gods graces: for if we would partake with them in their lusts we might go
free: For if Balaam would curse the people, he might soon rise to promotion,
Numb. 22.37. and if Michaiah would please the king in his Prophecy he need
not befed with the bread of affliction, 1. King. 22.27. and if the three
children would worship Nabuchadnezzars Image, they might easily escape the
furnace: Dan. 3.12. but we must keep our standing, and not shrink a foor^
from the foolishness of the Gospel, what storms soever may arise: for it is
no more then as if Christ should borrow our lines for a time to do him credit
withal, which shall be mightily rewarded.

killed for thy names sake, there arises this consolation: that forasmuch as
our sufferings are joined with Gods glory, and are brought upon us for Gods
glory, we may be sure they shall have a good issue, and shall end well: for as
he tendreth his own glory, so will he also tender us. We think it strange,
that the wicked have such a swinge in their delights, and that we hang down
our heads. Yea Danid complains, that seeing the prosperity of the wicked he
had almost in his haste accused God of partiality: but Paul (2. These. Psalm.
73.13.
1.5.6.) proves, that it is impossible (since we that are thus tossed and
vexed as it were in the whirlepoole of sorrows, are better then the world, and
in higher account with God) but that there shall come a day, when rest shall be
given to our souls, and vengeance powered into the bosoms of persecutors. For
there cannot be a truth more certainly to be believed then this: that since we
do suffer at their hands who are worse then our selves, it is a sure token
that there shall come a revelation of Gods judgment, wherein the iron rod of
the Lords wrath shall bruise them soul and body, when we shall be carried up,
with S. Paul into the third heaven, and with Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, 2.
Cor. 12.4. Luke 16.23.
and when the vengeance of the Lord shall pursue our enemies, driving them from
his presence and from the glory of his power, 2. These. 1.9.

for thy names sake: observe, that it is not the suffering of every phanaticall
or fantastical spirit, that shall be taken for the Lords truth: for there may
be such forcible illusions, as men may give their bodies to the fire, or necks
to the halter for the supposed truth of Popery, and then their suffering is as
a seal set to a wrong instrument: but it must be in a true zeal of a true
cause; for the death does not justify the cause to be good, but the cause
justifies the death to be holy and religious. For Paul (1. Tim. 1.13.) was a
zealous persecutor when he was a blasphemer, and yet though the did God good
service: but when God received him to mercy, then he forsook and disclaimed
the righteousness of works. So that if our sufferings be for God, we must lay
our foundation only in Christ crucified, harboring and maintaining a pure
conscience in an undefiled heart, not stained with hypocrisy, nor growing so
hard as to be burned with a hot iron, 1. Tim. 4.2.

For the second point, which is the grieuousnesse of the affliction befalls Gods
Saints, it is to be considered two ways: first, their cruelty, that nothing
will stay their hunger, nor stainch their malice, but blood: for either we are
killed; or daily have death before our eyes, the sight whereof often ^^mes is
more bitter then death it self. Secondly, the indignity they offer us, and
the disgrace, not only to slay us, but to slay us like beasts, to set forth
and express their exceeding rancor and malice toward us.

Concerning the cruelty and indignity has been used toward Gods ^aints for
the old Testament, let the Apostle to the Hebr. 11.36 speak, who teckoneth up
twelve seue all kinds and sorts of persecutions, wherewith the faithful have
been pursued, and yet were never dauned nor dismared, knowing they should
receive a better resurrection. And how they have been used since Christ his
ascension, the stories of the ten persecutions in the Primitive church do tell
us, that Christians were so odious as they were out of the protection of law,
for not only were laws made against them, that publicly they should be
tormented, but every private man might be a butcher to a Christian, and never
come in danger nor question of law for shedding of blood: yea there was such
exquisite torments devised for them by Satan as could not be greater, as that
some should be covered with the skin of a beast, and then cast to a wolf to be
rent like a beast: some smothered with a little smoke proceeding from a
continual soft fire: some scorched in the flame and powdered with falt and
vinegar: some cast down headlong from the top of mountains: some having
their flesh scrapt with shells, and many such like torments; so as though it may
seem Homo homini Deus, man to be to man a God, that is, a helper and defender
where there is love, yet in the difference of religion it proves Homo homini
lupus, that man becomes a destroier of man. Hereupon does Christ (foreseeing
the affections of tyrants, Mat. 10.16.) tell the Apostles in plain terms,
that he sent them as sheep among wolves; and presently expounds himself, ver.
17. Beware of men, whose mouths be as open sepulchers to devour us, and who are
in nothing so wily and watchful, as in setting snares to entrap us.

We are killed all the day Wherein observe, that it is a portion ordained to
every Christian, not to be exempt from any calamitie^ common with the wicked,
but to be subject to all these and to far greater, because judgment must
begin at the house of God; and this indgement is to last not for a time or an
hour, but even to continue all the day, giving no truce nor intermission: but
as one wave beats upon another, and one day follows another, so must we
learn Patiendo pati, by suffering how to suffer; and the end of the former
trouble must beesteemed to be the beginner of another, as Christ himself
says, Take up my cross daily. Neither yet must we think that we are called
to any hand condition, or that the calling of a Christian is any uncomely
calling, for we have Christ as a glusse before us, who walked as it were
continually upon the ice, and was not one moment free from some subjection and
baseness in the outward man.

Secondly, by sheep appointed to the slaughter, learn that a Christian must
never think he has suffered enough, till he has suffered death: for it is
not said, appointed to the whip, or to the rack, or to the prison, but even to
death, which is the thing our flesh most abhors. For this must be the
Christian man's account, not to be cast and cassiered out of this warfare till
death has perfited our sanctification: as Hebr. 10.33. the Apostle reckoning
up the afflictions of the godly, as partly while they were made a gazing stock
by reproaches, partly while they suffered with other in compassion, mourning to
see them distressed, partly while they did bear the loss of goods
cheerfully, yet as if this were but a small matter, and as if yet they were
far short in their reckoning, chap. 12.4. he tells them they have not yet
resisted unto blood, nor suffered death; as if the number of death made their
account perfect, and that they must still be casting till they come to death,
for having fought so many battles as went before in their sufferance of so many
inferior blows, and as it were weak afflictions, they must not cast away
their confidence till they have fought the last skirmish, and have overcome
death by dying.

Thirdly learn, that by the Lords decree we are not all appointed to be
offered up in sacrifice, but by the malice of the enemy we are all destinated
and set forth for such a bloody end, though the Lord in providence do
oftentimes rescue us even out of the jaws of the Lion: howbeit God appoineth
all to some, I do not say affliction, but persecution, for in the scripture we
read of a double martyrdom, Cruentum and Incruentum, a bloody martyrdom, and
a martyrdom without blood, as when we suffer any shame, imprisonment, loss of
goods, etc. And this appears in two of the first enemies of Gods Church,
Ismael and Esau; the first scoffed at his brother Isaac, the other out of the
hidden malice of his heart could say, Genesis 21.9. Genesis 27.41.
If my Father die, I will have Jacobs life. So as though we escape blood, yet
we must witness the truth of Christ by bearing at least the sting of the
tongue, from which never any of us was exempted. And though Ismael said not so
much as Esau, yet assure thy self they have both the same mind, for sometime
the butcher wants his knife; and therefore settle thy heart, and carry death
as a seal upon thy finger. Heaven is compared to a treasure hidden, Mat.
13.44. and worth more then all thy substance; meaning thereby, that a man
should not refuse to bestow any thing upon the field of Grace, that is, the
Gospel, that thereby he may enter into the kingdom of glory. And though the
Lord calls not all forth to this sharpest combat, to be slain in the field,
yet must every man carry this Christian resolution, that if he be called, not
to prize or esteem any thing, but to leave all, and with patience and
cheerfulness to kiss and to embrace the sword of death.

We are more then conquerors, etc. Here follows the comfortable issue, and
as it were the gate of joy set open unto us in our extreemest miseries, namely,
that in all things we over come: wherein observe two points: first, the
victory it self: secondly, the means whereby we obtain it, that it is not
by the natural strength of flesh and blood, but through the power of Christ
that loved us.

For the first, we are more then conquerers two ways: first, in respect of our
selves: secondly, in respect of others. We are conquerers in respect of our
selves three ways: first, in the afflictions that go before death: secondly,
in the very suffering of death: thirdly, that sometimes there comes a special
deliverance, and the wicked are made a ransom for the godly. Prou. 21.1^.
The first of these appears, in that we choose to suffer rather then to admit
any ill condition in serving God: as, rather then the three children would
stoop to the worship of the beast, they embraced the fire, Daniel, 3.22.23.
And though through the sharpness of the trouble oftentimes the outward man
trembles and decaieth, yet are we strengthened and renewed in our souls and
consciences, that we are not careful to answer the greatest tyrant upon the
earth, that that God whom we serve is able and will deliver us from the sting
and poison of any torment; yea though sometimes the Lord strangely handles
them that suffer for the Gospel, so, as their soul is troubled and cannot
apprehend any comfort, but even feel the justice of God upon them for their
sins, and in the instant of their dissolution they seem to be void of inward
heavenly power to strengthen them, and do find a heavy unaptness and unapt
heaviness to sustain the trial; and that though they have poured forth
their soul with tears unto the Lord, yet they cannot find that resolution in
any comfort to take the cup, but as it is held to their mouths; yet at the last
being for the cause of Christ, they may be sure he will send his spirit to
quicken them, and dispatch such a comforter from heaven, as they shall find
even in the flames such alacrity and delight, as if they had rather received a
pardon from death then any power to be thrust on to death: for the Lord will
comfort the abject, bring light out of darkness, and as 2. Cor. 4.11. make the
life of Jesus manifest in our flesh, by our being delivered up to death for his
sake.

Esaias 43.2. Neither shall the waters drown thee, nor the fire burn thee, nor
the flame kindle upon thee: meaning thereby, that the Lord shall make the most
bitter drink pleasant to them whom he has called by his name:

Act. 5.19. Peter cast into prison had the door opened by the Lords messenger,
and was brought forth in despite of his enemies the same Peter was whipped, and
being ( Act. 12.6.) a sheep appointed to the slaughter, lying fast bound
between two soldiers, and the prison doors being watched, the Angel of God
smote him on the side, and his chames fell off, and he was brought through the
first and second watch, and the prayers of the church did disappoint the
purpose of the tyrant, whose hands were not yet washed from the blood of James,
whom he had killed with the sword. So vehement also were the prayers of Paul
and Silas, ( Act. 16.25.) that an earthquake shaked the foundation of the
prison, and loosed the bands of all the prisoners, and the Lord put it into the
hearts of authority, to send Paul forth in peace; and when he would not,
standing upon the law of the Romans, ( Act. 22.25.) that no man should be
scourged before he was condemned, his enemies were glad to entreat him to go.
Of which examples we must make this use, that if the Lord saw it good for his
glory, he could do as much now: for nither is his power abated, nor his love
diminished. Exodus 16.15. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
For in that he fed the Israelites with Manna, he showed that he can make a man
live without bread: in that he blessed the small quantity of meal which the
widow of Sarepta had, he shows that our life stands not in abundance: 1.
Kin. 17.16.
and he that made the three children dance in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.22.
when they that put them in were killed with the heat of the ouens mouth, he
can and will cheer us, and make glad our hearts in the vale of death. For it
is he that strengthens David to overthrow Goliath, and his power shall support
us to over come death. 1. Sam. 17.45.
Now for the deliverance which is extraordinary mediate, we have example in
Saul, Act. 9.25. who by the Disciples was put through the wall, and let down by
a rope in a basket, when the Jews watched the gates to kill him. We have
likewise our own Prince Queen Elizabeth, on whom many waters did beat, and
over whose head many floods have run; and when even in her sisters time she
was as a lamb to be led forth to the shambles, it pleased the Lord to snatch
her out of the mouths of the mighty, and to set her seat far above their
reach, and then were they sorry, they had cur down the branches and suffered
the stock to stand.

Secondly, we are more then conquerors in these afflictions in respect of
other: and that two ways, either in the conversion of others, in seeing the
Lords power in the midst of our perplecities: or else in the confirmation of
others, they being emboldened by the Lords hand on us, to assure themselves he
will not leave them destitute in the like extremity. Examples of the first we
have, Act. 4.32. and 5.14. how in the heat of the disciples afflictions, and
when it was counted little better then insurrection to flock to sermons, the
people sold their possessions to buy a good conscience, and to know the fruit
of Christ his death: and how the number of them that believed grew more and
more; and how out of the blood of that constant Martyr Stephen there sprung up
daily fresh and new Christians. Examples of the latter we may see in the
testimony of Paul, who said his bonds were famous in the Court of the Emperor,
Phillip. 1.13.
and by that others were taught to preach more boldly: and 2. Tim. 2.10. I
suffer as an evil doer, even unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound,
therefore I suffer for the elects sake: meaning thereby, that his example of
captivity and patience did sundry ways confirm the Church in the hope of a
better life. For this is the property of the Gospel, to grow highest where it
is trodden down, and to spring fastest where it is killed. For when Ahab and
Iezabel thought they had not left a Prophet of the Lord, but had destroyed all
but Eliah, and him had they sought for as with a candle: then had Obadiah hid
an hundred of the Lords Prophets in a cave, (1. King. 18.4.) that never bowed
their knees to Baal. Job. 5.22.
For the Lord does but laugh at the policies of the wicked, and he in his time
will discover their shame to their faces, and lift up the heads of his servants
above all the tyrants of the world.

Demas find no preferment by the Gospel, (2. Tim. 4.10.) he will nothing
esteem of Paul's company. Such is our desire to be rich, as if we gain by our
servants that work with the Devil, we had rather they should be possessed
still, then we would lose our gain: which we may see, Act. 16.19. where Paul
and Silas were haled before the Magistrates, only for casting out the spirit
of divination in the maid that got her masters great advantage by divining.
Yea such and so vehement are our natural and earthly affections, and so great
our greediness to enjoy the pleasures of our life, that the marriage of a wife,
or the trial of a yoke of oxen shall keep us from Christ, Mat. 22.5. Luke
14.19.20. So that it must be a greater power then the faculty or ability of a
man: for if naturally we are not able to abide the snuff of a candle, much
less to burn in the fire. Why then so many examples as we see patiently
enduring death for the testimony of the truth of God, so many testimonies have
we of the Lords power to enable weak vessels to hold such scalding liquer.
For many through presumption of their own strength have apostated; and Peter
was well near it, notwithstanding his brag, that he would not leave his
master to the death, if Christ his eye had not pierced his soul to repentance
for his former denials, Luke 22.61. David (1. Sam. 17.45.46.) confesses, that
it was not in his strength to contend with Goliath, neither did he come to him
with sword or with spear, but in the name of the God of Israel, who would
close him into his hands. And this in truth must be our pattern, and our praise
in these temptations and afflictions, to fly out of our selves, and to run to
the wings of the Lord Jesus, whose grace only is sufficient for us, and whose
power is made perfect in our weakness: for where the flesh carries a
confidence in it self, there is no room for the spirit; for the spirit
helps only those that be infirm, and Christ is only a Physician for a
sick sinner. Mark. 2.17.
Now as we are conquerors through him that loves us, so let us labor that
Christ may think his love well bestowed, his blood well spent, and his victory
for us well gained, by our love of him again, that it may be as hot as the
flame, that whole floods of waters may not quench it; and so strong, as neither
terrors in persecution, nor pleasures in life, nor the anguish of death may
make us forsake our ankor Christ Jesus, but that we may hold our confidence in
a hope sure and steadfast, which shall at the last give us entrance into the
veil, whither Christ our forerunner is for us entered in. Heb. 6.29.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 38, 39.




Here the Apostle sets down a conclusion full of all consolation,
proceeding from a divine and heavenly resolution, and christian magnan unity,
extended and offered by the Apostle in the person of all the faithful: wherein
he does courageously challenge, and exultantly triumph ouerall creatures, being
assured that nothing that ever was created could finally separate him from that
love wherewith the Lord had loved him in Christ. This conclusion stands on
two parts: first, in the enumeration or reckoning up of some particulars, which
if any thing could sever us from the Lord, it were likely to be some of these
he named. Secondly, because the Apostle could not insist in the induction or
bringing in of particulars, he uses a general comprehension of all things,
that nothing might be excepted; in these words, (nor any other creature:) the
things reckoned up are nine, which be either one contrary to another, or else
diverse from other.

For death, that cannot separate us from God: for though it be most terrible to
the flesh to see his prefixed end, yet this is so far unable to sever us, as
nothing has greater power to join us to God, through the death of him that
overcame death: which appears likewise by this, that even the wicked though
they love not to live the life of the righteous, because it is tedious through
afflictions, yet they can wish with Balaam, Number. 23. verse. 10. that their last
end may be like theirs, who always resign up their souls in rest unto the
Lord. And though some wicked may make a peaceable end, whereby Satan hardens
others to think they are beloved of the Lord, because they depart like the
light of a candle, and some of the elect die troublesomely, whereby Satan
makes his instruments to condemn the generation of the godly: yet in their
inward man, they do not only patiently expect, but deeply sigh for the day
of their dissolution, that being unclothed of this corruption, they may be
crowned with the Lords glory: for they that have received the earnest of the
spirit, the pledge of their inheritance, and the first fruits of the Lords
love, and unto whom he has sealed and assured pardon of their sin, they do
know they have cause to expect the revelation and show of their happiness,
being here tossed with sundry waves of perplexed miseries, and being sure
there to arrive from a tempestuous voyage to a most blessed haven. And it is
joyful to a Christian to be delivered from this careful life, wherein every
day is the messenger of fresh sorrows, and wherein he finds his corruption
so burdensome: so as though Paul was taken up into the third heaven, 2. Cor.
12.4.
yet he cried, Who shall deliver me from this body of sin? For here we
know our selves to be scarce worth the ground we go on, we are so worn with
care, and so ground with affliction: but then we shall enter into the presence
of God, and dwell with him perpetually. To be short, many have been so
ravished with this joy, which we see but as in a mist, as they have not only
given up themselves to natural death, but even suffered violent death,
embracing it as chearefully as the soldier that comes (after his valor
showed) to be made a knight, or as the King that goes to his Coronation: for
then shall we have not Reeds but Palms in our hands to show our triumph, and
be crowned not with Thorns, but with Glory, even the glory that Christ had
from the beginning.

Now for life, that cannot do it; for there is no temptation in this life,
neither excessive pleasure, nor abundant profit, not magnificent state that a
righteous soul will not forgo, rather then forsake the righteousness of
C^^^^, or their own peace of conscience; yea (...) Moses, ^^^^her then to lose
the least light of the Lords conntenance, we will refuse to be made glorious by
our birth, and choose to suffer affliction with the children of God: Heb. 11.24.
and with Paul ( Phil. 3.8.) to esteem all things but as the excrement of a dog
in comparison of the security and confidence we have of the Lords love toward
us, so as we are Christ's in our life also. And though we do desire to see the
face and glory of the Lord, yet as Saint Paul speaks, whether we be in our
body at home absent, Phil. 1.20.
or abroad in our separation, our souls still wait upon the Lord: for, for
this cause, as Romans 14.8.9. Christ died, that whether we live or die we might
be the Lords.

Now for Angels, Powers, or Principalities: by the names themselves may be
understood as well the good Angels as the bad: whereof Paul speaks 1. Cor.
6.3. Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? that is, the reprobate
spirits, for these be executioners of the Lords will, though not by willing and
loyal obedience, as well as the other: and though both these being several,
have in the scripture the same titles given them: as the good are called ( Ephesians.
1.21.) Powers and Principalities, and so are the bad called by the same name,
Colos. 2.15. where Christ is said to spoil and to traduce Principalities and
Powers to open shame: and Ephesians. 6.12. We must fight against Principalities and
Powers: yet in this place by Angels are to be taken the good; and by Powers
and Principalities the devils. The reason is, because here the Apostle makes
an opposition between contraries; and also because in other places of the
scripture where these same words are used to express the good Angels, there is
always more added to their style, as Ephesians. 1.20. Thrones and Dominations are
mentioned besides the other. But it may be said, will the Angels that are the
messengers of God attempt any such thing as to part God and us? No, it is
impossible, howsoever the Apostle speaks excessiuely from the exultation and
joy of his spirit; for he reasons ab impossibili, as if he should say, if
Angels, which be the most excellent and most powerful creatures, could attempt
to separate us from the love of God, yet they could not; for Christ which is
the head of Angels has joined us to his Father; and therefore much less any
inferior thing can do it. After this manner this Apostle speaks Galat. 1.8.
If an Angel from heaven should preach any other doctrine (which is impossible)
let him be accursed. So Romans 9.3. Paul wishes himself accursed to redeem the
Jews: and Moses prayed to be rased out of the book of life rather than the
Israelites should perish: which was not possible that the decree of God should
be frustrate. But such was the vehemency of their affection if the Lord would
be entreated at their prayers. And it was necessary for the Apostle here to
name Angels, because they be the mightiest creatures: and if they cannot part
the Lord and us, much less can devils; for the worst they can do is but to
buffet us, whereby our infirmities shall be healed: and as Christ said to
Peter, Satan desires to winnow thee like wheat, Mat. 22.31.
but I have prayed that thy faith may not fail. This also appears by that in
the Revelation 12.4. that the red Dragon cannot do it, though with his tail
he can draw stars from heaven, that is, discover the hypocrisy of some great
professors: for first, he waited upon the woman as she was with child:
secondly, in her delivery: thirdly, when the child was brought forth; to see
first if he could have destroyed the Church of the Jews; and if not, the
Church of the Gentiles; and if not, the head of the Church the Lord Jesus; or
if not, the whole body of the faithful; or if not, some one of the faithful:
but he was cast down (says the text) that is, he was abased in his pride, and
sought to advance and lift up himself again to heaven by destroying the woman
and her seed, that is, by withstanding the salvation of the elect. This Dragon
has especially two instruments: first, the great Beast, that is, the Roman
Empire, where was a name of blasphemy written in his forehead, which though
it could with Eliah call fire from heaven, yet could it never consume the faith
of Gods chosen, 2. King. 1.10.
nor ever draw one soul from Christ. The second is the Roman Hierarchy,
raised out of the ruins of the former, which though it could make the heavens
brass that it should not rain, or the earth iron that it should yield no
fruit, yet could it never touch any that was written in the book of the Lamb:
Revel. 5.3.
for where he seals none can open, and where he opens none can shut: and
as it is said in the former place, They which are bought from the earth sing in
great troops a new song with the Lord Jesus.

For the other, Neither things present, that may be known, nor things to come,
which may seem to be doubtful, can make any separation of God from us; for
the elect are sure the Lords grace shall assist them to the end: neither height
of heaven, as Paul that was carried up on high did not yet presume; nor the
depth of hell, 2. Cor. 12.5. Jonah. 2.1.
as Jonas being in the belly of the Whale did not yet despair, but had his
prayers passing to heaven through the fishes mouth: Job. 13.15.
and Job in the patience and resolution of his spirit could say, O Lord though
thou kill me yet will I love thee: for hope, which is the sure anchor of the
soul, makes us to enter with conside^ce within the lists of the Lords
presence, and there staieth us, for the Lord does know us for his own in his
beloved Son.

Hence learn, that a man may be assured he shall be saved; for this place is
without exception. Yet some say, this was a special revelation Paul had of his
own salvation; which is most injurious to the whole text: for though he says,
I am persuaded, as speaking of himself, yet in the matter of the persuasion he
joins all the faithful, as that nothing can separate us, speaking generally
of all, which is proved also by many things and speeches before, as verse 23.
We groan for the redemption of our body. Did Paul only groan? And verse 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of God? Was Paul only beloved? And verse
36. We are killed all the day, and we are more than conquerers; including all
the faithful.

Now that a man may know he shall be saved, it is proved thus: A man may
know certainly whether he be a Christian, and truly ingrafted into Christ,
proved by the first of John 4.13. By this we may know we are ^n Christ,
because we have his spirit. And to prove this (2. Cor. 13.5.) Paul speaks
plainly: Do yet not know unless ye have the spirit of Christ, ye be
reprobates? Again, a man may know whether he be led by this spirit by the
fruits of this life; and being led by the spirit he is sure he is the son of
God; and being his son, undoubtedly an heir of his kingdom. Some will say, he
may know it for the present, but no man can tell what he shall be, 1. Cor.
10.12.
for let him that stands take heed he fall not. But know this, it is no
persuasion unless it reach and extend to that that is to come: as Paul says
here, he was persuaded, neither things present, nor things to come could
remove him from his hold he had in Christ: and we may assure our selves, that
he that has begun this work in us, if we walk before him in fear and
trembling, will finish it to his glory and our comfort.

Secondly, observe, that all have not the same measure of this resolution: for
there is a diverse measure of this, according to the diverse degrees of faith and
age of a Christian: for some are such of whom the Church does as yet travel of
and are not delivered: some are newborn to be fed with milk, others are
grown more in faith, and come unto a riper age of Christ: as the holy Ghost
says; The righteousness of the Gospel is revealed from faith to faith;
alluding to the Sun, that rises not in his excellency, but sends forth a
dawning before it appears; and then a mean light before it comes to the
height of his brightness: even so there is a measure in the feeling of this
persuasion; but yet so, as being but a grain, a sparkle, or a drop of true
faith, it does lay hold upon the Lord Jesus, and assure us that we shall have
eternal life through Christ: Number. 2.19.
even as none were healed, but they that beheld the Serpent, though some saw it
more clearly then others. And it is not our faith properly that saves us, no
more then it is the hand that nourishes: but as by the hand though it be weak
we receive nourishment, so by faith, as by an instrument not always of like
strength, we feed upon Christ and all his benefits. Why, but this resolution
here spoken of, not only the weak, but they that be strong feel not: for we
see by experience, that none have such security, but they sometimes despair
through their own feeling and priuitie of their sins, which present
themselves, so many and so deformed; and therefore it is so terrible, as they
sometimes doubt of Gods love and kindness: and so vehement is the perturbation
of their spirits rising from their own unworthiness, as they seem forsaken
of the Lord, and much disquieted in themselves: therefore though Paul had this
persuasion, yet every man cannot have it. To this answer; It is not said, there
must be any such security, as that there must be no doubting; or such
tranquillity, as there must be no trouble: for David seemed to doubt whether
there was a God or no, Psalm. 73.13.
because he saw the wicked flourish so proudly. And it is no commendation of
faith to be free from doubting of Gods mercy in some measure; for sometimes
there are thrown against us such fiery darts to the dismaying of our poor
consciences, as hardly can our buckler of faith drive them back, yea the soul
of a man may even be astonished under the Lords heavy hand, and yet there may
be true faith: for though it be shaken, it cannot be overthrown; though it be
oppressed, it cannot be left in distress: and though our faith may be strongly
assaulted, and foiled, and wounded with the terrors of the Lord, so as his
arrows shall even pierce our souls, and the venime thereof drink up our
blood, and that we shall think the Lord has shut his compassion from us, yet
shall we at the last be raised up to behold the Sunbeams of the Lords love:
for the praise of faith is to overcome by fighting, that the power of the Lord
may be made strong by our infirmity and weakness.

ROMANS chap. 8. verse. 19.20.21.22.








(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

THe Apostle having formerly taught us what way the Lord had allotted for us to
walk to heaven, to wit, by the same line that Christ his natural Son
ascended, that is through a crown of thorns, and a sea of afflictions, from
the ladder to the cross, and from the fold to the shambles, and that heerewith
we ought not to be dismayed, but rather inwardly comforted: First, because
hereby Christ and we draw together in one yoke: Secondly, because by this
subjection in infirmity there is wrought in us a conformity with him in
glory: Thirdly, because this glory is of that kind that the least taste of it
does far surmount the extremity of all our miseries in this life. Yet as if
he would strike the nail deeper, an^ ^ill the cup of comfort fuller, he
shows in these verses; First, that a change and confusion shall be scraped
off. Secondly, that we that are the selected of God, shall be freed and
exempted from the fear and sense of this horrible deformation of the world.
Thirdly, that it is certain this spoil and consumption of the earth with the
works therein shall come, for we are might so much by the insensible creatures
that wait for it themselves, nature informing them that their subjection to
vanity shall have an end: for as they were at first created good, and became
accursed for the sin of man, so shall they at length be restored with us that
are elect through the remoouing of that curse for sin, in the seed of the
woman, which is Christ.

First, in that it is said, there is a fervent desire in the dumb and
senseless creatures; we are not to understand that there is herein a will and
an affection, or a desire, or a hope, or any sense or understanding in the
brute beasts, or other Insensible creature, as the Heaven, Earth, Sun,
Moon, etc. for that which they have is only through the instruction and
instinct of nature; but this is only spoken in way of comparison, by a
figurative or borrowed speech, speaking that of the dumb creature, which is
only to be applied to us of understanding: for if there be such a fervent
desire, a longing, a sighing, and a mourning in these senseless creatures for
our deliverance from this bondage of corruption, under which we are now held:
how much greater then should our desires, wills, and affections, our sighings
and mournings be, who are sensibly and feelingly to be made partakers of this
heavenly glory? and to this end is their feruencie brought in, to stir us up
to the like or greater, as a thing more nearly concerning us. The like phrase
of Scripture attributing life, sense, desire and affections to dumb creatures
is used in many places; as Psalm. 114.3.4. When Israel went out of Egypt, the
sea saw it and fled, Jordan was driven back, the mountains leaped like rams,
and the hills like lambs: and verse. 7. The earth trembled at the presence of
the Lord: the Prophet bringing in the creatures magnifying and reioicing at the
majesty of God in the destruction of his enemies, and at his mercy in the
delivery of his Saints: that since these sensilesse creatures in their
obedience in their kind seemed to see this glory and triumph at it, much more
should the people themselves that visibly saw it, and sensibly felt it, be
ravished as it were with joy at the so powerful presence of the Lord, in making
the sea as the dry land for their escape and rescue from the sword of their
enemies. After the like manner does David, Psa. 148.2.5. bring in the creatures
in course, as they were created, praising the Lord in their kind, not in any
form or phrase of speech, but the beauty of the Lord appearing in them by
their obedience in observing that course wherein they are set, hereby inuiting
and stirring us up that have sense, feeling, reason and understanding to be
more mindful in our praise and thanksgiving to God, who are filled with
greater plenty, and have a more spiritual and divine beauty shining in us
than they have. So Esaias the Prophet, chap. 14.7.8.9. in derision of the
tyranny of the king of Babel, brings in the whole world, singing for joy,
the fur trees and the Cedars of Lebanon reioicing, and hell it self moved
at the death of so gold-thirsty an oppressor as he was, as if it feared lest
he would trouble the dead as he did the living; teaching us by this, that if
the insensible creatures do seem to spread their boughs, and bud forth
their flower at the destruction of tyrants, as bringing rest and quiet to them;
how much more should we be affected at it, that taste the smart of their
cruelty, and are kept but as a spoil and pray to saciate their bloody and
butcherly desires. So Jonah 3.7. sackcloth must be put upon the beasts, and
they must be kept from feeding, as if they sorrowed for the affliction hung
over their land; not that they had sinned or could have any affection of grief
in them, but by this that the people might the more acknowledge their
unworthiness, as deserving justly not only to be plagued of God in their
persons, but even to be deprived of the use and beenfit of the creatures
whereby their present life was maintained. And thus are the creatures brought
in here by the Apostle, as inwardly smitten with sorrow for the sin of man,
and for his pollutions on the earth, and longing after the advancement of the
sons of God to glory, to set the sharper edge on us, who are to taste as it
were the full cup of the Lords bounty and glory in the highest heavens, who
will thus exalt the horn of his Saints.

Further understand, that by Creature in this place is meant all the creatures
in the world, as appears, verse. 22. where it is said; that every creature,
comprehending all, does groan with us; howbeit there are two sorts of creatures
here exempted, namely Angels and men, both elect and reprobate: for the Angels
elect, they wait not, as groaning under vanity, (otherwise they desire it) for
the revelation or triumph of Gods Saints in heaven, because they always stand
before the Lord and behold his glory, Mat. 18.10. It is true indeed as Lu.
15.10. That the Angels of God rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, because
more glory is brought to God by his salvation; but they need not this affection
of groaning or sighing here spoken of, because they are in paradise and before
the throne of God already. Neither can it be meant of the reprobate Angels the
brood of the devil; for first they wait not for us, unless it be, as Ren.
12.4. the dragon waited for the delivery of the woman to destroy us; neither
do they wait upon us, unless it be, as Matthew. 4.1. the tempter waited upon
Christ in the wilderness. Secondly, they wait not for themselves, for they
fear nothing so much as the perfecting of Gods elect in number, because that
is the time of the perfefection of then torment, at which they tremble, Lames
2.19. the devil ever thinking that Christ hasteneth too fast and comes
before his time to torture him. Now for men, it is not meant, in this verse, of
the elect, as appears by the words themselves, for the waiting is not by them
but by the creatures for them, till they shall be restored to their liberty in
glory; and so much is plainly set forth verse. 23. And not only the creature,
but we also that have the first fruits of the spirit do sigh, etc. bringing
the elect, and their waiting, in by themselves, and not folding them up in the
general word creature. Concerning the reprobate, it is not meant of them, for
they are but of two sorts, the one such as Peter speaks of, 2. Pet. 3.3.4.
There shall come mockers which shall walk after their lusts, and say, where is
the promise of his coming? thinking because the Lord has been patient so
long, therefore the day of judgment is but a tale to keep men in awe: So as
these men cannot wait for Christ's coming since they deny it, and deride it:
the other are such as know there shall be a day of reckoning, but fear it and
put it far off, as loath to see it as their father the devil, because then
they shall receive according to that they have wrough^^ the flesh, which at
that time shall turn to their sighing and groaning, because they denied to
themselves sorrow and grief in the flesh. So as (all) creatures (but men and
Angels) are meant here; where we see the concordance and agreement as it were
of the whole frame of heaven and earth, not ^arring but ioining in one, that
they might be at the end of their labor and vanity by their dissolution and
change of their subjection into immortality.

Where it is said, When the sons of God shall be revealed: we may understand
it five ways: First, that it is spoken in this sense; that all the sons of
God are not yet revealed; for part are in heaven, part in earth, and part of
them not yet borne. Secondly, touching the sons of God on earth, they are not
all yet revealed, in regard that the Lord calls daily, and makes as it were
a fresh addition to his church by the power of his word, as he did in the
Apostles time; Peter by one sermon Act. 2.41. converting three thousand souls
to Christ. Thirdly, they are not all yet revealed on earth, because the wicked
cannot discern them, for as Christ was visible here with us, yet was not
known to the Scribes and Pharisees, their eyes through ignorance and malice
being so shut, as they could not see him; even so, though the members of Christ
are visible in themselves, yet to the malicious and ungodly they are invisible,
because they have not the eyes of faith to spy them out. Fourthly, the sons
of God here on earth, are not yet revealed to the children of God; for Elias 1.
King. 19.14.18. thought there had been none left but himself to serve God,
when the Lord unknown to him had reserved seven thousand that had not bowed
their knees to Baal. Fifthly, there are many hypocrites among us, in which
respect the sons of God on earth are not yet revealed, but at the latter day,
when the Angel shall come to make a separation, then shall the fish be known
from the frogs; the sheep from the goats: and the sincere professor from the
dissembler; for then there shall be two in one bed, the one received, the
other refused, who before were so linked in fellowship, as it was indiscernable
that in their deaths they should have such several ends. Howbeit the better
sense for these words, When the sons of God shall be revealed; is this: When
the sons of God shall be received up to glory; for then shall they know as
they be known, and then shall the restitution come when the sea and the grave
shall yield up all their dead, and all the creatures receive as it were their
first robes of purity and goodness wherein they were created.

Now verse. 20. the Apostle sets down the reason why these insensible
creatures do thus wait for man's glorious liberty: because they themselves
are subject to vanity; wherein we are to consider two things: First, to what
they are subject: Secondly, by whom they are made subject. That the creature is
subject, it is not to be stood upon, because it is granted of all men; but this
is no willing nor voluntary subjection, but by force and constraint: for the
horse must have his rough rider, or else the snaffle will not hold him in; and
the ox must have his yoke on his neck, and his goad in his side, or else he
will not draw well; and the mule as David says, Psalm. 32.9. must have his
mouth bound with the bitte and bridle lest he come near thee with his heel.
Now that which the creature is subject to, is here said to be, to vanity,
and verse. 21. to the bondage of corruption, that is, to a vanishing and
fleeting estate, and they are said to be so in three respects: First, in
respect they have lost their first comeliness and order, their first beauty
and their first perfection in which they were created; for as there is great
difference between that gold that has been tried seven times in the fire,
and that which is taken out of the veins of the earth mixed with other metals;
between that sword that is newly varnished, and that which has line so long
by as it is eaten through with rust; between the shining of the sun in his
brightness, and when it is eclipsed, or shines in a gloomy day: so is there
as great or greater difference betwixt the heaven and earth, and all the host
therein which then were made for the furnishing of Gods house toward the
entertainment of Adam his son in paradise, and the heaven and the earth which
now are left unto us poisoned by the curse of God for Adams sin with thorns
and thistles, barrenness, and unwholesome smells, that the very corruption in the
air kills both them and us. Secondly, they are subject to vanity in regard
the wicked do enjoy them, and the godly oftentimes abuse them; for the rust of
the money which the usurer hoordeth up cries in the ears of God because it is
detained by the unjust owner; the gay apparel of the proud and ambitious do
fret as it were themselves that they should hide the shame of them that are so
shameless to snatch at the majesty of God, and to shake his seat by their
sin; the wine which is swilled in by the drunkards does boil as it were in
wrath that it was pressed out of the grape to heat their stomachs that deserve
only to be inflamed by the fire of hell; yea and every morsel that falls
into the mouths of gluttons and wicked persons, the Sun that shines on the
unjust, and the rain that lights upon the fields of the oppressors, and all
creatures else that come within their fingring are grieved, and do wait with
feruencie for the end of all flesh that they may no longer be forced to serve
and sustain the enemies of their maker; for the sins of the wicked are so
heavy and burdensome, and their abuse of the creatures so intolerable, that
the earth groneth that it cannot swallow them up as it did Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, Numb. 16.32. or otherwise be disburdened of them, though to her own
desolation, as it was in the universal flood, Genesis 7.21. And again if we that
are sanctified use them otherwise than they are ordained of God, as that the
Sun should give us light to wander out of the way of holiness, that we
should otherwise be clothed then as becomes Christians, or any further
refreshed by recreation then to make us the fitter for the ranging of our
selves within the compass of our callings, herein do we also make them
subject to vanity, because we should use the world as if we used it not, with
such moderation and comeliness, as not to snatch at any of them, or to profane
them; for it is against the law of truce when we are at league with any either
to surprise them, or abuse them; and we through Christ are at league and peace
with all the creatures, as Job says Chap 5.23. Thirdly, they are subject to
vanity in regard those shall die which have life in them, and the rest shall be
clean melted and dissolved; for this heaven and earth we now see shall
hereafter be abolished as it is said, Esaias 65.17. I will create new heavens
and a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind: and
Psalm. 102.25.26. The foundation of the earth and the heavens are the works of
thy hands (says David to the Lord) they shall perish, but thou shall endure,
they shall wax old as does a garment: and Revel. 21.1. I saw (says John) a
new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away; which agrees with that 2. Pet. 3.10. The heavens shall pass away
with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the
works therein shall be burnt up: and howsoeure to our dim and unstable sight
the heaven with the furniture thereof seems very glorious and beautiful, yet
every day they decay and diminish by little and little, and are already as an
old worn and rotten garment ready to be cast off, and folded up by the Lord.

Having thus seen the threefold subjection of the creatures, first, unto
diminution of their first estate, secondly, unto profanation and pollution,
thirdly, unto dissolution, it now follows to speak of the second thing
pointed at before, namely, by whom the creatures are made thus subject, and
this is set down in the end of Verse. 20. Not of their own will, but by reason
of him (that is God) which has subdued it under hope, that they might herein
obey the Creators commandment, who was pleased to signify by their wavering
and transitory estate what the weight of his displeasure was for the sin of
man; yet was his mercy such as he would not subdue the world ever lastinglie
under his curse, but gave it hope that it should be restored. Where learn the
great severity of Gods justice and vengeance for the rebellion of our first
parents, which bounded not it self within the body of man who was the sole
offender, but extended it self as a cloud over all the inferior works of God
which were made for man as his servants. And this shows the offense to be
very high that it drew so heinous a plague after it: for we must not in our
vain and perverse thoughts against the wisdom of God lessen the sin of
Adam, as being but the eating of an apple, which was a small matter, since he
eat so temperately as but to ^^ste of it, and did neither spoil nor dig up
any of the trees of the garden, making God as a hard and niggardlie master,
that will take so exact an account and strict reckning of his Steward for every
particular fruit committed to his charge; and hereupon will dare challenge
God, as if his hand had been too heavy upon him. O beware of these damnable
and hellish conceits. For first know thou, it is the mark of a reprobate to
think with Cain, Genesis 4.13. thy punishment greater then thy offense; for
herein though it be but in secret, does he secretly charge God with cruelty,
who as Abraham says, Genesis 18.25. being Judge of all the world, cannot but do
right. Again, the liberty that Adam had to fill himself of all the other
trees, this one excepted, shows the admirable bounty of the Lord, that of
all sorts of fruit he kept but one for himself, as of all the days of the
week he has reserved but one in a special sort for his own use, being herein
more sparing to himself then to Adam or to us, yet do we profane that most
because it is none of ours, as Adam did thirst after that tree most, because by
special commandment it was forbidden by God, wherein his rebellion was much
increased, that could not be thankful for the store he had, but as if he
should starve if he wanted this that was forbidden, must set the edge of his
appetite upon this, which was so forbidden; threfore has God measured forth
an even plague of perfection equal with his sin of presumption, being
punished not only in himself, but in his whole posterity, with sorrow not
only upon his body, but with anguish and horror upon his soul also, and not
only with trouble and vexation in the beginning and entrance into this life,
being naked, and not able to clothe himself; hungry, and wanting strength to
feed himself; weak, and not of power to arm himself, but also being
followed and pursued of this vexation both in the continuance and in the end of
his life, feeding sowerly upon his labor, and dying lothsomely (if the curse
were not removed in Christ) and languishinglie upon his bed, his pains here
being but the forerunners and remembrancers of weightier that are to come in
the life to come. Nay, the Lord has made his justice like a hook to run
thorough the nostrels of all his creatures, they being all accursed for our
sakes; for as Job says, Chap. 5.6. Misery comes not forth of the dust,
neither does affliction spring out of the earth; meaning originally of it
self, but by reason of the sin of man: this being prefigured out unto us
Leuit. 15. under the law: for when one had the Leprosy, the bed he lay on, the
stool he sat on, the basen he washed in was unclean, the company he kept,
yea, he that laid his fingers on that the leper had touched was unclean also:
which sets forth the spiritual leprosy of our souls through sin, and
that all the creatures whereon man laid his hand, or where on he slept, yea, or
whereon he looked, were polluted and defiled through his uncleanness; so as
whether we look above us or about us, to heaven or to earth, on the right
hand or on the left, before us, or behind us, or round about us, we can not but
behold Gods great but yet his just severity and vengeance for our
transgression in Adam, who would not exempt the poor creatures from his
stroke, which as we may say were in themselves harmless and innocent: and
this well weighed, should make us sigh and groan and mourn, and cry for our
sins, that caused then so heavy a curse as has ever since caused the world
to wear as it were her mourning apparel, the earth even for the sins
committed in our flesh, having often times her fruit ready ripened in her womb,
and yet wants strength to be delivered, being ei^^^r blasted in the blade, or
not full eared for lack of the latter rain: so that if our meditations were
sanctified as they ought, as often as we see a sheep led to the slaughter, so
often should we think and acknowledge that we have deserved death better then
the silly beast, we being only in the sin, and the creature subject to this
vanity but through our corruption. And this must make us take heed how we give
the raines to our affections, which will soon ouerrunne and corrupt our
religion; for if God was so deeply displeased with sin when it came alone
into the world, how do we urge and provoke him to wrath in these days, that
bring forth so many new invented sins, that the dragon draws not now with
his tail the third part as he did Revel. 12.4. but even all the stars of
heaven after him, there scarce being any sound professor to be found that
either poisoneth not his religion with an opinion of indifferency, or mingleth
it not with so much fear of man, as he is far short of that zeal that the
Lord requires of them that be worshippers of him in spirit and in truth.

Now if any be so audacious and bold, to ask why God was so sharp in smiting
his creatures for the sin of man? Answer first with S. Paul Romans 9.20. O
man, who art thou dare plead with God, and call him to an account for his
doings? his secrets are too high for thee, and his ways past finding our:
Secondly, if the creatures had not been punished with man, and that he by his
particular sin had not procured a general curse, then could not man in his
weakness have made any use of the creatures in their innocence, unless they
had fallen with him, for they had not been subject to vanity to have been
slain and devoured of men if in themselves they had not been accursed.
Thirdly, God did not punish them in respect of themselves, but in respect of
us, for we know the children are punished for the reason of their parents, not
for any fault committed in their persons but for that the parents have so
highly transgressed the Princes laws; for by this he has forfeited to the
King what should have descended to his children, and this we think no hard
part in an earthly Prince unless it be in the case of Ahab who took the
eschete of Naboths vineyard by a false plotted accusation of a supposed
blasphemy against God and the King, 1. Kings 21.13. then must we needs think
that the King of heaven who cannot but give righteous judgment, has not dealt
hardly in punishing and subduing the creatures to this subjection, Adam having
in his creation the rule given unto him over them as a father has over his
child; howbeit the Lord in this gave no principal or set blow to them, but
only stroke them as it were through the sides of man, that after that fall we
might be punished even often times in the use of them. If any ask again why God
should thus proceed in making our wound the wider by punishing us in his
creatures, since before the curse pronounced on them Genesis 3.15. the Lord had
pardoned the guiltiness of the sin by the promised seed of the woman?
Answer. This was the wisdom of the Lord in two respects, first, in respect
of his elect, secondly, in respect of the reprobate: for in regard of the elect
they are not punishments for sin, the blood of the woman's feed having by
virtue of Gods promise washed away the guilt of it; but because there is yet a
remnant of corruption there being much filth, John 13.10. hanging on our feet,
therefore they are as chastisements to increase the measure of our
sanctification, and the labor in purging and keeping our selves clean by
repentance and a holy life; but now to the reprobate they are tokens and
forerunners of Gods justice, and of the sword of vengeance which they shall
feel hereafter among the damned: so that when we see the heavens made brass
above us, and the earth iron beneath us, the one withholding the rain, the
other not yielding her fruits but suffering it to die in her womb, this is to
us but a chastisement for some passions unsubdued, or for some sins
unrepented of; but it is a scourge and revenge upon the reprobate, mingling his
rejoicing with repining, and his store with grudging, that the want of that he
seeks may be as a fretting canker in his soul to fill up the greater measure
of his sin, verifying those speeches of Job, Chap. 8.14. His trust shall be
as the house of the spider; and Chap. 11.20. his hope shall be sorrow of mind.
For as for them that love the Lord he uses four special remedies to make
them fit for heaven; first, his spirit to guide them; secondly, his word to
instruct them; thirdly, his chastisements to reclaim them, fourthly, death it
self to end them, and therefore when he corrects us in his creatures, it is
to see whether he can recover us as it were by the sight of another beaten
before us, making them unfruitful that we might remember the want of our own
works, mustering often times the clouds together as if rain should fall, yet
staying it in the breast of the air, to put us in mind of the hardness of our
hearts, and of the dryness of our eyes, that do not weep sufficiently for
our own sins, nor abundantly for the sins and abominations of the land, it
being as we read, Ezech. 9.4. an undoubted mark of election, set by the
finger of God in the fore heads of his Saints to mourn and cry for the
corruption and cruelty that is in a city.

Again, we having formerly noted the severity of Gods justice against sin
that we might avoid it: so on the contrary, we are to observe his exceeding
rich mercy both to the elect and to the reprobate, that hereby we may be
provoked to follow him (...) to what straites soever he shall cast us: his
mercy to his chosen (...) ^^eth in this, that though he has laid such a curse
upon his (...) ^atures, whereas they may lay the curse on us as the cause, and
(...) they knew their own strength would devour us, the Lord in ^oue to us,
and in power to them, hiding it from them, yet does he force them to serve us;
the use of them all being sanctified and restored to us in Christ, and we being
through him made owners and possessors of them; for as Adam after his fall
being secluded from the tree of life, was thereby excluded from all the means
that might maintain life, so Christ having by our union with him brought us
again into the paradise of God where that rree grows, we are thereby endowed
and enriched with all the creatures both in heaven and earth, these being for
his sake waiters and artendants on us, yea the very little ones that be elect
as Christ says, Matthew. 18.10. have their Angels in heaven to defend them: and
as David faith, Psalm. 34.8. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them
that fear him. Now his mercy to the reprobate is manifested in this, that he
by his especial hand and Commandment, does bind and restrain the creatures
from rebelling against them; for the heavens would fall upon the whoremonger if
God by his power did not chain them up: the Sun that shines would scorch
and burn the Usurer, if his force were not bridled by the finger of God; the
waters from above would fall like a sea upon the blasphemer, if they were not
shut in by the patience of God; yea all lewd, profane, and wicked persons
should be melted by the heat, stifled by the air, swallowed by the earth,
devoured by the beasts, choked by their bread, and every creature would be
avenged on them for the subjection brought upon them; if God by his providence
did not restrain them, for if they might have their own will, they would surely
do it. Who is it says God, Ioh. 38.8. that has shut up the sea with doors,
that her proud waves cannot pass oner, but I? It is the Lord Job. 39.12. that
binds the Unicorn with his band to labor in the furrow, else would he not
serve us nor tarry by the cribbe: The strong horse whose neying is fearful,
and swalloweth the ground for fierceness, would quickly turn his heel upon
the reprobate, if the Lord held him not by the hoof: for we see how even the
smallest creatures are armed to annoy them when God lets the raines loose
but a little; Pharaoh that entrenched himself and waged battle against God,
brauing it as if he had the host of heaven to command, was, Exodus 8.17. and 24.
by lice and fleas, the most weak and contemptible creatures, so confounded,
the earth being corrupt by their swarms, that he calls for sacrifice to that
God whom before he despised. Korah and his company, Number. 16.32. for their
rebellion against Moses the lieutenant of God, we see went down quick into
the pit, the earth taking upon her the revenge of the Lords cause, and cleaving
a sunder, did swallow them up. The waters seeing the earth filled with
cruelty, and all flesh to have corrupted his way, ceased not til her waves,
Genes. 7.18. waxed so strong, as it bore down all but the family of Noah into
the universal flood. The fire seeing the sin of Sodom to be exceeding
grievous, and the inhabitants thereof to be puffed up with fullness of bread
and idleness, could not stay it self, but fell from the clouds like rain,
till it had overthrown and burnt up both the men and all that grew upon the
earth, Genes. 19.25. Lot, his wife and two daughters, verse. 15.17. only
excepted. The lions Dan. 6.22.24. that were so reconciled to Daniel through his
faith in God, that he had no hurt found upon him, being left to themselves, and
not having their mouths shut by the Angel, were so enraged against his
accusers, that they brake all their bones in pieces before they came to the
ground of the den. The Bears 2. King. 2.24. when they heard but children
(that might excuse themselves by ignorance, or otherwise, by speaking as they
were taught) mocking Elisha, the Lords Prophet, could hold no longer within the
wood, but rushing forth of the forest, tore in pieces two and forty of them;
hereby to teach even babes to use their toongs better. The worms that
otherwise are the weakest and basest, and most scorned of men; yet clustered
themselves together, and flew upon the face of a vain glorious king, and eat
up Herod in all his bravery, Acts 12.23. as disdaining to hear a wretch take
that glory to him, which was proper only to God; after this sort would all
the creatures rise up against the ungodly, and spit their poison on them, for
bringing such a curse upon them, if the Lord did not bridle and restrain their
wills, wherein he magnifieth his mercy greatly, that he will suffer the Sun
to shine upon the unjust, and makes his patience famous through the earth,
that he will suffer them so long that provoke him so much, all which is done to
bring them if it were possible to repentance.

Another thing we note here is, how long these creatures shall be in this
subjection; and that is, until the sons of God shall be revealed or taken up
to heaven, which verse. 21. is called a glorious liberty. Out of which observe,
that all these inferior creatures shall be restored to their first perfection
wherein they were made, at the end and consummation of all things, when God
shall be all in all; for as we, 1 Ioh. 3.3; when Christ shall be made manifest,
shall be like him, and see him as he is, which now we behold but as in a
glass, 1. Corinthians. 13.12. so is it certain there shall be a new heaven, and a
new earth after us, and a restitution of the creatures to their auncie testate,
as is said, Revel. 2.1.5. I make all things new; and 2. Pet, 3.10. The earth
with the works that are therein shall be burnt up: out of which some gather,
that this is not meant of material fire, but spoken figuratively, and in a
borrowed phrase, of a consumption by fire, that is not blown as Job calls
it, that is by the immediate breath and power of God. But I take it, it is
meant of material fire, because the Apostle spoke before of the drowning of
the old world, which was by material water. Howeuer it be, this is the meaning
of the holy Ghost in that place, that as the gold is cast into the fire not to
be consumed and burnt, but to be purified and refined, so as the substance
remains, and nothing lost but the dross: even so shall it be with the heaven,
the earth, and the creatures, they shall not utterly be consumed and wasted
with fire, but made the finer, because all corruption which was wrapped about
them by the curse, shall be burnt out; for as the substance of our bodies shall
remain, and the change shall be only to fire out the sin that hangs on us,
these base bodies being then to be made glorious; so the substance of all the
creatures shall continue, only this they shall be changed and turned into
incorruption and liberty: and after they are thus refined, there is no
question, but they shall endure; for as their presence is requisite for the
more glorious triumph at the marriage of the lamb, Revel. 21.9. so shall it be
likewise, for the continual praise and thanksgiving that is to made and had
for the advancement of the bride, through the love of that Lamb Christ Jesus.
But now if any will ask in the pride of his conceit, why all these creatures
shall then remain, and how long, and to what use; we say, these are endless
questions, which breed strife and contentions rather then, as S. Paul says, 1.
Timot. 1.4. godly edifying, which is by faith; such as that wherewith the
Epicure troubled himself; to know what God did before he made the earth: which
one well answers; That he made hell for them that are so inquisitiue and
curious: for, as Peter says, 2. Pet. 3.16. these are places of Scripture,
which they that are unstable and unlearned, pervert to their own destruction.
Let it suffice the Lord has opened the fountain so wide to us, that we know,
Ioh. 6.51. we feeding on Christ, shall live for ever. Therefore leaving these
speculations and school points, let us resort to the use and profit S. Peter
makes of this general dissolution; that since these things must perish, what
manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? for what
other treasure soever we take to, it shall be consumed with our selves,
holiness and the fear of God having only the wings to fly through all fires,
and to carry us to that heaven where dwells righteousness; which Revel. 21.
is described to be of that beauty and stateliness, and of that worth and
comeliness, as if the prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. had not too much blinded
the eyes of worldlings that they esteem of faith but as of a fable, it were
not possible but they should be ravished with expectation after it, there being
at every gate an Angel standing to let in Gods children, and to keep out the
fearful and unbelievers, adulterers, and ungodly persons.

Again here learn, that the creatures waiting with us, and having as it were
the same affection we have to be unchained of corruption, and at the liberty
of the sons of God, they belong only to us that are his children, and are
sanctified for our use through prayer and thanksgiving; for as through us they
fell, so through us they shall be restored, and therefore wait both with us and
on us in the mean time; and the wicked are but usurpers over them, snatching
them against their wills, and abusing of them to their lusts, as the
voluptuous Jews did, who feeding upon that was none of theirs, while the
meat, Psalm. 78.31. was yet in their mouths, the wrath of the Lord, Numb.
11.33. was kindled and consumed them: and even so at length shall the wicked be
chased out of the world, Job. 18.18. and for his theft in ravening upon that is
none of his, as God himself says, Job 39.13: he shall be shaken out of the
corners of the earth; for that they enjoy is none of theirs, but belongs as
truly to us as a man accounts that his own which he gets by his honest
labor: and in that they abound more with them here then Gods children to whom
of right they appertain, it is certain the glory of Gods elect shall be the
greater in heaven for the want of the creatures here on earth, and the more
the wicked enjoy here the greater shall their torments be in hell; for that,
is Luke 16.25. the objection of Abraham to stop the course of Dives his
petition who was in torment; Remember, says he, thou had thy pleasure in thy
life, and therefore for thy pleasure thou art tormented in thy death: for God
sends not all his plagues at once upon the wicked, but suffers him to have
his seeking, that he may be satiate with his own way, and that desiring,
Proverb. 12: 12. the net of evils, he may be hereafter tied and ensnared with
the cords of his own sin.

Again, observe hence for the conclusion of this point, that all the creatures
in heaven and earth do serve for the furthering of our salvation, and are
ready and willing to do us good, except the devil, and those that shall be
damned: for we know the red sea ran back and became dry land for the passage
of the Israelites, Exodus 14.21. The bitter waters Exodus 15.25. were made sweet
by the casting in of a tree, to stanch their thirst. The river Jordan returned
backward, Psalm. 114.3. till the people of God were passed over. Water came
forth of the stony rock Exodus 17.6. that the Israelites might drink
according as they desired. The Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down for a whole day, Josh. 10.13. at the prayer of Joshua.
At the prayer of Hezekiah, Esaias 38.8: the Sun went 10. degrees backward
contrary to the course of nature. The small quantity of meal and oil which
the widow of Zareptah had, through the word spoken by Eliah 1. Kings 17.16.
wasted not till the Lord sent rain upon the earth. The waters being twice
smitten with the cloak of Eliah 2. Kings 2.8.14. divided themselves twice this
way and that way for the passage over both of Eliah and Elisha. The waters of
Jericho 2. Kings 2.21. by the sprinckling of a little salt at the spring head
were healed of the Lord for the good of his servants that death come no more
thereof. The furnace Dan. 3.23. though it was heat seven times more then it was
wont to be, had no power so much as to scortch the garments of the three
children that would not obey the kings commandment in a matter of Idolatry:
neither had the Lions, Dan. 6.12. though ravenous in themselves, any mouths to
open against Daniel, that made his prayers to God, notwithstanding it was
against the decree of Darius the king, and so much solicited by his malicious
and idolatrous nobles. Since then the creatures of God are thus ready to hide
and smother their strength where they may hurt us, to open and enlarge their
power when they may defend us; and since the Angels of God Psalm. 91.11. watch
over us in our ways, let nothing make us so foolish since we run well, but
to hold on, for the tyrants rage can not last, but the wrath of God is a soft
consuming fire: and let us venture our bodies which are but dust for the
salvation of our souls, which are the Lords.

1 Thessalonians. chap. 5. verse. 19.20.




THe words themselves yield two points to be considered: first, a commandment
or an exhortation equal to a commandment: secondly, the means how this
commandment may be best obeyed, and the exhortation most fruitfully received.
The commandment is, Quench not the spirit: the means to perform this, is:
Despise not prophesying: that is, the wise and found interpretation of the
Scriptures, by them whose lips preserve knowledge, and whose feet are shod
with the Gospel of peace: for so prophesying is to be taken for an application
of the word, and a teaching to edification.

In the first, observe: forasmuch as nothing can be quenched but fire, why this
Metaphor or borrowed speech is used of the Apostle, to express the Spirit by
fire. The like phrase and speech is used, Mat. 3.11. when the servant baptizing
his master, lest it should seem a disparagement and debasing of him, does
protest in great humility, that he did it but with water; but there came one
after him, that should baptize them with the holy Ghost and with fire: that is,
with the supernatural power of the holy Ghost, as it were fire. And in John
7.38. the spirit is resembled to water, meaning thereby, that who so is not
cleansed of the holy Ghost as with water, cannot be saved.

Now the spirit is compared to fire in respect of the four properties that be
in fire: first, the nature of ^^re is to consume any matter that is combustible
or may be burned: even so the holy Ghost is sent into us to wast and consume
all the lusts of our flesh, as self-love, pride of life, and whatsoever else
exalts it self above the purity and simplicity of the Gospel. Secondly,
fire does refine every thing that can be purified: even so the holy Ghost does
change and refine our affections, and purges us from that dross and filth of
the earth, that cleaves so near to us, and hangs so fast upon us, and
keeps us still in the furnace of affliction, till we come to that perfection
of eternal blessedness, that the flesh dying, the spirit may live in the day
of the Lord. Thirdly, fire does relieve by warmth all those subjects that be
capable of life, and those that be benumbed it comfort, and reuiueth them
that be half dead through cold: even so the holy Ghost not only warmeth him
that is benumbed in his soul, but quickens him that is stark dead in
pleasures and other corruptions of the world, and does kindle in him a holy
zeal to the Lords truth, and raises him up to the hope of eternal life,
being before (though he seemed to live through the dullness and obstupefaction
of his flesh) drouping or rather dead in sin. Fourthly, fire gives light to
them that before sat in darkness, and shows them the way how to walk: so
the holy Ghost does enlighten our judgments and understandings, that we may be
able to discern and desire to thirst after that acceptable will of the Lord
unto salvation.

Secondly, consider since the holy Ghost cannot be quenched but where he is,
how the Apostle writing to the whole Church of Thessalonica, assumeth and
takes it as granted, that they all had this spirit: and this ought to be the
general judgment of all men, so long as a people conform themselves to the
outward obedience and sound of the Gospel, to presume and hope the best of
all. For no doubt many in this Church were accounted Saints, which were
detestable hypocrites, yet in respect of this mingling of the seed and tares
together, the Apostle medleth not with them, leaving that to the last
judgment: but signeth them all with this excellent badge of having the spirit:
for so ought it to be, unless their sins be enormous and notorious, and that
they sin and offend with so high a hand, as that they refuse the censure of
the Church, and to be thereby reformed; for then they are utterly to be cut
off and separate from the rest of the Saints. And this intermingling of
hypocrites and the elect together in the visible church, makes that oftentimes
the Apostle in a general style disswadeth and dehorteth all from that which
can be verified in the wicked only; as when he says, Heb. 3.12. Take heed
none of you be so unfaithful as to fall from the grace of the living God;
which is true only in the hypocrite: and so does he sometimes generally
exhort to that which is true only in the elect: as when he says to the
Philippians, Work fourth your salvation with fear and trembling: Phil. 2.12.
for all the Ministers of God must know that there will always be one Judas
among the Disciples, Mat. 26.22.
whom Christ only could discover: but for them that cannot see the heart, they
must offer the cup of grace to all; for the tares cannot be severed from the
wheat till that great day of separation come, when then the Lord by his Angels
shall cut us all down, and shall bind the tares in bundles by themselves, to
be cast from the Lords floor into perpetual tormenting flaming fire.

Again learn, since the spirit must not be quenched, that it follows of
necessity every one of Gods children must have it, and think it so far from
shame, as they must esteem it to be their only victory and crown that they
do enjoy it. For first, by this spirit there is made a distinction and
differnce between us and the reprobate: and it is like the blood ( Exodus
12.22.) that was stricken upon the door tops, which shall make the Lord to
pass over us, and not to suffer the destroier to come near us, when he goes
to smite the Egyptians: and as Paul says, 2. Cor. 13.5. The spirit of God is
in us all except we be reprobates. Secondly, from this spirit we receive
direction, whereby to guide the steps and actions of our life, that we snarle
not at the Ministers like dogs, nor run after the world like Demas. 2. Tim.
4.10.
Thirdly, in this spirit we reap such comfort as all the lightsome pleasures
of this life are but as shadows, and all the burdensome profit of this life of
no value in respect of that joy we take to be transformed into the image of
the son of God, whereby the slanderous speeches, and impious and sacrilegious
scurrility of some is notably condemned, who in scorn and derision do call
such as are fearful to offend, and do tremble and quake at the name of
sin, (men of the spirit, Puritanes, precise, and such like) they themselves
shrinking up sin in a narrow scantling, as if none offended but they that lie
in the goal. But what is he, that having a waspe about him will stay till he
be stung, and not avoid it at the first buzzing? What is he when he has room
enough, that will ride upon the edge of a pit, and venture his falling? Nay, 1.
These. 5.22.
it must be the wisdom of the Saints of God to fly as far from sin as can
be, and (as the Apostle says) to shun all appearance of evil: and we must not
be fraighted from the rule of conscience, nor from walking in a strait course
of religion by any such profane and ungodly mouths, which carry the poison of
Aspes upon their tongues, and the gall of bitterness within their hearts: and
let them know, that in this state wherein they stand, they are as surely the
devils as the devil is not Gods; for in whomsoever this spirit of God dwells
not and works not, that man shall assuredly be damned.

Now this exhortation, not to quench the spirit, is very weighty: for by this
the Apostle teaches and insinuates of the fearful declinations of some that
have begun in the spirit and have ended in the flesh; that haee saluted Christ
in the market place, and yet never entertained him in their houses. For that
the spirit may be quenched, Mat. 25.3. Mark. 4.4.
is proved by the five virgins that had their lamps but wanted oil; and by
the parable of the four sorts of grain, whereof only one shall be saved: for
thereby is manifest, that the Gospel may be received with joy, yea it may take
root to grow up to a stalk, and from a stalk to a blade, yea from a blade to
an ear, and yet shall never ripen: but when it is gone so far, shall either
be burned up by the heat of persecution, or choked by the thorns of this life,
and shall never come to perfection.

Again that parable which carries with it a real truth, of the spirit which
being cast out of a man walks in dry places: for so much is Satan cast out
as we are enlightened in our judgments; Luke 11.24.
but when he returns he finds it more garnished then before: that is, after he
has once refused and trodden under foot that light of knowledge which he had,
he is possessed with such darkness, as he is wholly left a prey for Satan.
It is also proved, that the spirit may be quenched by plain places of
Scripture, as that of Ezechiel 18.24. the man that lives in righteousness a
long time, after falling away, shall be judged in his unrighteousness: and 2.
Peter 2.22. the dog is returned to his vomire, and the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the ruire. Some will say, True it is, the spirit may be
quenched in (...) hypocrite, but never in the elect: as 1. John 3.9. He that
is borne of God, sins not. And whom God loved once he loves always. This
is true; but then look that thou stand upon good and sound evidence when
Satan troubles thee: for thou know how the burning lamps went out, how the
seed in the blade came to nothing; and it is certain that a man illuminate may
sin against the holy Ghost; and therefore see that thou have good title, and
groundest upon good interest when thou shall be vexed with temptations: For
Romans 8.13. if we live after the flesh we shall die; and as many as are led by
the spirit of God, they are the sons of God: and who has this spirit, look
1. John 3.14. We are translated from death to life because we love the
brethren: for he that has a soul must needs breath, and he that has the
spirit must needs fulfill the fruits of the spirit.

Secondly, albeit the elect have received an everlasting spirit, whereof the
Lord can never repent, and which can never utterly be quenched; yet let us
fear and tremble; for in the elect it may so be obscured and overwhelmed,
that some of the graces of Gods spirit, nay most of the graces, yea the
chiefest of the most, nay all almost of Gods graces, may in them be quenched,
as David prays Psalm. 51. Lord create in me a new spirit; and yet he had it in
him: for in the same place he says, Lord take not thy spirit from me. So as
this exhortation, not to quench the ^^^rit, has a double fruit; in the
hypocrite, to make him inexcusable; in the elect, to make them more circumspect
and careful in their conversation: for we must not be secure, in as much as
albeit the spirit of God in those that be his, cannot be absolutely quenched
and wholly put out, yet there may be a great abatement of the spirit, as not
to be recovered without great touch and terror of conscience.

For first, while a man feels the presence of this spirit, there is given him
such joy, and with that a singular peace in the inward man, and such security
of his salvation, that he feels the love of God spiritually to do him as much
good as his meat; and upon this assurance he does as it were behold the heavens
open for the Lord to embrace him living or dying, and he knows himself to be
sealed up in the blood of Christ unto eternal life. Now if this spirit be
gone, and absenteth it self in spiritual operation, together with this is our
former joy abated, and the foundation of our hope begins to be shaken, and
being weak of our selves, we are surprised with many fears; and suspecting
our selves to be cast from the fear of God, and our sins arising and flying
up like smoke in our eyes, we almost are brought to the case of Cain, Genesis
4.12. to think that whosoever meets us will slay us.

Secondly, as upon the enjoying and presence of the Lords spirit, there springs
an unspeakable joy and comfort in our hearts, and we find that the Lords love
breeds in us an heavenly assurance of eternal peace, and fills our hearts
with a mutual and reciprocal love of God, our love streaming and flowing from
the well head of the Lords love: then it follows, that the less we feel the
Lords love toward us, the less we love him again; and then we droope and
languish in our selves, our prayers be faint; our meditations cold; and when we
should watch, we with the Disciples fall asleep: and we feeling not the life
of the spirit, Mat. 26.43.
we are greatly abated in our love of holy and Christian exercises; and we then
only keep a general course in our profession, and perform every good thing
as it were tedious unto us, like Eutychus, Act. 20.9.10. who came to here
Paul's sermon, but was overcome with sleep.

Thirdly, when the spirit is abated by the diminishing of the Lords love
toward us, and the withdrawing of our love from him, then because we have
grieved the spirit, the Lord suffers us to fall into fearful and
presumptuous sin: as he did suffer David to fall into the sin of whoredom
with Bathsheba, aggrauated with the murder of Vriah, wherein he lay frozen by
Satan's subtilty nine months at the least before he confessed it to God: for it
appears 2. Sam. 11.27. that the child was borne before Nathan the Prophet
came to him: and howsoever no doubt he could no more escape the prick of
conscience, then he could stay the panting of his heart; yet before that time
not a word to God of any serious humiliation for his adultery. So as never any
of Gods children sinned more grievously then he, Mat. 26.70.
except Peter, who was not so much kindled at the fire of the high Priest, as
he was cold in his soul: for first, he lied, in that he said, he knew not
Christ: secondly, burst forth into swearing: and thirdly, gave himself to the
devil if it were he that was with Christ: which the Lord most justly suffered
to befall him as a great chastisement since he neglected the loving forewarning
of his master: and though he was never so much elect, yet would the spirit
never comfort him, till he had with drawn himself to bewail his sin
bitte^^. All which is lively expressed Cant. 3.1. In my bed by night (says the
church) I sought him that my soul loved, I sought h^^ ^^^t I found him not, I
went and rose, and walked about the city, and by the stree^s, and by open
places I sought him but found him not: thereby to declare, that when the Lord
once withdraws his face from us, how hardly we shall win his favor again.

Fourthly, when the Lord has suffered us to fall thus far, as we shall even
seem to be swallowed up of hell already; though in the end he will restore
thee, yet first he will suffer thee to bear the shame of thy sin in this
life: Genesis 9.23. 1. Sam. 15.14.
as Noah for his drunkenness to be a scorn to his own children: and David
for his adultery, to be thrust out of his kingdom by his own son, which
was such a grief to him, as all the joy of his sons life did not so much
comfort him, as the sorrow of his death did wound him, he mourning for Absolon,
(2. Sam. 19.33.) as if he had doubted of his salvation. But happy is he, that
has the thorns in his sides in this life, and that is afflicted here: for
though the Lord will neeuer take his loving kindness from thee, yet he will
scourge thee, not for any satisfaction of his justice, for Christ has paid
all, but only for a chastisement.

Lastly, besides all this, when the spirit is gone and abated, it shall be such
a terror to thy conscience, such smart and vexation to thy whole mind, as thou
were better be almost in hell, then feel this great want, and sustain this
great torment of recovering it again. For first, when thou considerest the
loss of thy former pains, which thou spentest in the mortifying of thy flesh:
that secondly, when the spirit is abated, Mark. 9.18.
the power of Satan is increased, and that he cannot be dispossessed without
great violence, and even rending thee in pieces, as appears by the dumb man
in the Gospel. Thirdly, that if thou die at this time, (as Ezech. 18.24.) all
thy former righteousness shall not be remembered, but thou shall die in thy
present sin: and fourthly, that as a man dangerously sick and somewhat
recovered, and after by misgouernment falling into a relapse, it does
exasperate and increase the disease: and as a wound half healed to come to a
new incision, cannot be without greater pain then before: and for a man half
in his journey, to return back again, when he must needs go through,
cannot be but a great coffeehouse: So when thou remembrest the great
conflicts thou had at first, when thou did enter thy name into the school
of Christ, and considerest that now thou must abide greater, it shall be half
a hell to thee, to be brought seriously without guile of spirit, from the
detestation of thy sin: as we may see Psalm. 32.4. before David could be
brought to confess his sin of filthiness and of murder, he says, that
very care had eaten his bones, not but that in his private chamber he had
confessed it to the Lord: but before he could come to task his conscience, and
to set it as it were upon the rack to be rent in pieces by his confession of
it before men, and to abide patiently the shame of the world for it, he seemed
to be plunged into the deep of deepes, as himself says: Out of the deepes,
O Lord, have I cried unto thee. Even so when the spirit of the Lord is abated
in thee, thou shall find it will not be regained by some slight work, and
ssubbring up a short prayer: as, Lord have mercy upon me: but thou must come to
the case of David, even to pine and wast away, and to have the moisture dried
up within thee: yea, consider his tedious travel before he could repent
suddenly. And if he was beaten thus far of the Lord with Scorpions, of whom
the Lord had protested, that he was a man after his own heart, shall thou
think by a pang of devotion and superficial prayer, to recover that sweet
comfort thou have lost in the Lords spirit? Nay know, that if thou temptest the
Lord so far as to withdraw his spirit from thee, it shall cost the dear
before thou can enjoy it again: and if thou break forth into sighs and
groans which fill the heavens, even in this does the Lords mercy greatly
appear* for he might give thee up into hardness of heart, and never trouble
himself to restore his spirit again unto thee. But thy sorrow must be so
great, thy prayers so fervent, and thy sighs so many, as to cry out with
David, Psalm. 51.8. Heal the bones, O Lord, which thou have broken. Let us
beware then how we distemper our selves spiritually, for fear the arrowhead of
the Lords wrath should rankle in our sides; and let us take heed with the
Apostle, how we grieve this spirit: for if Adam might have had the whole spirit
taken from him in respect of his Apostasy, who was perfect in his creation,
how much more may we, that have received but the earnest of the spirit, and
the first fruits thereof in Christ Jesus? Howbeit as the evil spirit in an
hypocrite may be cast out, and yet he may return to his vomit again, (2.
Pet. 2.22.) and his casting out was but in regard of his enlightening for the
time, and he was not gone out indeed: so in the elect the spirit, and the
working of the spirit, may be interrupted for a season, but it cannot clean be
taken away.

Again consider, where it is said, Quench not the spirit: that all Scripture
commands always the contrary to that it forbids: as 2. Tim. 1.6. the
contrary virtue to this here spoken of, is commanded: I charge thee (says
Paul to Timothy) that thou stir up the graces of God which be in thee: the
word in Greek signifies. To keep the fire burning: giving us to understand,
that this spirit is a flame kindled by the holy Ghost, which Satan, the flesh,
and the world labor to blow out: so much the more careful therefore must we
be, to foster it and maintain it, that it never go out. Here then must be
considered the sleights of Satan-to blow it out, and always by the clean
contrary we must labor to keep it in: for as the flesh lusts against the
spirit, so must the spirit likewise against the flesh.

The first motion therefore Satan stirs up in us to quench the spirit, is to
lust after evil, not to lust after nothing: which temptation he threw into the
eyes of David, as he walked upon the roof of the Kings palace, (2. Sam.
11.2.3.) to lust after Bathsheba, Vriabs wife. As earnestly then as the flesh
lusts after evil, so earnestly and more must the spirit lust after good
things, as to say with the Prophet David: I am ready upon every occasion to do
thy will, O God: neither yet must we not deceive our selves, for every lusting
after good things is not of the spirit: for it is easy to do many good
things, wherein thy affections are not strained, and to abstain from many
evil things, to which thou art not tempted: but thou shall know whether the
spirit do fight against the lusts of the flesh by this: if any thing do
directly oppugn the affections of the flesh, if thou take part with the
spirit, and cross thy affections in this, thou maintainest and do cherish
the spirit. As David (1. Sam. 25.13.) upon a churlish answer given by Nabal, in
a passion of anger was resolved to kill him, but upon the entreaty of Abigail
Nabals wife, he was pacified, and entered into consideration of the greatness
of the sin of murder, and blessed the God of Israel, and the counsel of
Abigail, that had kept him from shed ding of blood.

Secondly, if Satan cannot get us lust for evil, he will strive to get us
either do nothing, or else to spend our time in trifles and in pastimes, to
drive away dumps with vain delights: which may sometimes be used for
recreations to make us more fit to walk in our callings: but if we play to
play, that is, suffer our hearts to be stolen away, and snared in the
pleasures of this life, then the Lord will judge us as unthrifty servants, that
have not gained by our talents. Our labor therefore must be on the contrary,
since every man has his task set him, and God is our ouerseer, though
presently not our revenger, that we fall not asleep with new wine: but
according to the Apostles rule, Ephe. 5.16.18.
that we redeem the time from vanity, and walk worthy of that calling
wherein God has set us.

Thirdly, if Satan cannot blow out the fire of the Lords spirit in us by this,
but that we resolve in our hearts to do some good; if we will needs do it,
he persuades no to do it by and by, but to pawse upon the matter, and to
procrastinate and defer it by this reason; We may as well do it another time as
now. But we must labor the contrary, unless we will suppress the power and
soundness of the spirit; for if we be not apt to day, we shall be less apt to
morrow: and it is good to take the time while it is offered, for we know not
whether our life shall pass this present occasion. Christ comes not to thee
at all times, and therefore if he knock now and we let him not in, though
hereafter we pine away with the desire of having him, we shall not get him;
according to that speech of the Prophet Esaias 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is nigh: for though he suffers long, yet
will he not be mocked. Therefore in doing good, we must resemble and be like
those that having earnest business, as soon as they wake in the morning,
start out of their beds to avoid and shake off their sluggishnesse, and say
not as the stothfull do, Prou. 6.10. Yet a little sleep, yet a little
slumber, etc. for when we are moved and resolved to perform any good thing,
we may not grieve the spirit by deferring it, but we must do it presently, like
Abraham, Genes. 18.6. who made haste, and ran in to prepare meat and
entertainment for the Angels: for we must not look upon the clouds if we will
sow, nor gather the winds, if we will reap, nor defer good motions and actions
if we will receive comfort by them.

yet strive by continuance in them if it be possible to make the spirit easy;
and though at first thou feel great difficulty in praying, yet resolve to
continue in it some long time in ripping up thy sins by prayer: and if at the
last by often strife thou can come to pray with ease, and to feel the
sweetness of the Lords mercy comforting thee in thy perplexed thoughts, and in
thy weak petitions, it is a notable sign of thine election.

Lastly, Satan would quench the spirit by this; if we will not be worse, he
would make us not to be better, nor to go forward in religion. We will all
grant, that we must profess the Gospel: now since Satan cannot weane us
from this opinion, he labors to keep us at a scantling in this porfession:
but it is certain, he that goes not forward in the porfession of the truth,
goes backward. Have thou not more zeal now then thou had when the
Gospel was first brought thee? then fear lest the spirit be much quenched.
Would thou have a man stand at a stay till he come to his full stature? or
one half cured to send away the Physician? or eat and not be nourished? or
spend of thy stock, and not increase it? And why should thou not be as
wise in the spirit as in these things? Would thou have the Israelites make
league with the Canaanites? Deuteronomy. 7.16.
No: they must not cease till they have cast them all out of the land. And so
if thou be at league with any sin, it hinders thy growth in religion: and
if thou come not to a full and perfect age in Christ, thou can not be saved.
Thou must know though thou have thy lamp burning, yet the oil wastes with
flaming: and if thou have not oil to supply thy want, thy light will go out,
and thy self shall sit in darkness. Yet so far has this policy of Satan
prevailed, that many who in King Edward and Queen Mary's days were zealous
for the Lord, are now frozen in their dregs; and they that before heard the
joyful message of salvation with singular comfort, and could not have their
thirst staled but by the waters of wisdom, are now by this long peace grown
secure, and waxen neither hot nor cold. Of these men to say no worse, they are
right Laodiceans, against whom the wisdom of the holy Ghost long since
pronounced a fearful doom, that the Lord would spue them out of his mouth:
for shall Christ, who is his Fathers counselor, while he was in the flesh
increase in wisdom, Luke 2.52. and shall we who are as blind as Beetles,
think it enough for us to retain the rudiments and first principles of
religion, and not to wax strong and able in the truth of God? Nay, certain it
is, if we continue children in understanding, and do not grow from love to
patience, 1. Cor. 14.20. 2. Pet. 1.5 6.
from patience to temperance, from one grace of God to another; if we increase
not, I do not mean in peevish and preposterous zeal, but in sound
substantial zeal; and from being fed with milk, to desire strong meat, it
shall be as loathsome for the Lord to take us that be thus decayed in our
souls, and which from good substantial Christians are fallen to be most
miserable beggarly banke-rupts, as for a man to receive again into his
stomach that he has once gorged up. As Satan therefore labors to quench
this spirit by our coldness in religion, and by standing at a stay in
Christianity: so let the spirit of God in us strive for the contrary, Reu.
22.11.
that he that is righteous may be more righteous, and that we may increase in
faith, and be daily set on fire with the zeal of Gods truth; for we may not
be worse than the ground, which by the rain is made more fruitful; not then
the herbs, which by the Sun are made more flourishing.

Here some will say, he that is once faithful, and whom the Lord has once
sealed, that man cannot have the spirit taken from him: therefore though the
operation and working of the spirit be for a time hindered and interrupted, yet
it shall be restored again, because the Lord has promised, that whom he
loves he will always love. It is true, that if any fall with David he may and
shall rise again with David, if he pertain to God, but then he must
earnestly and soundly repent as David did: and to come to a true and serious
confession of thy sin indeed, it shall be the hardest work, and cost thee
dearer then ever any thing did. Again, who would be so foolish to make of a
particular and rare example a general ground, as to fall with David for
company, to rise with him for company: and because thou feast one sore wounded
with a dagger to be cured, to desire to be stricken with the same dagger to be
healed with that man for company. Nay if any has fallen from that grace he has
once received, let him pray that he may rise again; but let him know, that
being fallen, if he had all the hearts in the world, and could shed fountains
of tears, he should find them all too little and insufficient to lament
soundly, so as the Lord would come again to comfort him.

Lastly, here may be doubted, since the spirit must not be quenched, and that
as has been taught before, it must be maintained, or else it will decay:
whether it be in us to nourish this spirit as well as to quench it. To this we
answer with Paul, Philipp. 2.12.13. Make an end of your salvation with fear
and trembling: for it is God that works in you both the will and the deed,
even of his good pleasure: so as we must fear, but we must also work. And
this spirit cannot be idle in us, so as we must not stand gaping, looking that
the Lord should fill us with his graces; but we must work, because the Lord
works upon us. So then the Lord does all merely of his grace. But here is
humility and diligence commended to us; and therefore does the Lord by his
Ministers exhort us to good works, to make us more circumspect and cheerful
in doing them: for the holy Ghost works not absolutely and simply in us, but
vouchsafes means, it self being the chief efficient to prepare the mind to
receive that grace to which we are exhorted; even as we all live by Gods
providence, yet not without bread. And as the safety of a child's riding
stands in the fast holding of the father: yet the words of the father, to bid
him hold fast, makes the child more wary: even so exhortation makes us more
wary in avoiding sin, for we are not dead stones, but living instruments:
and therefore as we perform lively actions of the body, so must we have
spiritual operations of the mind; the fruit and benefit whereof, is
discerned by the power and strength of the holy Ghost, who works both in us
and by us.

Now for the second point, which is the means how the commandment of not
quenching the spirit may be best obeyed? It is by making much of the Word and
the Preachers thereof: for by prophecy, is meant such as have the word of
exhortation in their mouths, and of whom it is said, Esa. 59.21. The spirit
that I put into their mouths, shall never depart from thee nor thy seed.
Whereby we learn, that as the spirit is given by the word preached, so is it
also maintained by the word preached; and as there is no light without the
Sun, no fructifying of the earth without the windows of heaven be open, nor
no lamp burning without oil: so is there no faith begun and continued without
we be established in the word of grace. Now if we find sometimes no heart in
the word, but that it is irksome to the ear and unpleasant to the sound, let
us not therefore refuse the means, and exclude our selves from hearing: for
oftentimes a stomach is gotten by eating, and though the spirit be quenched in
us in this grace, yet let us come where this grace is offered: and though we
hear not sometimes with such a relish as we would and ought to do, yet let
us pray that our hearing may do us some good; and that by hearing our stomach
may come again. And if we hear often and forget it, yet let us do that in
this kind of sickness, which we do in the distemper of our natural bodies,
eat the oftener, if we eat much and cannot retain it to digest it: so if we
cannot remember what we hear, let us hear the oftener, because our memories
are so weak: so as if there be any preaching, (not neglecting our callings)
let us partake of that food, and the Lord may in mercy so much bless our
diligence, as we may by one Sermon learn so much, as may comfort us in the
hour of death.

Lastly, as in general diseases of the body, (as in an ague) all parts are
weak, but principally the stomach, yet it receives a medicine, and the
disease it self provoke us to that: so if Satan have weakened thy stomach
so much, as thou have no list to hear the word, let this dullness be so far
from discouraging thee, as that it make thee lust and desire the more after it.
For as Paul said to the Centurion, Act. 27.31. Except these abide in the ship
ye cannot be safe, when they of themselves would needs have gone forth: and
yet Paul had the absolute promise before, that himself and his whole company
should be safe: but this was conditional, if they obeyed the means, that is,
if they abode in the ship. Even so, they that despise the means of hearing,
refuse the mercy of reforming their lives, and of mollifying their hearts;
whether they refuse of rashness; as hear or hear not it is all one: or of
distrust; as, though I hear it will do me no good: for assuredly except we
hear as often as we can, we cannot maintain this spirit: and going out of
this ship, that is, departing from the word preached, it is not possible to be
saved.

TITUS chap. 2. verse. 11, 12.




THE Apostle in the 9. and 10. verses going before did exhort servants that
were professors, to show themselves obedient to their masters, according to the
flesh in all things without offense to God, and charge them, that though they
be in a base and low degree, yet they should labor to adorn the doctrine of
Christ. Now in the 11. verse he adds a forcible reason to his former
exhortation: because that grace, that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, which,
etc. has appeared to all men, that is, to all conditions of men, that it might
instruct them to lay aside prophannesse, concupiscence of the eyes, and all
things that savor of the world, and to live justly toward men, and religiously
toward God, waiting for the glory to be revealed.

The words divide themselves into two parts: the first commends the
excellency of the teacher, which does instruct us: namely the grace of God:
the second is the matter of instruction: and this is to be considered two
ways: first, by showing what things we are to forbear, which is twofold:
first ungodliness in respect of religion: secondly, worldly lusts as
furtherers to prophannesse. Secondly, by showing what things we must incline
unto, which be three: first, sobriety of life: secondly, to live righteously
toward men, for the duties of the second table: thirdly, to live religeouslie
in respect of the worship of God. Last in verse 13: there is propounded an
effectual means whereby we may be the better affected, and more earnestly
provoked (...) follow this counsel, which is, an expectation or hoping for of
a more excellent glory, which shall be given at the appearing of the Lord
Jesus: for hardly can a man thoroughly mortify himself, unless he propound to
himself a more excellent reward in the life to come.

For the first, that is, the grace of God, which is the teacher: this that is
so called here, may be judged and resolved to be the Gospel, or the doctrine
of the Gospel, by the end of the tenth verse, that ye may (says the Apostle)
adorn the doctrine of the Gospel, which is called grace, by the effect it
works in the hearts of men, namely, because it brings us to the grace of
Christ through the remission of our sins in his precious blood. And therefore
Paul ( Romans 1.16.) calls the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes, whatsoever he be Jew or Grecian: and Ephesians. 1.13.
shows how that by trusting and believing in the word of truth the Gospel of
our salvation, we are sealed with the holy spirit of promise. And 2. These.
2.10. the reason is given, why men are rejected and cast from Christ, because
they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. For as S.
Peter says, (1. Pet. 4.17.18.) Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
and what shall be the and of them that obey not the Gospel?

Secondly, this grace of God does persuade us thus to live as is here
prescribed, by this token, that it brings salvation: so as observe, he does
not say simply: The grace of God has appeared and teaches us, etc. but that
grace which brings salvation, does beseech and teach us to reform our lives,
because salvation is already purchased. Even so Christ and his forerunner John
Baptist, ( Matt. 3.2.) preached amendment of life for remission of sins,
because the kingdom of God was at hand: that is, the Gospel, so called,
because none shall enter into that kingdom, that has not first entered into
the kingdom of grace. So Paul when he had folded and enwrapped all under
sin, and had taught the points of our predestination, ( Romans 9.10.) in the
12. chapter, and 1. verse, he beseeches them by the bowels of the Lord Jesus,
to be renewed in their minds, and reformed in their lives. And Romans 6.12. he
exhorts them, that sin may not reign nor have dominion over them, because
they are called to the grace of the Gospel to be justified in the blood of
Christ. So Peter (1. Pet. 1.17.) from our redemption draws an exhortation to
new life. If (says he) ye call God father, pass your time in fear: and Paul
(1. Cor. 6.20.) exhorts to glorify God in our members, because we are his,
and not our own, being bought with a great price. So as this is the most
effectual persawsion that can be, ^. Cor. 7.^.
because we are already washed, to keep ourselves clean.

Further observe, that the Gospel being brought in here not simply,
persuading us to purity and cleanness of life, but as bringing salvation with
it: that as all benefits may persuade, so there be three sorts of benefits
especially that may persuade most, of which salvation is the greatest. The
first kind of benefit to persuade by, is deliverance from some great
extremity: the second, is an advancement from a base estate to some high
dignity: the third is a benefit that joins both these together, and this is
most forcible. How far the first of these may prevail, David shows 1.
King. 1.29. who when he would assure Barsheba his wife, that Solomon should
succeed him in his kingdom, to give the best security he could, he protested:
As the Lord lives, that has delivered my soul from adversity, thy son
Solomon shall reign after me: as if he should say, as he was to be thankful
and obedient to the Lord for these his deliverances: so he would pledge and
gage this to her, upon the certainety of Salomons succession. For the second
sort, when from a base condition a man is advanced to some special preferment;
and how this prevails appears in Joseph, Genesis 39.8.9. who by the force of
this argument beats back the assaults of his Lady and Mistress: for he
bearing in mind the special benefits of his master toward him, reasons
thus; I Joseph by my masters favor am now the greatest in all his house, being
at first a bondman, there is nothing but he has committed to my charge, only
thee has he reserved to him self: how is it possible then I should commit
such a villainy to so kind and bountiful a master? making his own advancement
as a bulwark to drive back the siege of his mistress incontinency, thereby
even to stop her mouth by appealing to her own conscience, that weighing how
his master had dealt with him, there could be no excuse for him if he should
commit such a villainy. For the third, wherein both these concur: what heart
can be so ungrateful as not to be persuaded to yield obedience to him that
has performed both these? If a man committing some criminal offense, and when
the stroke was even ready to be given, in that very instant of his anguished
mind, as for death it self, so for so shameful a death, the King should send
him a pardon, and after advance him to some honorable office, thereby to grace
him for his former indignity, and to clear him of his former blemish: if this
man should have any suite recommended to him from his King, which suit should
carry with it some remembrance of his deliverance; were it possible for that
man but to execute this commandment, and to further this suite with great
loyalty? Surely he could not but do it. Let us see then how far the
Gospel may prevail with us since it has brought salvation; which implies
and presupposes that there was damnation before: for we were the heirs of
Satan, without Christ, without light, wrapped in the chains of darkness,
ordained not to the execution of the gibbet, but to be judged after the
passing of a few da^es in trouble and vanity, to be tormented eternally with
the damned: from this has the Gospel brought us: therefore when we are
tempted to sin, we should say unto our selves, As the Lord lives that has
delivered my soul from death, I will not do it: and have this suite commended
unto thee, not to wallow in the mire, by this token, that the Gospel has
saved thee from hell. For the second benefit, it was singular favor to be
freed from the former misery; but the Lord together with that has advanced and
raised us to special dignity, that of the bond-slaues of the devil, we are
made heirs, not of this world only, but of the world to come, fellow heirs
with the Lord Jesus, to be beloved with the same love, and to taste of the same
glory: John 17.22.
so as we may say with Joseph, Thus and thus bountiful has the Lord been
unto me, how can I then commit such wickedness against the majesty, and in
the presence of so good a God?

Hence learn, since the Gospel exhorts us by this saving argument to
reformation of life, whenever we are assaulted inwardly by our own lusts, by
the instrument which is the devils, to use the benefit of this salvation to
stay us from that sin we are tempted to, let it be it were to wantonness,
then let every of us argue thus with himself: And what? shall I use the
members of Christ, bought with such a price as the blood of the Son of God,
and shall I make them the members of an harlot? 1. Cor. 6.15.
shall I thus requit the Lords kindness, and so lightly esteem the riches of
his mercy? Why now he does not command to perform the law, and so be saved;
but because I am already saved he does beseech me to amend my life; and shall I
set no more by all his benefits bestowed, both upon my soul for instruction,
and upon my body for health and comeliness? shall I not remember the manifold
temptations he has freed me from, and the multitude of his compassions
extended toward me? shall I make no more reckning of his favor that has
bestowed on me so many graces, and pardoned so many sins? Far be it from me,
that advisedly and deliberatly I should so despite the Lord as to grieve his
spirit, and dishonor that God that has given me Christ out of his own bosom,
and with Christ all things else, and through him salvation.

Now for the instruction, and first for the things we are to forbear: the
first is ungodliness, that is, not only the superstition of the heathen and
palpable Atheism, but all careless serving of God, when men regard nothing
less then the purity of a good conscience in the service of God, and when they
little respect the true worship of God, but only make a show and a semblance
to serve him: so as the word (ungodliness) does signisie all dispising of him
openly, or serving of him negligently. Now all ungodliness, prophannesse and
urreligiousnesse does touch first the exercises God has appointed to testify
our sincerity: secondly, it touches God himself. For the first, when we come
to hear the word or to pray, if we do not persuade our selves that he that
despises the teacher despises God, as we may see Luke 16.29. by the answer
of Abraham to the rich man, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them. And further, if we do not believe that what so is preached out of the
Bible, shall as fully be executed as if it were now performed, as we may see
Revel. 22.19. this is open ungodliness: and for this diminution of the truth
of Gods word, his part shall be taken out of the book of life; for a man must
judge of ungodliness by the effects of ungodliness, as to say, a man's good
meaning is good belief: for then was Vzziah unjustly punished and smitten with
the Leprosy for burning incense unto the Lord, 2. Chron. 26.19. for his
intention was good, but his action was accursed, because it was not for the
King to deal in the Priests office. So when we hear men say, It were no
matter if there were no more going to Sermons, since there is no more following
of them: these and the like are speeches of open ungodliness; for did ever any
man grow colder for sitting by the fire, or leaner for eating of bread?

The second thing to be eschued, is worldly lusts, which be two fold: first, to
lust after unlawful things, which be either the fleshly desires of a carnal
man in himself, or which may hurt our neighbor, either in name, goods, or
body. Secondly, when we lust after worldly lawful things unlawfully and
immoderatly; both which are set down in three general points by Saint John,
1. Ioh. 2.16. first the lust of the flesh, that is, that the flesh would live
at ease: as we may see by she reasoning of the rich man with himself, Luke
12.19. after great store gotten, Now soul (says he) live at ease, eat,
drink and take thy pastime. Secondly, the lust of the eye, to live wantonly,
and to have an adulterous eye as Euah had, that could not see the fruit, but
she must eat it, Genes. 3.6. and as Achan had, Joshua 7.21. that could not
see the Babylonish garment, but he must have it: and as Shechem had, that
could not see Dinah, but he must ravish her. Thirdly, the pride of life, that
is, the desire of honor, and thirsting for preferments in this life; for it is
impossible for that soul that is surfeited with these things, to carry any
true love toward God, or any burning zeal toward his truth. And these be they
that wrought so forcibly with our first mother, in yielding to the first
temptation that ever was in our flesh: for first the apple seemed fair to the
eye: Genesis 3.6.
secondly, it was good for meat: thirdly, it was good for knowledge, which
implied pride of life, she thinking thereby to be as wise as God. These three
the Gospel denies us of, when we savor so of them, as our greatest care is
to enjoy them, and we affect them more then the righteousness of Gods
kingdom. And as the Gospel teaches us to forbear these things, so also does
our Baptism: for who so is dipped in the water, which represents the blood
of Christ, he is thereby instructed to deny himself, and to hate the works
of the devil: this being a Sacrament, which not only seals to us remission
of sins in the blood of Christ, but also sanctification by the spirit of
Christ; which consists in mortifying the old man, and quickening the new. The
first standing on these two: first, death: secondly, burial: that as we
believe Christ to be dead to obtain pardon for all our sins; so we believe
that he by his obedience obtained the spirit of God to mortify all our
corruptions: and when he went into the grave, our old man was buried with him,
that we might be raised up with him to newness of life: and this is set down
1. Peter 1.2. where he says, We must suffer in the flesh, that is, die in
corruption and in sin daily* even as Christ did in his body. And he that
does not crucify his affections, performs not his vow in Baptism, nor
cannot challenge any part in Christ his death: for he is said to die once to
sin: Non vt peecatum desineret, sed vt peccatum destrueret: not to shake off
sin, for he had none, but to destroy sin which was in us; so as he is sure
to have part in the condemnation of the world, that has not begun to rest in
the corruption of his flesh.

Now for the things which are to be embraced, they are three: first, sobriety:
out of which words learn generally in setting these things that are to be
followed last; That the least corruption is the best perfection in a man: and
therefore first we are here instructed in the negative, not to live ungodly and
wantonly, before he comes to the affirmative, to follow sobriety: and for
this end has the Lord given eight of his commandments hegatiuely, that is,
thou shall not do this, nor thou shall not do that; and but two
affirmatively, thereby showing that our nature ever inclines to the worst. And
that these negatiues, Thou shall not live irreligiously, Thou shall not live
filthily, must first be given in precept before there can be planted any
holiness in us: and our perfection and victory stands in this, to master as
many infirmities as we can, and to run as near as we can to the prize of
Christ his glory. The word sobriety is especially taken in humane learning and
common phrase for the virtue of temperance and continency in our diet, that
we surfeit not; but though it have this strict signification, yet more
generally in the Scripture it is taken for that virtue whereby we so contain
our selves in the outward blessings of this life, and in the applying of the
inward graces of the mind, that we neither surfeit too much in pleasure, nor
presume not too much on knowledge, to be drunken with holiness. For sobriety
in outward blessings Christ gives a caveat, Luke 21.34. Take heed your hearts
be not oppressed with drunkenness and surfeiting: and presently expounds
this to be with the cares of this life, taking his proportion, that a man may
be as drunk with worldly cares, as with beastly quaffing. For the other, that
is, for containing our selves within some just compass in using Gods graces,
Paul ( Romans 12.3.) says: Let no man presume to know above that is given him to
understand, lest by taking too much upon him, and not knowing his own
proportion, he become drunk. And this could Festus see, that too much learning
might make a man proud, though ( Act. 26.24.) he applied it wrongfully to Paul.
Now that we must be temperate in the blessings of this life, is showed by the
parable of them that were invited to the Kings supper, Luke 14.18.
and excused their absence, some by marriage, some by buying of farms and oxen:
all which were in themselves lawful, but yet made unlawful by permitting
their hearts to be stolen away with the riches of iniquity, as Christ
terms them. And to this end also is the parable of four sorts of seeds
cast into the ground, Mark. 4.8.
whereof one only prospers: meaning thereby, that many being earnest
professors, and receiving the seed of the word, so as it rooted, and wanted
nothing but ripening, whereby they themselves knocked as it were at heaven gate,
and yet went cross to hell, because the seed even when it was in the blade,
was blasted and choked with the thornie cares of this life. This Paul had
learned by experience, which caused him (1. Tim. 6.6.) to charge men to be
moderately minded, because many have fallen from the faith by riches; as if he
should say: he that carries this resolution to be rich come of it what will,
will never content hemselfe with the poverty of the Gospel, nor the portion of
Gods childen, the bread of affliction: for the Apostle set not down there
extortioners, or chafferers, or such like, but only speaks of men filled with
the desire of riches, as of the abuse of lawful things. And if this will not
make us wary enough, let us learn of Christ, ( Luke 21.34.) to take heed lest
at the day of judgment the Lord find us heavy with the cares and fetches of
this life. This judgment is general, at the consummation of all things; or
particular, at thy own departure: for as the tree falls so it rests. And
if this will not serve, then let us fear the examples Christ propounds, Luke
17.26.28. in the days of Noah and of Lot; he does not say, they were
unmerciful, or idolatrous, taxing them with any such gross sin, but
recites the general corruption, they eat, they drank, they married: and what
was the end? the flood came and swallowed them up, and fire from heaven came
and consumed them. And in these examples he sets down three sorts of men:
the first followed their pleasures only: they eat and drank. The second
followed their profit only, they bought and sold. The third, that followed
both their pleasure and their profit, the worst of all; they build for their
pleasure, and plant for their profit. So that if the caveat or warning will not
move us in the doctrine, Luke 16.9.
let the example fear us in the sequel. Hereof is it, that they be called
uncertain riches, and deceitful riches, because they so ensnare and entangle
our hearts, that we neglect the means of our eternal peace. And certain it
is, that more go to hell for abusing lawful things, then for using things
simply unlawful: for these are so deformed in their face, as men are ashamed
to use them, the other are so disguised with the outward appearance of some
delightful show, that we embrace them as our friends, that strike the first
stroke to wound us at the heart.

Now to come more nearely to the bounds of sobriety, we must learn, that
sobriety in pleasures stands in three things: first; in a moderation in
meats and drinks: secondly, in recreation: thirdly, in apparel. For the
first, he that does so intoxicate himself with feasting, and so stuff his
belly, as he is made unapt for his calling, such a man does surfeit as well as
he that has so enflamed himself with wine, as he breaks forth into some
open distemper; or so filled his paunch, as he is constrained to regorge it up
again. Yet I do not say, but the cup may sometime ouerflow, and we may at one
time be more cheerful and liberal then at another: for Timothy may drink
wine for his stomachs sake, (1. Tim. 5.23.) for it cheareth the heart, Judge.
9.13. And we see Christ at a marriage approved more liberal diet then at other
times: for ( John 2.9.) when wine failed, he himself turned water into wine.
But yet we must walk so soberly in all things, that by fullness of bread which
was the sin of Sodom, we neither benumme our senses, nor disable the members
of our body from their special duties, always observing this rule: that wine
is to be given to the heavy heart, and not to the merry. For the second, which
is recreation: even in this have the best surfetted, but we must look that
they be first of honest report, which gives small warrant for cards or dice;
and if they were lawful, yet ought not the children of God so much to use
them: because in that they imbol^en others that do abuse them. For that is the
Apostles rule, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever are honest and of good report, think on
such things. Secondly, we must look we use them as recreations. ^^t so long
as they may make us unfit to discharge our vocatio^^: for the end of our play
must be labor, and not to be brought asleep with it: for then does it
neither comfort the strength of the body, nor relieve the powers of the mind,
for which recreation was ordained. For the third, that is, apparel, the holy
Ghost gives us a glass to see when we are seemly arraied: wherein we must
observe two rules: first, that it be not costly: secondly, that it be not
garish: costly for the price, nor garish for the fashion. Paul (1. Tim. 2.9.)
comprehends both these by name, forbidding costly apparel, which is that
that is either above a man's ability, or above those, whom in degree,
profession, s^xe and age the Lord has matched with us. For we must always in
attire strive to match our selves with the grauest Christians of our
profession. Garish is opposite to comeliness, and is that which follows the
cut, which by the outward vanity of the body, shows the instabilitie of the
mind: for the visible attire has these inconveniences with it: first, it
descrieth the invisible pride of the mind: and say and pretend what thou will, that thou have no such end: when the leaf is green on the top of the
tree, how can I believe that the sap is gone down to the root? and when I
see these streams of pride about thee, how can I think but they flow from the
well head, which boileth in the heart? Secondly, as it expresses pride, so it
exciteth and stirs up lust, and very often the occasion makes the sin.
Neither is it good for a light brain to drink much, nor to put flax to the
fire, nor oil to the flame, nor to lay open a costly garment before a glancing
eye. Thirdly, it does abridge us in the performance of many christian
exercises, as contribution to the poor, hospitality in the house, and such
like: for as the French man says, Where there is a velvet coat, there is a
belly of rust, and when we are grown so high in pride, as we cannot look
down upon the low estate of our brethren, but behold them as Grasshoppers upon
the earth: we may well curse that garment that withdrawes that blessing
pronounced by Christ to them that visit the needy and relieve the naked. Mat.
25.36.
True it is the Gospel prescribes no set fashion: but look what the most
godly do of our profession, by the grace of this Gospel we ought to follow
that, and we shall find peace for our souls; for the Lord dwells but in
two places, either in the high heavens, or in an humble heart. And as a
Philosopher said of concupiscence, some was natural and necessary, some
natural but not necessary, some neither natural nor necessary: so may we say
of apparel, some is comely and necessary, some comely but not necessary, and
some neither comely nor necessary.

The second thing that is to be followed, is righteousness in life, and just
dealing between man and man; and this is either general and universal, or
particular and peculiar. The first is the ground of nature, That all men deal
as they would be dealt with: the second is this, that every man in his
several calling should deal with a good conscience, and give every man his
due. John Baptist having preached a sermon of repentance, Luke 3.8. first
generally exhorts them to newness of life, and then descends to special
duties to be recommended to special men; as particularly for the Publicans,
verse. 13. you must receive tribute according as it is taxed, and not inhaunce
it for your own gain. For soldiers, verse. 14. Do no man any violence,
neither rob ye under this pretense, but be content with your wages. For rich
men, verse. 11. that as the Lord had dealt bountifully with them, so they should
extend their compassion to others. Wherein observe, that as every calling has
his special sins waiting on it, so the Baptist sets down special and
particular remedies that every man must labor to furnish himself withal. So
here to speak of one kind of righteous living, as that which is most abused,
though the thing it self be most common, namely of bargaining: first observe
that Paul sets down a rule (1. Thessalon. 4.6.) that no professor in his
trade should go beyond a man, that is, that every seller should set such a
price as there may be a just proportion between the value and the thing
bought. Now this value must be rated according to the general rule of nature,
Luke 6.31.
Do as thou would be done unto: and it is not enough to say Caveat emptor,
Let the buyer look to it; but thou ought to have care that he may have
equal advantage of the thing he buieth, with the benefit thou receiuest.
Proverbs 20.14. is set down the general corruption of both these: It is
naught says the buyer, abasing it, that he may have it the cheaper: which
implies, It is good, says the seller, praising it too much, that he may
price it the higher. Howbeit we must consider, that the same God that
commands thee not to assault his person, but to preserve it from violence,
the same God enioyneth thee to have care over his goods, that if his money do
pass through thy hands, thou do use it with the same affection thou do
thine own, always remembering ( Proverbs 20.23.) that diverse weightes are
abomination to the Lord, and that (1. Corinthians. 6.9.) no unrighteous or unjust
dealer shall ever see God. Many will come and make such a show of holiness,
that their endeavor is to deal justly toward all, as they will needs be
resolved what are false weights, what is usury, and what is circumuention or
cosenage, that they may avoid it; and when it shall be told them truly out
of Gods word what they are, and it falls out to be such as they expected
not, then they return either with heavy or with angry hearts, and will
resolve themselves what was spoken was false. Even as ( Jeremy 42.5.) Iohanan
comes to Jeremy to know whether he and the rest might go down into Egypt
to dwell there, where they should see no war, and promises whether his
message from the Lord was good or bad he would obey it: Jeremy went and asked
counsel of the Lord, who answered, they should not in any case go down to
Egypt. When Iohanan heard this, he burst forth into outrage, saying* It is not
the Lord has told thee this, ( Ier. 43.2.3.) It is Baruch that makes thee
thus precise against us: so he was resolved before what to do, only he
would have been glad if his purpose might have been confirmed by the Lords
mouth. And as it fares with the sick patient, who affecting some meat
hurtful, asks the Physician whether he may eat it or no; who having the
regiment of their bodies, and knowing their disease, tells them, no, in no
wise: yet so strong is their appetite that they will take it, and only would
have been glad if the Physician would have approved it. So men will come to
know the nature of sin, which being described to be ugly in it self, yet
seeming beautiful and gainefull in their affection, they will still embrace it;
showing themselves to have descended of that young man spoken of Matthew. 19.16.
who would needs be questioning with Christ how he might go to heaven, and
when he touched him in his wealth which he made his god, as that he must fell
all, it is said he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.

Secondly, observe here the order the spirit uses, placing just dealing after
sober living, as if it were impossible to look for true dealing where
sobriety went not before; and therefore we having gone beyond the proportion
of our old fathers, and exceeding that sobriety which was the ancient
renowned virtue of this age and nation, justice and just dealing cannot have
her due course, but the cloth must needs be stretched to maintain our
superfluities, so as that of Joel 1.4 fitteth for this, What the Canker-worme
has left the Grasshopper has devoured, what the Grasshopper has left the
Catterpiller has devoured, etc. So we by the same proportion may say in
these days, That which purchasing (which enlarges it self like hell) has
left, that sumptuous building has devoured; what this has left, magnificent
furniture has devoured; what this has left, pride of life has devoured; and
what this has left, ambition has wasted: for great men must be bribed, and
then poor men must needs be racked. And therefore it is certain, if
reformation begin not at our selves, that we can pull down whatsoever
exalts it self above the compass of modesty, comeliness, and sobriety,
we shall expect little truth and justice to others.

Thirdly observe what this is commands us to deal justly; it is not the law
in terror of death, but the Gospel, even because the Lord does purpose to
save us by this grace: so as it is a suite commended unto us by such a special
token of the price of salvation, as we cannot choose but perform it with great
care, unless we will show our selves greatly unthankful, and prove our
hearts to be more then flintie. Jeremy conuinceth ( Ierem. 35.14.) the
obstinacy of the Jews by the example of the Rechabites, who refused to drink
wine offered and set before them, because their father Ionadab had so commanded
them. Hereupon (says the Lord) Judah I have warned thee often, but thou
would not incline thine ear nor obey me. Of which example we must make this
use; Rechah spoke to his children but once, the Lord has spoken to us often to
live religiously; he was but the father of the flesh, God is the father of our
spirits; his commandment was hard, and his yoke heavy, to forbear the use of
lawful things and necessary, as not only to forbear wine, but they must
neither sow nor plant, and yet they kept it: the Lords commandment is, that
we surfeit not with the cares. of this life, and that we deal honestly with
our brethren: Rechah promised them but to live long on earth; our Father for
our obedience has promised us eternal life: so as both he that commands
is higher, and the reward that is given is greater.

Now follows the third thing that is to be embraced, and that is a godly
life; for it were absurd to be precise toward men, and to deal wickedly with
God: and all is abominable if our religion toward God exceed not our
righteousness toward men. To know what godliness is, shall be best discerned
by the contrary: and ungodliness is threefold; first the worship of a false
God: secondly, the worship of a true God falsely, as the Jews that executed the
Lord Jesus, and Paul that persecuted the Church of Jesus, they did think they
did God great good service: thirdly, such as worship the true God in a true
service outwardly, but with an vnzealous heart, like Judas that followed Christ
and yet betrayed him: 2. Tim. 4.10.
and like Domas that forsook Paul and embraced the world, yet did he not
return to his idols again: and in truth there is no difference between these
two last: for it is all one to serve him fantastically, as did the Pharisees;
as to serve him coldly, as did the Laodiceans: but now godliness is opposite
to all these, and is a true service of a true God, in a true religion, with a
true heart. And this is soon discerned by our affections: for if we can
tremble at the word preached, and be possessed with the spirit of fear at the
least offense and sin which we can commit, because we know that the majesty
of God is displeased, and the spirit of God grieved; and if from this fear
does spring sorrow, and from this sorrow, care of recovering our fall again, and
when we are cured can resolve and strengthen our selves in patience to go
under the yoke of afflictions, and under the wheel of death for the truths
sake, we may assure our selves our paths are straight, and that in our journey
toward God our feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, not
any way to be distracted with cares, nor distrustful with the troubles of this
life.

Hence observe, that none are to be commended for their sobriety and honesty,
unless also they be religions; which is proved thus: None are honest, but they
that be clean in heart; no man's heart is clean, that is not purified in
conscience; and none are purified in conscience without faith; and none have
faith, that are not zealous and religious toward God; for faith strives by
prayer with God. Thou will say, love is the fulfilling of the law: but this
love toward our brethren implies, and of necessity presupposes a love of
God, which constrains us to love man: for no more then a man can love God and
hate his brother, no more can he hate God and love his brother; and if he love
God, in this is ever included a love and zeal toward his glory. Again, if we
take the love of our brethren, to be that Paul speaks of, (1. Tim. 1.5:) it
is then agreed: for then it is love from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a
faith unfeigned, which being grounded on Christ is the foundation, root, and
well head of all honesty and just dealing.

Lastly observe hence, that the godliness here spoken of must have two
properties: for first, it must not be hidden in the heart, but fruitful and
visible to the eye, that the world may see it: secondly, we may not defer our
godliness, but it must be present even as the time of our life is: for Gods
children most be like the rod of the Almond tree spoken of Ierem. 1.11. which
in those countries where it grows, is the first that blossometh: yea we must
not only give the first fruits as under the law, but even all the fruits of
our lives to the Lord: for God often punishes the want of his fear in our
youth, with the want of wisdom in our age: and if our godliness be not present
he oftentimes cutteth us off before we can see the time to come. Neither yet
must we think it sufficient to cherish godliness in our hearts, no not in our
chambers, but it must be as a light set upon a hill, that not only Gods
children may see it for their direction, but that even the world may see it for
their condemnation: as Christ says to his disciples, I have sent you to walk
in the midst of a froward and crooked generation, yet must they walk still:
for by this open profession of godliness, we show whose liuerie we wear, and
that we are not ashamed of the cross, nor abashed at it. Howbeit, this course
of godliness which we must live in, is no more nor no less then an absolute
resignation and giving up of all things in respect of God; which stands in
three things: first, in giving up our reason: secondly, in denying our
affections: thirdly, in framing our mind to a moderation in what estate the
Lord shall set us in. For the first, we must resign up our reason to religion
in two respects: first, for that it is an incomprehensible mystery which is
unsearchable: secondly, for that the ignominy thereof is insufferable in our
reason, as to think that he is blessed that is hungry, they unhappy that be
rich, and that the Lords correction is love. For the second, which is the
giving up of our affections, it will teach us so to walk, and so to deal as
in the presence of God; it will make us plough up those furrows of pride and
vainglory, which lie so deep in our hearts: and when by the instigation of
our affections we are moved to riot or voluptuousness, it will make us
abstain, because we have given our selves to God. For the third, to have a
willingness to suffer what the Lord sends, will make us resign up those
inordinate cares of getting, wherewith we are oftentimes perplexed, and to
content our selves with that portion the Lord has shared out unto us: so as by
religion and a godly life, we shall learn to say with David: O Lord thou have
done it, therefore I hold my peace: and not only to bear an outward
contentment in worldly things, but even in all calamities, to rest upon the
merciful hand of God.

JAMES chap. 2. verse. 20.21.




THe word of God has two parts in it: first, it is a word of wisdom:
secondly, it is a word of knowledge, by knowledge to reform the judgment, and
to convince the conscience; by wisdom to persuade the affections to the
obedience of that we have truly learned. Saint James here indeuoreth to
persuade that none could be saved without works, and he proves it by a double
example of Abraham and of Rahab: Will thou understand, etc. as if he should
say: If that set down before cannot sufficiently take root to affect thee and
to persuade thee, that without the works of a holy life thy faith is no better
then a devils faith, take this example of Abraham for all; thou will grant that
Abraham was an excellent person, and had true faith, and that the covenant was
so made with him, that none should be saved, unless they were of his seed,
either according to the flesh and spirit, or at least according to the spirit.
And since the covenant was made with him, and he was saved by faith, so must
all we be saved by his faith, that is, by a faith of the same kind that his
was; for there is but one faith, though there be diverse measures of it. Now
Abraham had an approved faith; as it is proved by this one act and work of his
for all, because it was the principallest of all, in that he stayed not, nor
demurred upon the Lords commandment in offering up his fonne, the greatest
work that ever flesh and blood did, except his that was more then flesh and
blood, namely Christ.

And because the Jesuits, as hardened enemies against the truth, have strangely
perverted this place, we must understand a difference between these speeches:
Faith without works is dead, and, Faith that is without works is dead: for by
the first speech may be thought, that works give life to faith; which is most
false: but the second speech is true, works being a necessary consequent of
faith, and an infallible sign, that faith has gone before: even as in these
speeches, to say: The body is dead without breathing; and the body that is
without breathing is dead: for if we affirm and attribute the cause of life
to breathing, it is false; for the soul is the cause of life in the body: but
the other speech is true, for the body that has no breath in it is dead^ and
where breath is, it is a sign there is life. So to say: the tree that is
without fruit is dead, is true; but not to say, the tree without fruit is dead,
for the tree that stands in the ground and is not fruitful, we may well say
is dead at the root; but when the sap lies at the root, we may well say there
is life in the tree, though there be no fruit on the branches.

Now the adversaries argue thus: No dead faith can justify: faith without
works is dead; therefore no faith can justify without works: as if they
should say; Christ Jesus never raised up himself without his humanity,
therefore his humanity helped in raising up his flesh; which is most
blasphemous. Howbeit, Christ separated from his humanity was never raised up,
this is must true. So they in their former argument refer justification to
works, which is most false: but if they had concluded, therefore faith that is
without works cannot justify, they had done well; for thereby had been
proved, that works had been inseparable from faith, but not that they concur:
for faith is alone ever in justifying, but never alone in the person justified:
even as the eye alone of all the parts of the body does see, but the eye that
is alone, separate from the other parts of the body, does not sece at all, but
is a dead eye.

Was not Abraham, etc. Here consider two points: first, in what sense this is
true: secondly, why this work above the rest is commended and registered for a
proof of Abraham's faith.

The words here set down are directly contrary to the words Romans 4.2. Abraham
was not justified by works; and therefore they must be so reconciled as both
places may be true, lest contrariety and variance appear in the spirit of
God, which cannot be. This is like those speeches uttered by Christ, My Father
is greater then I: Ioh. 5.17 19. John 10.30.
and in another place, I and my Father are all one: and I count it no robbery
to be equal with my Father; which is spoken in a different respect: the first,
in the person of a mediator: the second, in the person of the Godhead. So Saint
Paul taking the word justifying for justification before God, said true: and
Saint James taking the word justifying for justification, or approving of his
faith before men, says true also: but the word being taken in one and the
same sense, it were impossible for an Angel from heaven or for Christ himself
to reconcile them. And the reconciliation which the Papists make of these two
places, fights directly with Paul: for they say, faith and works do
justify: Paul says, faith only justifies. So as when Paul speaks of
justifying by faith; he means that whereby we are acquitted by Christ, and
do appear perfect before God in him: and Saint James takes it for being
justified in the sight of men, that is, declared and approved to be justified
when our holy life answers to our holy profession. And that the word
Justified is thus used, and taken in this sense, as Saint James does, appears
Psalm 51.4. That thou may be justified when thou art judged, that is,
declared to be just. So Luke 7.29. the Publicans justified God, that is,
declared him to be just: and in the same place it is said, Wisdom is
justified of her children. And Luke 10.29. it is said, the Lawyer was willing
to justify himself, that is, to show that he was just: and it is likewise
proved out of the text it self; Show me (says Saint James) thy faith, show
it to me, not to God.

Again, Saint James had falsified and abused the Scripture, if he had taken
the word (justifying) in the sense to be made just; for the sentence that
Abraham was justified, had passed the Lords mouth many years before the
sacrificing of his son: for this, that he was just, was pronounced long
before Ismael was conceived, as appears Genes. 15.6. and therefore taking the
word (justified) to be made just, he could in no sort be justified by
offering up his son, because he was justified before: but the meaning of
Saint James is, that it was approved by this act and work of Abraham, that
God had not said before in vain that he was justified: and Romans 4.10. it
appears Abraham was justified in his uncircumcision; and this work James
speaks of was done long after his circumcision.

To this the Papists reply thus, Though Abraham was justified before he did
this work before God, yet there is a degree to be more justified, and so this
place of Saint James may be taken to be a further justification and an
increase of faith before God as well as not. To this we answer, that one
pardon from God suffices for all sins, and one drop of blood serves for
all offenses: but because our faith is weak, that we are not able to apply
this blood all at once, therefore it is said, that we must grow from faith to
faith: and he that is washed in the blood of Christ is all clean: but our
sanctification in this life leaves some grudge and tang of corruption, and
makes our feet impure, as Christ speaks, John 13.10. so as with God we are
justified all at once; and there is no proceeding by degrees in respect of him,
for blood pardons all, but water, that is, our renewing grows by degrees.

Now for the speeches of Saint Paul, Romans 4.4.5. and Romans 8.30. that none are
justified by works: the Papists say, It is to be taken of the works of the
law ceremonial, but not of the law m^ ^ll. But we must note, that Paul
speaks there of the law written in the tables of stone, of that law that
manifests sin to be sin, Thou shall not lust, etc. which is the law
moral, and so their distinction false and frivolous. Besides they were both
the laws of God, and therefore a man may be justified as soon by the one as
by the other: for as Paul says, 2. Corinthians. 3.5. All our sufficiency is of
God, and of our selves we can do nothing, and but that the veil is taken away
in Christ, the same covering remains which was in the old Testament under
Moses.

And where Saint Paul says, Abraham was justified without works, and no man
shall be justified by the works of the law: True, say the Papists, by none of
the works of the law that he does in the time of his infidelity, but by them
that he does after his conversion he may be justified. And they say, that
forasmuch as the Apostle says, The works of Abraham were done in belief;
therefore by this he excludes only those works done before faith to help
his justification. So as by this we see the adversaries make two
iustifications: the first, when of an infidel a man is made a professor, which
they say is by congruity, when there is a certain inclination in the heart of
man to perform some good works, and yet for want of grace cannot, the Lord
seeing his heart thus prepared to be justified, does call him, and merely of
his grace does justify him. The second, when a man is freely justified by the
grace of God, then by this grace of God and his own free will (say they) he
may increase his justification before God.

For the first, we answer that none can be justified by works before faith;
for this is as if a tree should bring forth fruit without a root, or a body
should live without a soul: so in vain is it to make a question of that
cannot be; for before we have faith it is impossible to work, or to think of
a good work. Secondly, where they say, that speech concerning Abraham is taken
and to be understood of his works done before faith, and that he was justified
by his good works in faith: this does wholly eneruate and take away the
strength of the Apostle his reason: for Paul says, If he were justified by
works then had he whereof to glory with God, Romans 4.6. which speech extends
as well to works after faith, as before faith; for he that deserves any way
may glory. Secondly, the Apostle says, Not to him that works, but to him
that believes is righteousness due, for if he works he has his wages by
desert: that is (say they) he that stands upon his own works before faith,
without the assistance of Gods grace, this man challenges it by desert,
because he did them without faith and grace: which evasion and shift is most
vain; for a man is not therefore made evil because he does evil, but he does
evil because he is borne evil: so a man is not justified because he works
not, but therefore he works not because he is not justified. And it is most
blasphemous to say, justification is wrought partly by grace and partly by
free will, and to thank God that thy free will with his grace can justify,
for hereby shall thou never be justified: for if any thing of thine either
prevent the grace of God, or assist it in thy justification, then is it not as
Paul says, Ex gratia sedex debito, not of grace but of duty. And where they
speak of two iustifications, we never heard but of one, mentioned by Paul Romans
4.3. that is, justification by faith. And for the second justification, that
is, that being justified men may deserve something by their works, this is but
a fruit and effect of the first, that is, a daily proceeding to wash our
feet, John 13.10. and an earnest endeavor by good works to make our election
sure, and to have our faith approved, according to that in the Revelation,
22.11. that he that is righteous may be more righteous, that is, may still
bring forth better fruit: for the works of the justified please God, not of
themselves, but because they are justified, for the person must first be
accepted before his work can be accepted. And though none shall go to heaven
but they that be washed where blood has gone before, yet none because he is
washed shall be saved.

Now in this example of Abraham which is set down here, observe four parts:
first, a brief narration of it: secondly, the special work of Abraham, which
is above all other his works registered and exemplified: thirdly, the
amplification of the work in the 22. and 23. verses: fourthly, the determinate
conlusion that a man cannot be saved nor justified by faith only.

Of the example it self was spoken before; now follows to entreat of the
second part, that is, of the exc^^plifying and enlarging of this work of
Abraham in sacrificing his son: Here may be demanded, why the Apostle
alleges this work of his more then any of the rest; as if there were some
disparagement between this and other his works and excellent virtues: he was
peaceable to all, harborous to the poor, resolute in afflictions, wise in the
government of his house, not afraid in the sight of Kings to set up and erect
an altar, as a testimony that he served the true God, even in the midst of
their idolatry: yet is this work preferred above all, that is here set down,
because though he was declared to be just in all his other works, yet
chiefly and above all in this of sacrificing his son.

The circumstances to exaggerate and make this work seem great, are these: If
Abraham had been commanded to have disherited this son, or to have banished
him, or to have seen him no more, it might much have tried his patience; if he
had had more sons then this, yet because he loved this son specially well,
in the affection of a parent it had been much to have endured: but this, that
Isaac was borne of the free woman, and though borne of flesh, yet merely
supernatural, in as much as there was no more life in Sarahs womb in respect
of her age then in a dead stock; Heb. 11.12.
that he was his only son, his beloved son, the son of the promise, when
Abraham knew that if Isaac were taken away, both himself and all the world
should be damned, because in this son alone was the promise: if he had had
more children, though the covenant only was tied to this son, or if there
had been any more hope of children, if he might only have heard of the
sacrificing of his son, and not have seen it; or seen it, and not have done
it with his own hands; or done it suddenly, and not have gone three days in
strife between the law of nature, and the law of obedience: or if Isaac had
offended any thing, or if this commandment had come from the tyranny of any
Prince and not from God, or if it might have been closely done, and not in a
mountain, where the Sun might abhor to see such cruelty of a father toward
an innocent child, it had been much less even in the affection of a natural
father, and yet a most grievous trial and assault. But that this commandment
must come from God, who first had bid him hope for this son, and now bids him
kill him, as if he had before but mocked him: that an Angel must be the
ambassador and carier of this message, whom the weak eyes of man cannot
behold for glory: that this news must come in the night when his eyes by other
objects could not draw his mind from bethinking of this bitter message: and
that this must seize upon him in his sweet sleep to awake him; though in
respect of the former he might be much anguished, yet by this so much the
greater was his trouble: and yet far less had it been, if he might not have
gone so long perplexed in his thoughts. But now not to demurre nor stay upon
it, but to rise up early in the morning, and in three days journey, wherein
no doubt he had many and diverse agitations and combats of spirit, not to utter
a repining word or grudging speech, this was a further and greater trial. For
many are wont to be good at a brunt, who are altered by after cogitations. Then
the words of the sweet child; Father here is wood, but where is the sacrifice?
had been enough to have rent his heart, to see he should be butcher to that
son could ask so wise a question. All which must argue and show such a
strong and mighty faith in Abraham, that he could never so silently and
chearefully have performed this, had he not believed, that if his son should
have gone to hell, the Lord could have taken him out again: for faith admits
of no contradiction when it has a promise. And so we see Abraham forgets not
only to be a father, but the matter is so qualified by faith, that he
forbeareth not only the affection of a parent, but in faith believes, that out
of his ashes the Lord would raise him up, not another, but the very same Isaac.

From hence learn, that though the Lord examine not us so streitly as he did
Abraham, yet he tries every one of us according to his measure: for the
practice of religion and mortification concerns all from the Prince to the
tankerd-beater; and though we cannot all be swallowed up so deeply with the
zeal of Gods glory, as were Moses and Paul, Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
who to win souls to God; wished themselves not to see God, yet must we
learn, when we have a commandment, to exclude and lay aside all discourse of
flesh and blood, and to follow Christ, even to the hazard of our own lives,
not a far off as Peter did follow him to his suffering, Mat. 26.58.
but just behind him, as near as can be, according to the rule prescribed, and
with that alacrity and resolution that we ought, even as Abraham did here to
the sacrificing of his son.

Secondly, in this example observe: that if Abraham could for bear to command
his natural love of a father to a child at the Lords commandment, how much
more shall we be inexcusable, that cannot command our selves from
uncleanness of the flesh, and such like sins, but will keep our sins as
tenderly and as long as we keep our lives, and yet will be counted the
children of Abraham? But we must answer our selves as Christ did the
Pharisees, Ioh. 8.44. and as Saint John did answer those to whom he wrote, 1.
John 3.7. that we do but flatter our selves with the name, when we are in
truth the children of the devil: for he that does righteousness is
righteous; and if Abraham resigned up the lawfulness of the tender affection
of a father at the Lords commandment, much more must we resign up our
affections and discourses in unlawful matters.

Further observe, that it is not enough for us to deny our unlawful pleasures
and appetites, but we must even forbear things lawful if the Lord command
it. If he call us forth to trial for the Gospels sake, Mat. 4.20.
we must with Peter and Andrew leave our nets, that is, our calling; and
forsake our wives, that is, our comforts, Mark. 9.47.
and our selves, even to pull out our right eyes, if they be any impediments to
us in the progression of faith and a good conscience; and if there be any
repugnancy that we cannot enjoy our wives and glorify God, we must not regard
them in respect of God: for if we do, the Lords mouth has spoken it, we shall
never be saved. Let us therefore take heed how we build, for if our foundation
be of stubble, the day of affliction will soon consume it, and we shall be as
blown bladders emptied with the least prick of any trial, and as brass that
yields an hideous sound under the hammer: but if we ground upon that golden
foundation of faith, then in our afflictions shall we be as gold which is more
agreeable in the sound, and more pliable in the stroke; and we lying between
the anuill of death and the hammer of the Lords hand, shall show our selves in
patience to possess our souls, even like Abraham, who without grudging did
execute the Lords embassage, though most repugnant to nature, and to the
promise made.

Again observe, as this matter of trial in Abraham turned in the end to a
comfortable issue: even so shall it fare with us in our afflictions and
temptations; and if we will sacrifice up our honor, our affections, our Isaac,
that is, our laughter, the ram only shall die for it, that is, our cares, our
troubles, our afflictions, and our vexations shall be wiped away. This is
agreeable to that Mat. 10. Ye shall for my names sake forsake what you honor
most, and love best: and then follows; If any man do this, I will give him
in this life an hundred fold more, that is, more joy, more resolution and peace
of conscience, and more comfort in this base and low estate, then he should
have had in an hundred fathers, or an hundred wives, not regarding the
quantity, but the blessing of God in the comfortable enjoying of them. This
offers singular consolation to those that suffer for the cross of Christ,
that the thrones of this life shall only be sacrificed, and our souls and
consciences shall rest secure, filled with greater joy in the end and issue of
our troubles then ever we were before. And as the world says; that he is rich
that is contented; even so we say, that he is safe that rests in the Lords
hands: And if we stretch forth all our powers to embrace Christ, then is he
gone as a harbinger to provide a place for us in heaven, Ioh. 14.3.
and he that saves our souls, we may well trust him with our bodies.

Further observe, that he offered up his son, and yet he did it not: wherein
we learn, that the purpose of a man's heart being fully resolved to do a thing,
it is in the Lords eyes as if he did it, though he do it not: for therefore is
Isaac said to be offered up, because he was so in the purpose of Abraham's heart,
which the Lord accepted as an execution of the thing it self. And this holds
both in virtues and in vices: for if a man be called before the judgment seat
as an heretic in any time whatsoever; and being called thus to trial,
offers to seal his opinion with his blood, and matters going further does
not relent: what is this man in the light of God (if his religion be true) but
a Martyr, though his life be after pardoned? Not that every resolution is taken
of God as if it were performed; for Peter was carried with a vehement
precipitation and presumptuous conceit of his own strength, when he said,
Master though all men forsake thee, yet will not I, ( John 13.37.) but I will
lay down my life for thy sake: and yet afterward upon a small occasion he
denied him. But if a man stand in the day of his examination and trial, and
shrink not, but is ready to sacrifice his life for the defense of God his
truth, as Abraham was ready to have sacrificed his son; then because in the
trial he did not relent, but even in this time did purpose it, it shall be
taken of God even as this work of Abraham, done though not done, and his life
lost though he escaped with his life. In like manner falls it out in sins,
for if thy heart be full of a dultery, and yet because she that should be thy
harlot dallied too long with thee, or else occasion did not fit thee, whereby
thou art kept from the act it self, yet art thou a whoremonger in the sight of
God. Mat. 5.28.
The like may be said of other sins, for though Saul threw not a stone at
Stephen, but only kept the clothes of them that did it, yet is he ( Act. 8.1.)
enrolled in the book of God as one that consented to his death.

Verse. 22. See thou not, that the faith wrought with his works, and through
the works was the faith made perfect?

23. And the Seripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham beleened God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God.

24. Ye see then how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only.



Hereupon the Papists take occasion to say, that not faith alone, but faith
together with works works our justification. Whereunto we answer, that there
be some things wherein faith works alone, and some things wherein it works
together with works. Faith works alone with God, it has wings and flies to
heaven, it deals only between God and Christ, and prostrateth it self
before God in Christ, upon confession that the soul is Satan's due, and
deserves to be bound hand and foot and to be cast into prison as unable to
pay the debt; it entreats that this obligation may be taken from Satan, it
wrastleth with death and damnation, and terror of conscience, Coloss. 2.14.
and craves a pardon, bringing nothing but the very heart blood of Christ. And
even as the very looking upon the Serpent healed them in the wilderness: Number.
21.9.
and nothing else could appease the tempest, ( Ion^h 1.15.) but the very
casting of Jonah into the sea: and the sins of the people ( Leuit. 16.22.)
were laid only upon the Goat: so faith in this petition of forgiveness,
brings nothing, but comes empty, and lays all upon the shoulders of
Christ. But now between men and men on earth, faith works by love; so as if
we bring nothing to men but faith, it is certain we never brought faith from
God: for since thy heart is not discernable, and the spirit and piety of the
heart is unsearchable in respect of men, and good to God we cannot do, our
faith upon earth must be as busy before men in works, as it is before God in
the blood of Christ. And as Martha and Mary ( Luke 10.39.) dwelled in one
house, one only to hear Christ, the other working and laboring to entertain
Christ; even so our faith with Mary must only kneel at Gods feet, to hear
that comfortable voice of the pardon and absolution of our sins in the blood
of Christ: but our faith on earth must labor with Martha, by love and good
works to entertain and help our brethren.

Besides, we must consider that things may work together, but not together in
the same work. Even as Christ in the work of mediation must have two natures,
a divine humanity, and an humane divinity: and we say not, that Christ as God
only, nor as man only is Mediator: but by these two concurring together: and
as we say, that Christ is not Mediator without flesh: and as truly we say,
that he raised not up his flesh by his humanity, but suffered in the flesh,
and was raised up by the power of his divinity only; and that his divinity
died not, but his flesh only: and in this they worked severally; in the flesh
to be overcome of death, and in the spirit only to overcome death; yet these
two in the work of our salvation do work together. Even so faith works
with love, in bringing forth sanctification and a holy life: but in the very
apprehending of Christ his blood, this power to justify is of faith only.
Like as the root of it self gives life, but the root with the branches bring
forth fruit. And as the fire makes warm by heat and light, and yet the
heat of the fire warmeth alone, but light is inseparable from it: so no faith
can work well without works; but yet there are none justified by the power of
works, but by faith only.

Now where it it said, Faith wrought with his works, and through the works
the faith made perfect: observe that this is meant only of a declaration to
men; for we are perfectly justified in the sight of God by the blood of Christ.
And though the hand be leprous, yet it can receive sound meat: so though our
faith be imperfect, yet our justification is perfect. For there is but one
pardon in heaven, through that one death and passion of Christ; and before a
man be perfectly justified, he cannot do a good work: for we must first be in
Christ before we have faith, and must have faith before we can work, for
these are fruits of faith. And as a Toade is not therefore a Toade because it
poisons, but therefore poisons because it is a Toade: nor a Serpent is not
therefore a Serpent because it stings, but stings because it is a Serpent: so
we are not ingrafted into Christ because we are good, but being ingrafted into
Christ we are made good.

Lastly observe in the words, that we are not justified because we work,
but because we shall be saved therefore we work. Zaccheus ( Luke 19.8.) had
not salvation because he restored fourfold, and gave half his goods to the
poor; but because the Lord was come into his house, and had taken possession
of his heart, therefore he wrought these works of faith. Neither was the poor
man in the Gospel healed because he should sin no more: John 5.14.
but Christ faith, Thou art healed; therefore in sign of thankfulness for thy
health look to thy life that thou sin no more: for heaven shall not be given
to works, but to workers; and promise of eternal life is made to the works
of the just, as they are justified, Gal. 3.11.12.
and they are justified only in Christ, for in every work there is
imperfection; not but that the spirit could work perfectly, but that every
thing is received according to the measure of that that does receive it: and
we in this life are able only to receive the first fruits, and not the
fullness of the spirit: for the spirit is like the Sea that is able to fill any
vessel, but no vessel is able to contain it.

Now in the 23. verse, two parts are to be considered: first, the purpose of
the Apostle in alleging this Scripture: secondly, the sense of the matter
delivered.

For the first, if Saint James cited this place to prove that Abraham was
imputed righteous in the sight of God by this work of sacrificing his son,
he must needs have wrested this Scripture, which were blasphemy to say, being
written by the singer of God: for Abraham had this imputation of righteousness
through his belief given him and pronounced by God himself, Genes. 15.6.
before either Ismael or Isaak were borne: so as then the meaning of the Apostle
in alleging this scripture, is only to show that that testimony which God
gave Abraham of the excellency of his faith, was declared and approved to be
true by the performance and execution of this special work.

Now for the second point, concerning the sense of the place cited, namely that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: here we see
that it is agreeable to the scripture, that the obedience of the son which
stood in two parts, first in fulfilling the law, secondly in satisfying for our
sins, is only inherent in the son, and was in him even from the moment of
his conception to the moment of his ascension: and that we have only his
obedience allowed unto us, and through the imputation thereof we are made just,
not that it abides in our selves, for we are no better then Abraham: but we
have it by imputation as Abraham had. And this is a doctrine of great comfort
and necessity to be believed, that we have it by imputation and not of our
selves: for now we are sure it shall never fail us, nor we shall never lose
it, as Adam at first lost his innocence wherein he was created: and therefore
now since the Lord recovered us being lost, he has more care of us then to
trust us with the carriage of our own righteousness, and therefore has
committed it to him whose love fails us not, and of whose abundance every of
us are filled.

Now this the Jesuits do greatly scorn, and call it a new no righteousness,
if we be not just in our own persons; and they say, that God cannot be just,
if he make a man just through the righteousness of another, and not in
himself: Take heed (say they) of the gloss of the Caluinists, who hold, that
our righteousness is a thing only inherent in Christ, which is a fantastical,
imputative, new, no righteousness, whereby we conceive that to be in us which
cannot be found in us: and they (say the Jesuits) count it more to Gods honor
to take him to be just, that is not so, then for God to make him just through
his grace that was wicked. Further the Jesuits say, that God at first
justifies merely by grace; but after so qualifieth a man, as after his
conversion he has righteousness inherent in him, and so not imputed, and this
is man's righteousness, because it is in man, but Gods righteousness because
it comes from God.

To this we answer: and agree that God justifies the wicked, but it is
blasphemy to say, that he justifies the wicked continuing wicked; and we
hold that we are made just through the obedienceof Christ communicated to us;
and as Christ for us was made sin, who of himself had no sin; so we in
Christ are made righteous being of our selves unjust. And whereas they say, that
God after a man's conversion does qualify him with some habitual matter
whereby he is in himself just before God, we say, that he justifies no man
but after his calling, when he gives him the spirit of regeneration, whereby
he is changed in his affections, and reformed in his life, which is as water
where blood has gone before; by blood to clear him from the guiltiness, and
by water to cleanse him from the filthiness of his sin: so as we say he is
not wicked after his calling, 1. Ioh. 5.6.
but God then makes him partaker of the first fruits of the spirit, (witness
his conversation) and by this effect he is declared to be justified in the
blood of Christ.

Yea but (say the Jesuits) your opinion cannot be sound, since righteousness
gives a denomination that such a man is righteous before God, and it is such a
quality as a man cannot be said to be just in the justice of another, no more
then to live by another man's health. Now this is true of formal qualities, but
not of judicial imputation: for as a payment made by another, discharges the
obligation, and makes the principal party no debtor, so the justice of God
being satisfied in the death of Christ, we are freed from that penalty we had
incurred, and acquitted of that debt we did owe, which we should have paid had
not Christ done it. Hereupon the righteousness of Christ is called a garment,
which we have not by birth, but as a thing that comes from without: so as the
righteousness of Christ confisting in the covering of our nakedness as a
garment, proves that that whereby we are imputed righteous, is not a thing
abiding in us, but a thing laid upon us in the love of Christ. Yea but (say
the Jesuits) what justice is this in God to account a man righteous in
another righteousness, or to account him a sinner that had no sin? True it
is, it is another man's righteousness if we speak of the inherencie, but yet our
righteousness and not his only, as he is our person, our Christ, and our
Savior; Ioh. 17.23.
and it is ours, since we have him whose it is: and this maintains Gods
justice to punish Christ in our person, and to justify us in his, in respect
that he is in us and we in him: and so does he neither punish the innocent, nor
justify the wicked. And for this cause it is said, that we are flesh of his
flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and bone of his bone, which must not be understood of any incarnation and
gross natural coalition and mixture of his flesh and ours, for then the
reprobate should have this righteousness as well as the elect. But as it is
said in marriage, man and wife are but one flesh, not meaning thereby any
conjunction of natures, but still they remain several, but only because by
covenant and promise they are to separate their bodies one for another: so is
it to be understood, not that we with Christ are conjoined in substance, but
yet more nearely conjoined then any natural or artificial union, and more
truly (but yet spiritually) then the husband is to the wife, the members to
the body, the branch to the tree, or the meat to the body that it nourishes,
which must always be taken mystically. And in this respect when we know that
Christ is truly ours, that God gives life, and this life is in the Son, and
this Son is in us, it follows, that we are not saved by his righteousness
but by our own, his person being made one person with us, not really in
substance, but spiritually; and yet not subject to fantasy only, for we are
indeed in Christ, and not partakers of his spirit only, but of his flesh also;
according to that of Christ, John 6.50. Unless ye eat my flesh and drink my
blood, ye have no life in you: not that we eat the very flesh of Christ with
our mouth, but leaving the grossness of substance, we do truly feed on him by
faith spiritually, and we are made not only partakers of his benefits, but of
Christ himself: as it is said: He that has the Son has life, not the
benefits of his life, but life it self: so as we are ingrafted not into Christ
his death, but into Christ himself, and Christ dwells in us, as himself
speaks, John 6.56. And we are made not one soul with Christ in desire, nor
called spiritual because we are joined to him in spirit: for we are joined to
him in body also: yet is it called spiritual, because it is wrought by the
power of the holy Ghost by faith in this life, and in the life to come by the
very aspect and beholding of God, and the irradiation of the blessed Trinity.
And although we are not able to conceive and understand this, it is no marvel:
for it is a great mystery, a mystery of all mysteries, surpassing the
excellency of an Angels conceit, only adore it and believe it, and labor not
to compass it by the weakness of thine understanding, which shall never be
truly understood, till we see God face to face.

Here may be demanded, how Abraham could be one flesh with Christ, seeing
that he died long before Christ was borne. Notwithstanding this be so, yet
Abraham and all the rest of the Fathers through their faith were spiritually
conioined to Christ who is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
and they were not saved by their regeneration and works of faith: for these
were but effects of their first uniting to Christ spiritually; which speech of
our conjunction with Christ, is like that of the true Catholic Church, who are
said to be members of another, though they be several persons, in respect of
the mystical reference which they have to Christ their head.

Further they object, Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one many are made righteous. Whereupon they
infer, that it must be proportionable every way: and that as corruption is
naturally derived from Adam to us, and his very corruption really abides in
us, so Christ must really derive his righteousness from himself to us, or
else (say they) the example holds not. To this we say, as in Adam we are
truly sinners by his sin, and that not by imitation, but by imputation; for
that one sin of Adam which condemned all the world, was only committed in
the person of Adam: so the justice of Christ is no more in us, then was that
sin only of Adam which made us all to be damned, and the punishment of that
sin brought original sin, and the general corruption. And (say they)
though all are saved through the obedience of Christ, yet as after the sin of
Adam, original sin was derived to us, so must Christ his righteousness
needs be in us. We answer, true it is they agree in this: Adam gives us that
be has by the participation of his flesh, Christ gives us that he has only
by the communication of the holy Ghost. Again we say, as every man dies of
his own disease, and yet it may be he had that contagion from another, so for
Adams sin, as it was imputed unto us we die, and yet not for Adams sin aloue,
but for our own, for in us there is the very matter of corruption: but Christ's
righteousness is not in the flesh but in the spirit: for though we may have
perfect sin, yet we cannot have perfect righteousness: Again, there be
three degrees in Adams sin: first, by imputation: secondly, by propagation
and drawing the filthiness of Adams sin really into the soul and flesh of
man. Thirdly, we are condemned justly by the imitation of Adams sin, in as
much as when we come to discretion we sin as Adam did: but rigteousnesse is
spiritual, and has but one degree, only by imputation and not by imitation,
for who would go to hell to suffer as Christ did? And yet there is somewhat in
Christ, not imputed to us, but derived to us, yet no matter to justify us;
that is, the sanctification of his nature, which is the renewing of ours: and
this holiness we must have actually in us, but all this is after our
conversion wrought merely in the obedience of Christ his blood.

JAMES chap. 2. verse. 25.26.




Unto the example of Abraham, the Apostle matcheth this of Rahab, to show how
by this excellent work she did prove her self a convert Israelite from a
cursed Cananite: wherein first is questionable, why the holy Ghost should
vouchsafe to sort Abraham that most reverend father of the faithful and of the
Patriarchs, with a woman who was for her condition base, because a victualler;
for her country cursed, because a Cananite; for her conversation infamous,
because a strumpet, and leave other excellent examples of worthy men, which
might seem to have been a less disparagement to Abraham: whereto is
answered, that there is a special cause why saint James sets this example
down above the rest, because to the example of Abraham it might have been
replied, that he was a singular and rare man, so (...) might be compared with
him, none did ever exceed him, and many were inferior to him and yet have
been saved: and therefore that the Apostle should not too much insist upon the
example of Abraham, for this cause he has chosen such a one, as there is so
many degrees between Abraham and her, as if it be above our reach to match
Abraham, yet we may be ashamed not to onermatch a whore. And if we can
neither imitate the highest, nor be equal with the lowest, let us boast never
so long of good works and faith, it is certain we are monstrous hypocrites,
and cannot be saved.

Secondly, in this example we must wisely consider what worthy things there
are in this work of Rahab taken out of Josh. 2.1. that it should receive this
honor to be matched with the noble acts of the Patriarchs, both by this
Apostle and in Hebr. 11.31. Wherein we must examine the lawfulness of her
act, not only to conceal them that came as spies, but to abet, comfort and
convey them away, since they came to espy the land, which tended to the
desolation of the whole country, and subversion of the state. Which makes
nothing for them that send Emissaries and Jesuits into this our land, to
steal away the hearts of the people from their lawful Sovereign. For in that
Rabab did thus aid, comfort, and abet them, she did it not because they came
to usurp and assault the country, (for if they had had no right, but only
had come to have made a larger extent of their Princes territories, it had
been in them a fellonious purpose, and as much as rouing upon the sea and
robbing by the highway; and if she had suspected they had come to this end
without having any better right, upon pain of her soul she should have
discried it, otherwise she had been disloyal to her Prince and State:) but in
that she did conceal it, she knewshee had her security from heaven, that
cursed should all those be that resisted the seed and race of Abraham; she
knew that by the mandate of the almighty the land was given unto them, and that
they that dwelt therein were but usurpers, and therefore were bound to yield it
up as from God* And if upon this knowledge she had not protected them as (...)
did the Angels, Genes. 19.8. she had been guilty of their blood: she might
have been used like Tarpeia among the Romans, who when she had engaged them
to deliver up their bracelers upon recompense of yielding up the City and
Tower, the fouldiers overwhelmed her in stead of giving her the bracelets: but
all conditions made by Rahab were performed by the spies, to show that the
whole work proceeded from the Lord. Now for the letting them out by night,
though it be not lawful by the laws of such defenced cities and places, to
scale the walls in the night time, yet upon the equity of the cause, and in
the case of necessity it may be excused; for she set them out at a window, a
thing done without mutiny or any fraudulent purpose to escape, and therefore
justifiable, even as the letting down of Paul in a basket was, Acts 9.25. And
in this whole work she sinned nothing but in making of a lie, which though
some excuse and extenuate because it was Mendacium officiosum; an officious and
dutiful lie, yet it is no way excusable, for no lie to save a soul is
lawful. Wherein we observe, that even the Saints of God in their best
purposes have in some things followed their mother wit, and their own
corruption. Withal note the loving kindness of the Lord, that this particular
blemish in the work does nothing derogate from the excellency of her
obedience, no more then Rebecca, Genes. 27.8. who notwithstanding she
subscribed to the oracle of God that Jacob should overcome Esau, yet she by
indirect means sought to prevent this work of God, which the Lord in mercy
did wink at in respect of her general resolution to be obedient. The like may
be said of Abraham, who because he thought the fear of God was not in the
house of Abimelek, and that they would have slain him for his wives fake,
Genesis 20.2. dissembled Sarah to be his wife, and carried her under the name
of his sister; which infirmity the Lord passed by, because in other his
actions he was faithful.

Here some to debase this work of Rahab may say: Why, was this such a matter
to ha^^ (...) few messengers of the Lord? and why should this commend her
faith, since she never came to trial to avouch this work? We answer, that the
resolution she admitted was very great, since it might have cost her the
greatest torment that could be; and she might so have stunke in the sight of
the people by thus betraying them and their country, as either the people in a
mutiny, or the King in justice might severely and cruelly have executed her: so
as by this it argues that she was persuaded that the God of Israel was only
to be worshipped, and the seed of Abraham only in the world to be esteemed:
and hereupon she did practice the rule of our Sauiuor Christ, even to hate
her own nation, Mat. 11.20.
and took her life as it were into her hands to save theirs that were the
servants of God. So as though in the former example the Ram only was
sactificed and not Isaak: and in this example Rahab safely delivered, and her
parentage reseued; yet the resolution of them both was nothing less: and so
the speech of Christ true, that they that for his sake forsake all, Mat. 10.37.
shall have more comfort in that little that is left, having peace of
conscience, then of all the former store: nay, that they that suffer for his
sake shall be free when their persecutors shall be fettered, as appears
Jeremy 39.11.15. Jeremy that was in desolation and in prison was safe, when
the King himself had his eyes put out: and Ebedmelech the Kings counselor
was promised not to perish, when the rest should fall by the sword, because he
had made the Lord his arm.

Further, this example of Rahab to stand so resolutely for the deliverance of
the Lords messengers, conuinceth all those that howsoever religion twang upon
their tongue that they can prate of it, yet prove that they have nothing in
them but the Laodicean luke-warmth, Revel. 3. in that they so profess it as
they shrink in the day of trial, and dare not adventure to harbor the Lords
Ambassadors, and to succor them as Rahab did. Yea and this example condemns
others, who are so far from forsaking lawful things, as wife, possessions,
life, etc. for the Gospels sake, as they will not forbear unlawful things, no
not to leave off the least show (...) pride, or the least profit in biting
gain. Whereas by this example we are taught to take up our cross, and not to
look backe-like Lots wife, Genes. 19.26. for there is no tarying in Idolatry
or other profaneness, to fetch any thing from the house top, Mat. 24.17.
or to run back into the fields to take our garments, though they be
necessary for this life, as our Savior speaks in the Gospel. But more
justly the example conuinceth them that row with the tide, and profess with
the parliament: for he that does therefore profess religion because he has
his protection from the Prince and State, would with the State serve the
devil. Nay, in matters of religion we must not ground upon examples, but upon
the truth of the religion: for as we must not follow a multitude to do evil,
so neither must we follow a multitude to do good only because they do it,
Exodus 23.2. For it is not the religion of God which we enjoy because the
parliament enioineth it: but therefore it is by parliament commanded, because
it is the religion of God: and fearful it is to think, that a Prince can
prescribe a law to the eternal God, which is far more disparagement, then
for a subject to make a law how he will obey his Prince, which notwithstanding
is not sufferable. But as Rahab was persuaded that the God of Israel, that sent
those men, was the only God, and that the loins of Abraham for whom this land
was to be gained, were the true owners by the special promise of God: and in
this respect she regarded not her Prince, nor her country, nor her own
fathers house, but that by special mercy they were exempted; but she did most
faithfully and in great obedience, and in a most Christian resolution willingly
resign up the country to them, to whom the Lord had given the title: Even so
must we in matters of the Lords service always prefer and stand for the
will of God to be observed, rather then either to have our country preserved,
or our Prince obeyed. For as Peter says, Act. 4.19. It is better to obey God
then man; yet still so, as we submit our selves to the power and authority of
the higher powers, under whose sword are our bodies, though our souls be under
the shadow of the Almighty.

Again, where it is said: She received the messengers: observe the cause why
she did it, be^^^se she was persuaded the God of Israel sent them, so that it
was not to gratify the men respecting the men, saving that religio^^ did
constrain her, and her love to them arose in respect of her love to God that
had converted her. Whereupon we no^^ ^^at the world determines wrongfully of
good works; (...) man may be an honest man, and live well, and do good (...)
neighbor, though he be not greatly religious: for all actions wherein the
glory of God, the love of God in Christ, the comfort of our consciences, and
the desire of the salvation of our brethren do not concur, those are not
good: so as a good action without religion can no more be good then a house
without a foundation, a tree without a root; water without a wel-head, or to
be good without God: for where there is no zeal, there is no faith; where no
faith, no conscience; where no conscience, no love; and showing our love not
for conscience, we may for our charity go to the devil: for a man must first
be good before he can do good; and good he cannot be without God. 1. Sam. 6.17.
The works such a man does may be perhaps like the Emeraulds of the
Philistims, varnished over with gold, that is, make a fair show in the sight
of men: but if they proceed no further, that is, to have the testimony of the
spirit, that they be wrought by his hand, they are most abominable before the
face of God. Will thou set a face as if thou wroughtest well, because thou will
not take the penalty of an obligation, and yet thou will prosecute a matter
against a preacher, for a superstitious, ceremonious, beggarly element? What
good work is this, to speak well of all men, and yet at every word to wound,
to blood, to heart the holy one of Israel? What is it, not to hurt thy
neighbor, to be a friend to thy friend, and yet to be an enemy to the friend
of God? What great work is it, not to beat false witness, and yet privily to
suggest against him thou dare not reprove to his face? So as unless our
doing of good arise from religion, we may easily strain at a gnat and swallow
a Camel; hear John Baptist gladly for a time, Mat. 6.20.
and chop off his head afterward as Herod did, Matthew. 14.10. Now as for
moralists, and such as transform themselves according to the times, they are
as Jude 13. terms them, the raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own
^^me as the wind serves, and like the wandering stars of the ^^^ament,
unconstant and unsteady, void of faith (for sides must be firma, non
ambulatoria, we must have a standing not a walking faith) and as without faith
they cannot please God, so except they please God they shall not be saved.

She took them and sent them away.

Where learn, it is not enough for us not to hurt a man that professes
religion, but we must do him good: even as this harlot wrought not enough in
receiving the spies, and then to have left them to their own hazard, but as in
obedience she did receive them, so in faith she must safely send them away. Yea
we are bound by prayer, by purse, by person, by credit, by countenance to
relieve them, not only to think well of them and to like them, so far must
we be from vexing them. For if Obadiah (1. King. 18.4.) had only hid the
Prophets of God, and had not fed them, it bad been but half a good work.
Hereupon is it, that in the last day, in the sentence of the reprobate shall
never be mentioned what evil they have done, as that they have bitten by this
usury, or polluted their bodies by that whoredom: but there shall be recited
only the good they did not, as, Mat. 25.41.
for not clothing the naked, for not visiting the sick, for not releeuing the
poor brethren: for Rahab must not only conceal and hide the spies, but she
must send them away safe. And if the sentence of judgment drawn in this form
cannot affect us, let us further know, that though evil is the absence of
good, yet good is not the absence of evil: for Rahabs work is but lame if she
do but harbor them; and if she do not finish it by letting them forth, it
shall never be registered as a work of faith. For look Judge. 5.23. Cursed be
Meroz, that came not to help the Lord against be mighty, not because he did
persecute the Lord, or did him any hurt, but because he helped him not. And we
see Rahab upon this least knowledge of God ^entred her life to save them.
Besides; we shall read in the Gospel, that the greatest torment of the glutton
is, Luke 16.25.
that he gave La^aru^ no water, not that he was an extortioner, or that he
spurned the poor man from his door. By all which examples we are taught, that
where religion is opp^^sted, by all means and in all things we can, to relieve
the Gospel. for the good we have omitted; and the evil we have committed,
shall come to judgment.

Lastly, mark the words: Rahab the harlot, which reproachful speech must not
be referred to the present state of her conversion, but to her former
conversation: as if he should say: Rahab that once had been a whore: for none
truly converted can remain in their former sin, but if he do after his
conversion fall into some gross sin, as David did in killing Vriah, 2. Sam.
11.17.
the Lord will scourge him as he did David. And to be raised up of the Lord
after such a relapse, must not be by slubbering up our repentance, but we must
so be humbled, as to feel dryness in our bones with grief as David did,
Psalm. 32.4. And we shall never receive comfort until we have soundly and
seriously repented. Whereupon we gather, that the Lord regards not what
sins we have committed before our regeneration, so that after our conversion
we walk worthy of our calling; for many that were whores and wicked were
converted. As Luke 7.37. she that washed Jesus feet with the tears of her
eyes and heart, and wiped them with the hair of her head, had been a whore:
but we read not that after that she was any more so. So Zaccheus (Luk) 19.5.)
was an extortioner before Christ called him from the tree, but we read not
that he ever took penny usury after. And Mat. 20.20. such be invited to the
supper as be patched and lame, to express our spiritual beggary: but after
we are come thither; we must have the wedding garment of a good conscience.
For Saul was a persecutor of the Church before he was called, Act. 9.2.
but we nerer read that he was so after his conversion. For if we continue in
a sin, look what follows even in this life, 1. Cor. 5.11. If any that is a
professor be a whore-monger eat not with him, that is, forbear thy private
familiarity with him: so then being converted, we must show our repentance
from those sins wherein before we were fallen: as the repentance from usury
is liberality; the repentance from pride is bumility; from whoredom chastity;
for repentance is the leaving of thy sin, and the cleaving to the contrary
virtue, and it is no repentance to leave thy sin when it must or has left
thee: as upon thy death bed to re^e^^ thee of thy usury, when thou can take
no more; or in thy age to repent thee of thy lechery, when thou can satisfy
it no more; but to repent from thy sin is, as 1. Peter 4.1. to suffer in the
flesh; to suffer in the flesh is to cease from sin; and to cease from sin,
is not only to leave thy sin, but to spend the rest of thy time in a holy
conversation.

Here will be objected, since works are so precisely urged, what say we to
the faith of the thief upon the cross, what works did he? and by this
example many betray their souls in presuming of the like grace. We answer,
that this was a particular privilege given to that thief, even as a pardon
may be given to a man upon the gallows: and if any embolden himself
hereupon, perhaps the rope will be his hire: and it is not good to put it upon
the Psalm of Miserere and the neckeverse, for sometime he proves no Clarke.
And for this thief, the Lord never did it but to one, that none might presume;
and yet he did it to one, and did save one in the exigent of his life, that
none might despair. Secondly, this was a work reserved for the manifestation
of the power of the Son of God, that he should believe in his fellow
sufferer, and desire him to save him; that when the Pharisees denied him to be
the Son of God, yet a poor wretch and a thief should confess it. Thirdly,
we must not regard the shortness of his confession, but consider the time and
circumstance when and before whom this confession was made; even then when no
man durst defend the innocence of the Son of God, when the Pharisees left
him, when all his Disciples were scattered, and when Marie his mother that
stood a far off and knew him to be the Son of God, and yet spoke nothing in
his defense, whereby she finned against the first table. She was his mother,
and saw him put to death unjustly, and yet would not testify of his
innocence, whereby she bore false witness against him, and so sinned against
the ninth commandment: being her son, she did not comfort him upon the
cross, and so sinned against the fifth commandment: yet when all these either
doubted of his divinity, or despaired, the poor thief did confess him to be
that Christ the Son of God, who ^^d Paradise to dispose. Lastly know, that he
was such a wretch, that he never knew God before, and therefore was it no
marvel though he committed felony: but as soon as the Lord knocked at his
heart, first he confesses Christ to be God and to die an innocent, Luke 23.41.
We suffer righteously, but this man has done nothing amiss: wherein he
wrought a work of the first table: secondly, he reproved his fellow who raned
on Christ, wherein he wrought a work of the second table. So as this example
of the thief is no warrant to defer or trifle off our repentance till the
last hour, for he wrought as soon as he was called. If therefore the Lord
has offered unto us the riches of his mercy, let us in the acceptable time
embrace it, and not abuse his long suffering by growing more lean and
ill-fauoured by these many years we have had of religious peace and plenty,
but let us return unto him while he is in the way, before darkness too fast
ouer-grow our souls, and before death snatch us away into the grave.

For the similitude, which is verse. 26. observe only that it agrees not in
all points, for the soul is the cause of the life of the body, but so are not
good works the cause of faith, but only an effect and fruit of it; for faith
gives life to good works, and faith works by love in the person instified:
for we must (as has been said) first be good before we can do good, and we are
made good spiritually by our regeneration in Christ, and we being ingrafted
into him then we do good: so as the meaning only of the Apostle, is, by this
similitude to show, that when a dead man being dead can speak, which is
impossible, then faith which has no works, and so is but a dead faith, shall
justify and save us.

1. JOHN chap. 3. verse. 9.10.




THE Apostle in the beginning of this chapter first sets down that God the
Father by his everlasting love in his Son has bestowed upon the faithful
this privilege, to be called the sons of God in the son of God Christ
Jesus. Secondly, that this dignity to be the son of God, and so to be
called, is not to be discerned by the men of the world, because they have not
known the Son, having not his spirit; for spiritual things cannot be
discerned by them that have nothing but fleshly policy. Thirdly, as this cannot
be discerned of the world, so it is impossible our selves should sufficiently
conceive of it while we remain in the tabernacle of this life, because there
is another glory we expect, verse. 2. Fourthly, he sets down an effect
inseparable from this adoption, As many as are the sons of God, and have this
hope of future glory, they strive to reformation of life, not to be equally
pure, but to be like pure to the Lord Jesus. This he proves, first from the
institution of the law; God never ordained the law neither after our creation
nor after our redemption but to be kept, and the reason is thus; The breach of
the law is a disparagement (...) (...) (...) (...) swinge, and sin it perfect
strength. Thirdly, the godly e^e said not to sin, be (...) he labors to
walk in all the commandments of the Lord. Now he that walks in the right
way may sometime fall: but if he do, he^ strives to regaine it by greater
carfulness and speedier passage^: but the wicked go clean out of the way,
as if heaven stood at hell gate. Lastly, because in the godly there is a
combat; for there is two men in them; in the inward man they would feign please
God, and by the outward, (as Saint Paul says) they are made captive to sin:
Romans 7.23.
but in a mere natural man there is nothing but flesh, and so no combat: for
where all is one there is no division; and if there be any strife in him, it is
between his conscience and himself, in judgment conuincing him that it is
sin, and not between his conscience and his affection, misliking it as it is
sin: for this is easily seen by his often relapse into the same sin.

Now for the reason: he does not sin, because the holy Ghost which is the
seed of our second birth remains in him, neither can he sin: and this is
proved by two places of scripture: first, Romans 8.1. where the Apostle proves
these two graces inseparable: justification from sin, and sanctification from
sin, thus: There is no condemnation to him that lives a spiritual man: this
is proved ( verse. 5.) by contraries, They that live after the flesh, savor the
things of the flesh, but he that is borne of God cannot do so; for then he
must savor of death, which cannot be; proved by this: The wisdom of the
flesh is enmity to God; but he that is borne of God cannot be Gods enemy: on
the other side, he that walks in the wisdom of the flesh, obeieth not the
law of God, and by consequent (says the Apostle) cannot but sin. Whereupon
it follows, that they that live after the inclination of the heart of man,
cannot please God, and so cannot be saved: now he that is in Christ cannot
but please God, because he cannot but perform his will. Another reason, that
being a true Christian, a man cannot but amend his life, is taken out of Romans
6.5. Whosoever is made partaker of Christ, is made partaker of the death of
Christ, then is he dead to sin, proved thus: Christ by his death deserved not
only remission of our sins, but also to have the holy Ghost in those that
be his to mortify their sin: and this spirit cannot be idle, but works,
and his work is to d^^troy, o^^^nemie, that is, sin. Lastly, it is proved
thus, Whosoever is in Christ, has the spirit of Christ; he that has this
spirit, lives in the spirit: for the life of the spiritual man is the Lord
Jesus, even as the life of the body is the soul, and he that has a soul
must needs breath: and walking ( Galat. 5.24.) in the spirit, he cannot
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for the flesh and the spirit be contrary. And
verse. 24. it is said, They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections thereof; and who these be, appears 1. Peter 4.2. such as suffer
in the flesh, and these be they that cease from sin. Now then for thee to say
thou art flesh and blood, is not a shelter pleadable when thou art reprehended
for sin; for he that is a good Christian cannot but forbear it: and if thou
art all flesh and blood, then have thou not the spirit of God, which is proved
1. Corinthians. 6.16. Do you not know how he that coupleth himself with a harlot
is one flesh with her, and he that is one flesh with a harlot cannot be one
spirit with Christ Jesus? Even so for wrath toward thy brother; thou say
thou can not love him. Consider that if the Lord should judge thee out of
thine own mouth, thou could not be saved. Thou will say, the injury is so
great as no man can put it up: but he that is more then a man can do it: and
if thou be all man, Christ Jesus will never put up thy name among the
Saints. Look 1. Ioh. 5.3. He that is borne again counts all the
commandments of God light: so as if thou be of God, it is an easy matter to
forgive the brother. If he repent not of the wrong done unto thee, leave the
vengeance to God, Romans 12.20.
and heap thou coals of fire on his head: and if he do repent and seek
reconcilement, it is the easier to forget it, and flesh and blood does pity the
case of the suppliant.

For the third point, which is the way how to assure our selves to be the sons
of God: we must learn, that there is no so certain a mark to discern a man
to be of God, as holiness of life; not but that Gods children may fall most
grievously, and blemish their profession most foully, but that if Satan hap
to blindfold them that they go astray, yet with the lost son they will
return with double sorrow, and unfold to their shame their own sin. Example
w^^ere ^f we have in David, who though he was engaged to the Lord by his many
benefits, that took him from the sheepe-hooke and g^^e him a Scepter; that by
his protection had made him escape the snares of his enemies, and by his mercy
had freed him from many tribulations, yet did he fall into great uncleanness,
even the sin of adultery, 2. Sam. 11.4.5.6.7.
which by the law of God deserved deprivation of this humane life. When he had
done this, he glauered and flattered with the woman's husband, and bad him go
home to refresh himself with his wife, seeking thereby to father the bastard
on him. When this succeeded not, he thought to make him drunk that he might
thereby be more irritable to lust, and so to have gone to his wife. And though
Vriah answered he could not do it, because the Ark of the Lord was in the
field: which had not David been desperately sick in his soul, how could he
have been so forgetful of the Lord, as to have dealt so with him that was no
Jew, but a convert to religion, hereby to make the name of the Lord evil
spoken of? Yet when this prevailed not, he went further, and unto adultery he
added murder, that he might make his sin known, and his unholy life to
appear both to God and man, and carry as the grief of it in his heart, so the
shame of it in his forehead. And in this he wrought worse then Iesabel, for
he made Vriah the instrument and messenger of the letters for his own
execution; yea he sent them to Ioab who had himself been a murderer; which
might harden his heart in that sin, seeing David that was the King, not only
a favorer but the cause of such bloody actions. And after what manner should
this be done? namely, that he should fall by the sword of the uncircumcised, a
most ignominious, and shameful, and grievous death for so Christian a
Gentleman; and that he should so murder him, as to color the grieuousnesse of
his fault, not he alone but many other should die innocent; and that he
should continue senseless in this sinful course by the space of a year; yet
when it pleased God to cure his disease of hypocrisy, and to clear his eyes
that he saw not his sin. but his chain of sins be^^^^ ^im, then he
calls himself not a man of blood but of blo^^^; and then ^is conscience is
open to grieve for it, and then with his tears he washes away his
uncleanness, and wall^^^ ^^s a man cleansed and purged from his filthiness.
So as if a^y be a whore, let her remember the tears of Mary M^g^alene: if a
persecuter of the Saints, let him repent with Pa^^: Luke 7.38. Gal. 1.15. Mat.
26.75.
if a murderer, let him soundly confess his sin with David: and if he be
Apostasied, weep with Peter; for these be the works of righteousness whereby
they are known to be of God. And seeing others delivered from the pit, we
must learn (as David says Psalm. 56.3.) to fear and to trust: so as we must
always fear to fall into the sin, before being fallen we can trust to be
delivered, for this is one part of the righteousness of Gods children, to
tremble at the sight of sin, and then shall we never swallow it without
remorse.

Secondly, from hence learn, that a man may know in what state another man is.
If I see thee a despiser of religion, a profaner of the Sabbath, a butcher to
the poor, and an unclean liver, what shall I believe thee to be, but the
child of the devil? for this may I know by thy fruits. Why, but love bids
you hope the best, 1. Cor. 13.7.
and believe the best. True it is, love bids me believe all things; but not
a sow to be clean wallowing in the mire, or a dog not to be filthy that is
regorging up his stomach, Mar. 6.44.
or that grapes can grow upon brambles, or that mercy can be found in the
heart of an usurer, or that thorns may be touched and will not prick. For as
love bids me not to determine too soon, so not to be abused too late: and
God bids me look upon the tree to judge of the fruit. I may say, thou art in
the state of damnation: for by thy snarling I know thee to be a dog, Mat.
7.6.
and I see thy heart through thy hands; but whether thou shall be finally
damned, I leave thee there: for the Lord may have mercy on thee upon thy
repentance. I may come to the tree and say, here is no fruit, or here is
small fruit, or here is bad fruit; but I cannot say, Never fruit grow on thee
hereafter, as Christ did Mark. 11.13. And it is not the comers to Sermons,
but the doers of Sermons (...)


