^
^ church is that (...) stone
(...) al filth and stinch does smell very strong.
The Angel therefore cries to old and young,
Saying: come away from her my people spedely,
Least ye be partakers of the beasts iniquity.
For this is even she, which with her fornication,
Has made almost all princes commit adultery,
And eke has made the^ drunk with her superstition
Whereby she has got up to great authority.
The blood of gods saints, she drank plentifully.
Therefore as vengeance to you she has showed,
Double to her again let the same be repayed.
Pull down her shop of wares, wherbi she has got
All the treasures on earth, and ruled the same,
Both Emperors and Kings this beast spared not,
But placed and displaced, as pleased this Dame.
Therefore shall God now descry her whole shame,
And eke pull down her shop of merchandise,
With all her merchants, which thereby did rise.
Wherefore O ye Merchants of ye Romish Babell,
Weep, howl, and wyle, for near is your fall,
The blood of Gods saints for vengeance cries fell
And God now in wrath on you pour it shall.
Come away form her therefore Gods people all,
Least ye be partakers of her plagues and evil
And so in fire and brimston be burnt with the devil.
^
Emprors and Kings with many a great kingdom^.
Entend to destroy us, and have no remorce.
Behold here our shop which enriched our purse,
How it to ruin begins to fall.
For ye top they have broken, and down they will have all.
Our pardons and relickes which was our beginning
Is naught now regarded, and found all but lies,
Our masses and dirgies which kept us aloft raining
Are now not believed, but al folk them despise.
The Lutherans at these did first enterprise,
And at the^ so pulled, yt the top they have broken
Of our hie steple, which the same does betoken
And now ye Hugonites, with the Beggars together,
With all force they may are pulling at the rest,
Which is our authority, and punishment severe,
And eke our stout ruling from East unto West.
Thus al these three at our church before pressed,
To show their great power in pulling it down
Which out out alas, will be done to to soon.
Wherefore O romish Babilo^, we now the bemone
And also our own selves which lived by thee.
Now wringing our hands, we weep, sigh and groan
For this our destruction which draws so nigh.
^n nations now plainly our falsehood do spy,
And our great cruelty they do so detest,
That til we be destroyed they will not be at rest
Imprinted at London by John Awdeley / dwelling in little ^^^taine street
without (...). The.xvii. of August. 1566


