A Funeral Poem upon the Death of the learned Divine Mr. HVGH BROVGHTON, who
deceased in Anno 1612. August the 4. Interred the 7.
A Comely Dame in sorrows garments dressed,
Where crystal sliding Them does gently creep,
With her soft Palm did beat her yuorie Breast,
And rent her yellow Locks, her Rosey Cheek
She in a flood of brakish Tears did steep:
Rachel she seemd, old Isreal's beauteous Wife,
Mourning her Sons, whose silver cord of life
Was cut by murderous Herod's fell and bloody Knife.
Betwixt her lilly Hands the Virgin held
Two Testaments; the one defaced with rust,
Vanquished with time, and ouergrowne with eld;
All spoyld with careless spots, all soyld with dust:
It seemed the same, the which JEHOVAH just
With his celestial Finger did ingraue,
And on the top of smoking Sinai gave
To him, whom Pharaohs Daughter found in watery cave.
The other, seeming fresh and fair yclad
In Velvet cover, filleted with Gold,
White Bullions and Crymson ties it had;
The pumisht Leaves were seemly to behold:
That spotles Lamb, which traiterous Judas sold,
With bloody foil, which streamed from his side,
Them guilt, when in Jerusalem he di'd,
For to redeem his Love, his Dove, his Dear, his Bride.
Theology (for so men called the Maid,)
Upon these Volumes cast her moystned eyes;
And who shall now (quoth she) since BROVGHTONS dead,
Find out the Treasure, which within you lies,
Shaddow'd in High and Heavenly mysteries?
And who shall now (quoth she) to others tell,
When as the Worlds great Grandsier ADAM fell,
Banished from flowery Eden, where he first did dwell?
What means that monstrous Man, which Babels King
Did in a troubled stumber once behold,
Like huge Goliath, slain by David's Sling;
With dreadful Head, and cutled Locks of Gold:
With Breasts and mighty Arms of Silver mould:
With his swollen Belly, and large Sides of Brass:
With Iron Legs; with Feet of mingled mass,
One part composed of Clay, one part of Iron was?
What means the Lion, and the Eagles wings:
The savage Bear, that in his horrid iaw,
Three Ribs of some deuowred Carkeis bringes:
The Leopard, which wise Belteshatser saw,
With dreadful mouth, and with a murdering paw?
What means that horrid hideous hellish Beast,
With iron Teeth, and with his horned Crest?
All these, and thousands more, by BROVGHTON were expressed.
It Was he, that brancht MESSIAHS sacred stem
In curious Knottes, and chayn'd his glorious Race
From princely Adam to the noble Sem;
So down to him, that had Choniahs place;
And from his Sons, to Mary full of grace,
A Mother-mayde, a blessed Virgin wife,
The Daughter of her Son, which gave him life,
Which did redeem the World from sin and Satan's strife.
It Was he, that grau'd the Names of Iaakobs Sons
In precious Jewels upon Aarons Breast;
In Sardius, Ruben; which as Water runs:
Simeon in Topaz, bafer then the reft:
Leui in Emerauld, for doctrine best:
Judah in Carbuncle, like Heavens eye;
In Saphir, Isachar; like th'azur'd Sky:
Sardonix, Zebulon; which near the Sea does lie:
Dan in the flowery Hyacinth is cut:
In Achat, Nepthali: and warlike Gadd
In bloody Amethyst: Asher is put
In Chrysolite: the Beryll, Joseph had:
Young Benjamin old Iaakobs own sweetlad
in Jasper: each within his several Stone,
Our great Bezaleel carved; who now is gone,
To praise the Lamb, and him, that sits on Throne.
Ye Sacred Muses that in Shiloah swim,
And in celestial Deaw do dippe your Quill;
The which your Phoebus mighty Elohim,
In silver streaming channels does distill
From top of Hermon, and of Sion hill:
As you your great Creators praise rehearse,
Ah, lend one broken sigh, one broken Verse,
One doleful Ode, or Hymme, to deck his Sable Hearse.
And you poor Jews, the issue of old Sem,
Which did in Hony-flowing Canaan dwell,
And swayd the Scepter of Jerusalem,
Until some snaky-furie sent from Hell,
Did you inrage with spite, and malice fell,
To put your Life to death: Ah now repent
For murdering your Lord! Ah now lament
His death, that would have brought you into Iapheths tent*
And ye poor souls, that covet Adams tongue,
Which did remain in Hebers holy line,
When the aspyring Heauens-scaling thronge,
Above the big swollen Clouds did seek to clime:
(And is there then such pride in earthly slime?)
Do you lament this silver pinniond Swan,
As white as Salmon-snow, a happy man,
That spoke like Adams-selfe the speech of Canaan.
Besides, the Greek plentious in words and sense:
The Calde wise, the Arabian profound,
The Latin pleasing with his eloquence:
The brauing Spanish with her lofty sound:
The Tuscane grave, with many a laurel Crown:
The lisping French, which fittes a Ladies vain:
The German, like the people good and plain:
The English pure and rich, his native Countries strain.
Ah scoffing Ismaels, do not offer wrong
Unto his quiet vrne; do not defame
The silver touch of that harmonious Tongue:
Peace durty mouths; ah hold your peace for shame,
Spue not your Gall upon a dead man's name:
But wake o north wind, come o south and blow,
with your Myrh-breathing mouths sweet odours throw
Into the empty air, from BROVGHTONS Tomb below.
This said, the Virgin vanished away,
And Heaven did put her mourning Mantle on;
Hysperions Child, the Father of the Day,
That with his blazing blade, full brightly shone,
Clothed in sable his star-glittering throne:
The Clouds from their swollen eyes shed crystal showers,
And all for him, that lives in silver Bowers,
And Halleluiah sings with Thrones, and glorious powers.
W. Primroes.

FINIS.

