The second Book of Primaleon of Greece. And Prince Edward of England.

Continuing the course of their rare fortunes, Knightly Adventures, success in
Love, and admirable escape from very perilous Enchauntments: As the like
delightful History has sildome been heard of.

Transtated out of French by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's
Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

Printed at London by John Danter for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his
shop nere the Royal Exchange. 1596.

To the right Worshipful, Master Fraunces Young, of Brent-Pelham, in the
County of Hertford Esquire, and to the virtuous Gentlewoman Mistres Susan
Young his wife, and my kind favoring Mistres: health and all happiness.
AFter I had sent unto your Worships, the first Part of my translated Palmerine
of England, and considered withal, that the same took his original from the
third Part of this present History of Primaleon, which I am now translating
and purpose (by Gods leave) shortly to publish: I thought it necessary to make
you both my Patrones of this likewise, and the third, when it shall be
finished, that ye may see the whole Chronicle of these famous Princes in
their full perfection. And albeit it was not my hap to do the first Part of
Primaleon, (but only the first four sheets thereof) by reason of my urgent
occasions at that time: so please ye to read it, it will give ye the better
entrance into this history, though I could have wished there had been more
pains taken in the Translation thereof. Notwithstanding, this second Volume,
the third, and all the rest in order, even to the very conclusion of Palmerin
of Englands famous history, whereof I have two Parts yet to put forth: will I
present to you, as my most affected Patrones, and to whom I confess myself
very highly beholding. I have no other means, whereby to express my
thankfulness for so many favors: I beseech ye then make acceptance of this,
and the rest in order, with whatsoever else remains in me at all times
hereafter. So being only yours at command, I humbly take my leave.

A: Mundy.

To his good Friend M. Anthony Mundy.
Having met Primaleons second Part in the Printing House, whence I have long
loytered, and where it has been longer looked for, I have done all my
diligence to further the Edition, the rather for that (in my simple conceit) I
have not seen a History more delectablie continued, nor (to be plain with ye)
any thing by your self more pleasingly translated. I would not be here taken
(for commending this) to be a condemner of any Work by you before Englished:
yet give me leave to note, that reproof (how ever causeless) makes him that
can do well, strive to make his good better, that his begun credit may be the
more increased, and the needless find-faults absurdity, more worthily pointed
at. This in you have I especially observed, since the Translator of Amadis de
Gaul his second Part, (seeming to dwell far from neighbors) speaking in his
own praise says. That between the first Part which you translated, and that
of his, there should be found more than a days difference. This peremptory
conceit of himself, made me expect somewhat extraordinary, wherein I w^^ not
dea^i^'d, for within a few lines I found where he tells us of a King, that
married the Emperor of Constantinople: which error (being but one among many
as gross) this bold Censurer will needs cast upon the Printer. I tell ye M.
Mundy, this tutcht me near, for a hundred such burdens have I borne. The
custom is common, when an Author or Translator (either ignorant or negligent)
palpably err, then the Printer (forsooth) as if he had deserved to stand with
a paper on his head at every Stationers stall, must make a great Errata,
calling the Title, Faults escaped in the Printing: when (God knows) should he
let but half the faults pass of many such VVriters, he should make them be
as well laughed at, as an vpstart attorney lately was at a Leete: who beginning
to open his Clients Title to the Judge, said. Understand Sir, that Robert
Norman late of Brampton Yeoman, took to wife John Beeden, daughter to Walter
Beeden of the same parish widow: whereat the whole Court laughing, he would
have laid the burden on his man, who in drawing his Remembrances, had writ John
for Ione, and Walter for winefride. I would wish that Translator so to excuse
his Kings marriage with the Emperor. Or, let him say, he found it so in the
French Copy (for those Printers are far hence) and because he would be
singular for translating verbally, being an absurdity in French, he let it
pass in English. But for our Printers in England (were he Dives, who in these
days can do more than Lazarus) I dare affirm there is none of them will let
so gross a fault pass, except of purpose to make a gross Braggart
ridiculous: So leaving him, and wishing you to hasten your Translation of the
third part. I end.

Your old Well-willer: H. C. Printer.

Of the Work and Translation.
IF in opinion of judicial wit,
Primaleons sweet Invention well deserve:
Then he (no less) which has translated it,
Which does his sense, his form, his phrase observe.
And in true method of his home-borne style,
(Following the fashion of a French conceate)
Has brought him here into this famous I Will,
Where but a Stranger now has made his seat.
He lives a Prince, and coming in this sort,
Shall to his Country of your same report.
M. D.

Of the Translation, against a Carper.
DElicious phrase, well followed acts of glory,
Mixture of Love among fierce martial deeds,
(Which great delight unto the Reader breeds)
Has th'Inuenter kept t'adorne this Story.
The same form is observed by the Translater,
Primaleon (sweet in French) keeps here like grace:
Checking that Fool who (with a blushles face)
To praise himself, in Print will be a prater.
Peace chattring Py, be still, poor Lazarus:
Rich are his gifts, that thus contenteth us.
H. C.

(...)the mountains, with two Lions in a chain like a lease, and a bow in his
hand. Much harm has he done beer, since he lived among us, for sometime he
will steal abroad into the fleids, and if he meet with any body, he
presently kills him, which hinders the Tillage of the ground in many places,
because none dare follow their busbandry, for fear of him. And albeit we have
made diverse assemblies, of our people, in hope to dispatch his life, yet
hitherto our labor has proved all in vain, for be wears a Cornet about his
neck, which whenever he wyndeth, suddenly comes a number more of his
Patagons to help him: in regard whereof, we find it better for us, not to
meddle with him, expecting when the heavens will strike him by his hand,
freeing the world and us (that way) from his horrible tyranny.

CHAP. XXXIII.

How Primaleon being on hunting with Palantine and diverse other, strayed from
them with his Squire, and found the Grand Patagon, whom he overcame and
vanquished.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Primaleon being on hunting with Palantine and diverse other, strayed from
them with his Squire, and found the Grand Patagon, whom he vanquished, and
brought into subjection.

I Hear great meruailes of ye (Sir) answered Primaleon, and truly I would
gladly see a monster so admirable. Never desire the sight of him, replied
Palantine, for in sooth ye were better see the Devil, than Patagon. I pray
ye Sir (quoth Primaleon) let us go hunt that way where he abides, and so we
may chance to get a sight of him: but we will put on our armor, to prevent the
worst which may happen. I Will bear ye company answered Palantine, albe it I
have no desire to see him. At which words Primaleon smiled, and arming
themselves presently, toward the mountains they ride, with twenty other good
Knights in their train. So long they chased on every side, that at length
dark night ouer-tooke them, even as they rode along a plain field, where
Primalcon entreating them to abide till next morning: they yielded theretoo,
and every one took his rest, except Primaleon, who was desirous to make
himself there spoken of by some action of honor, worthy note and fame: and
doubting least Palantine would not guide him directly to meet with Patagon,
beholding likewise how every one slept, softly he arose, and taking no body
with him but his Squire Purente, straied so far from them in the nights
season, as when morning appeared, he found him in the midst of a fair spacious
wood.

At length he espied Patagon, who had hunted thereabout, and was now giving his
Lions their fees, at which sight Primaleon greatly rejoiced. Patagon seeing
him, thinking presently this was a pray provided for him, immediately let slip
his Lions, and hartned them on against the Knight: who being mounted on the
horse that Gataru gave him, and seeing the Lions come so furiously against him,
leapt lightly from his horse, when the Lions (not regarding him) set both upon
the horse very greedily. Patagon crossing an arrowe in his bow, let it fly at
ye Knight, but his Armor being of good proof, it did not hurt him, and he
making toward him, gave him such a thrust with his Lance, as it pierced quite
through both his legs. Patagon feeling himself wounded, snatched forth the
Lance again, and darted it at the Knight, who espied it coming, and
therefore quickly stepped aside, setting hand to his sword to draw it forth: but
Patagon having a great Courtlar, smote so strongly therewith upon the Knights
Sheeld, that he cleft it in two parts, for which he was requited with two such
sound strokes, as Patagon imagined himself more than half dead already.
Wherefore, casting both his bow and Courtlax on the ground, and forgetting to
call for help with his Cornet, he ran to get feyzment on his enemies body,
thinking to strangle him between his arms: but he suddenly gave back, and
watched him such a blow with his sword on the right arm, that he pared away
most part of the flesh, cutting off his hand likewise, which fell down to the
ground. Now through the grievous pain he felt by his wounds, as also his
loss of blood, which dyed the grass round about him, he was no longer able to
stand on his legs, but falling on the earth, roared so dreadfully, as it would
have terresied the very steutest heart in the world to hear him. At this noise,
the Lyens forsook the horse, running toward the Knight with woonderful fury:
new it stood him on to be hardy and valiant, for the Lions rent his armor in
diverse places, giving him (withal) four or five great wounds: but he thrust
his sword through ye ones belly, which made him stretch himself along on the
ground dead, and turning back on the other, cleft his head in two pieces with
his weapon thus was he rid of the Lions both together. Nor was he unmindful to
thank God for this good success, neither did his own hurtes any way dismay
him, but leaving the Lions, he came to the Graund Patagon, being desirous
(seeing him so strangely shapen) to take him thence with him as his prisoner,
thinking it would be a great honor, to have him embarked, and make a present
of him to Queen Grydonia.

Then calling Purente to him, who was greatly astonished at this misshapen sight,
and rejoiced that his master had escaped such danger: List a while, quoth
Primaleon, and let us devise, how we may get hence this infernal fury, that
my mistress Grydonia might have a sight of him. I know not, said Porente, how
it can possibly be done, because he is so sore wounded: nevertheless, we will
try all likely means to accomplish your desire.

So taking the chain, wherewith he used to leashe his Lions together, they
fassned it about his neck, whereat he gave such another loud shrieke, as
called two other of his savage Patagons, with long sharp pointed yrons in
their hands: which (notwithstanding) were likewise vanquished by Primaleon,
though indeed with much a do, in regard he was so dangerously wounded.

Having breathed and rested himself there awhile, he concluded to depart
thence; but he could not devise how to get Patagon along with him, neither how
to help himself, because the Lions had torn his horse in pieces.

Being in this perplexity, it fortuned that Torques, Palentine, and all the
other whom he left a sleep, arrived where he was: but when they beheld what
Prim^leon had done, they stood amazed thereat, and Torques alighting from his
horse, came to Primaleon in this manner. Believe me my Lord (quoth he) I may
justly complain of your unkindness, in forsaking me as ye did all these
other: albeit I am of so slender valor, as my help will stand ye but in
little sted, yet might I in service have attended on ye, to do whatsoever
liked you to command me: Say good my Lord, how cheer ye? for me thinks your
hurts are very offensive.

I thank God said Primaleon, I find my self very well now I have brought this
earnest desired enterprise to end. Palentine, and all the rest of his company so
admired this rare accident, as they knew not which way to extol it sufficiently.

Sir Knight, said Palantine, God has highly favored ye, in that you alone
have effected, what this whole Island could not do: now has Patagon his
deserts, for should he have continued longer in these parts, we must have been
enforced to fly our country, as unable to endure his devilish cruelty.

Well (quoth Primaleon) he shall now trouble ye no longer, therefore help to
lead him along with us, that they which before feared him, may now at their
pleasure behold him. Six of them pricked him forward with their Lances, and
Torques took the Cornet from about his neck, setting it to his mouth, for
trial of the sound, and whether any more Patagons would come thither or no:
but had there not been so many in company, he might full well have repented
his folly, for fifteen more came running forth of the woods upon them, which
in the end were every one foiled, Palentine, Torques and all the other Knights
showing great valor, and were not a little proud of so great a victory.

All the Patagons being dispatchy, they holp one another to dress their hurts,
for not one of them escaped unwounded: two Knights of Ormeda gave their horses
to Primaleon and Torques, rather choosing themselves to travail on foot, than
suffer men of so great desert to be so unprovided. All the way as they rode,
such wunderment was made at the Graund Patagon, as every one enquired, to know
their deliverer from so hideous a monster: and when Primaleon was shown the^,
imagine you, what triumphs and honors they bestowed therefore upon him. The
Lord of the Island, (to whom Primaleon thus far had disclosed himself, that
he was called the Knight of the cloven Rock) embracing him for this great
good fortune, said. Pardon me Sir, if I have not hitherto honored ye to your
high deseruings, and let my ignorance of your virtues, excuse so great an
oversight. Immediately he commanded his Chirurgions to have especial care of
his wounds, as also those which the Graund Patagon had received, because
Primaleon was so desirous to keep him alive: but he would not suffer them
apply any medicines to his hurtes, wishing rather to die than be recovered.
Seluida (for so was the Lords daughter of the Island named) came in great fear
to see Patagon: mary he was well pleased in beholding her, and showed himself
not so rough and impacient, as before he did, participating with the beasts
nature of whom he was engendered, who only delighted in women's company.

When they perceived his gentleness in the Ladies sight and how obediently he
behaved himself to her, her doubt and fear of him being well removed: they
persuaded her to come the oftener in his sight, and she so prevailed with him
by fair demeanor, that she could govern him as she pleased, entreating him
(by signs) to permit his hurts be cured: but he declared by his signs, how he
had need of no other Surgeon than himself, and licking his wounds, with
his huge broad tongue, ^aue show, that this was Physic sufficient for him.
Thence forward Seluida took charge of him, leading him up and down with her
in his chain, so that much good issued by the taking of him; for the Patagons
(afterward) would never hurt any one, in the Island. Palantine and his brethren
did many honors to Primaleon; and Soluida their sister, having diverse
conferences with him, still labored to win him to continue there with them:
but all her perswations proved in vain, in regard his affections called him to
another place.

Now Palantine imagined, if any mean might prevail for his abiding there, it
was to give him his Sister in marriage, which devise he imparted to his Father,
and he (on the other side) no less willing thereto than his son, sent him to
acquaint Primaleon therewith, so coming into his chamber, and sitting down by
him on the beds side, he began as follows. Sir Knight of the cloven Rock, my
father and we all do love ye so dearly, as we are very loath to forgo your
company, wherefore he gives you to understand by me, that if you please to
accept my Sister Seluida in marriage, her dowry shall answer your own
expectation, and he will repute himself happy by enjoying such a son.

Sir Palantine (answered Primaleon) I thank both him and you for the great
love ye bear me, Seluida is so fair and virtuous, as I would account my self
fortunate having her my wife, if there were not an especial hinderance in this
case: then let me plainly tell ye, my heart is else where countermaunded, and
in heavens fair forehead are my vows engraven, which makes me think my stay
here is over tedions, though I could as willingly die, as part from your
company, but that ye perceive what an urgent occasion thereto constrains me.

If it be so (quoth Palantine) then I vow to travail a long with you, and
never to return hither again, while you have any service wherein to employ me.

He accepted his kind offer, and so he went to advertise his father thereof
who albeit he was loath to forgo his son, yet for the company of so good a
Knight, he dispensed with fatherly affection, agreeing to his sons commendable
resolution.

Primaleon was no sooner cured, but provision for departure as speedily
appointed, to the Ladies no little grief, who had good hope, that better
acception would have been made of her love, for (indeed) she affected
Primaleon entirely. Thus by the means of her, was Patagon embarked, where
taking a heavy farewell of her vain-bestowed love, the tears standing like
pearls on her fair cheeks, she thus spoke. Sir Knight of the cloven Rock,
much better had it been (for me) never to have seen ye, for ye take from me
my brother Palantine, leaving my poor heart fettered in stronger chains, than
those wherein Patagon is manacled: but would that mine were comparable to his,
then were I assured to go along in your company with these words she went on
shore again, not having the patience to hear his answer, which moving
compassion in him, made him thus shape his speech to Palantine. I am partly
sorry, that I cannot do your sister such service as I would, and desertlesse
(on my behalf) is the love she bears me: but what I cannot accomplish for
her, shall bind me in a stricter bond to you, reckoning you always as my
dear friend and brother. Now was Patagon evermore afraid when he looked on
Primaleon, for he knew him to be the Knight that vanquished him: therefore when
he menaced him, he presently was humble, and at his commandment, standing more
in fear of him, than any other in the company.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Knight that would not stay the deliverance of Primaleon, when he was
enchanted in the Isle of Cantara, returned home into Poland, where he reported
the Knight of the cloven Rocks death: the great moan Gridonia made for him, and
what was strangely told her, by the Knight of the enclosed Isle.

THus sails Primaleon toward Polonia, with all the speed possible, earnestly
desiring to see his Grydonia, fearing least she should hear some sinister
tidings of him, and thereby change her mind, to like of some other Knight:
which doubt in him was altogether needless, because she could like nor love
any other but he.

Now (as ye have heard beforeone) Knight (of the company) would needs be gone
from the Island of Cantara not willing to stay the deliverance of Primaleon,
because he bare him no good affection: this Knight is now come home into
Poland, where being in presence of Queen mother and Grydonia, he declared what
had hauned them, and said that the Knight of the cloven Rock was dead: these
news brought Grydoma to such extremity of grief, that leaning in the lap of
Queen mother, and breathing forth a sigh, able to rent a far stronger heart
in pieces, she said.

Unhappy wretch that I am, let me now die a most desperate death, seeing I
have overthrown the only fair flower of chivalry: These words she uttered
with such entire feeling passion, that she fell into a swoun for a pretty whiles
space: when Queen mother beholding her in this dangerous estate, and fearing
her life to be now on the latest period of expectation, clapping her on the
cheek, thus said.

Alas sweet Daughter, what shall I do with thee? I looked for vengeance on that
traitor Primaleon, and shall I now see thee die, in whom my comfort thereof
consisted? Ah miserable mother Queen, much better were my death, than to see
my fair hope in this extreamitie: Then turning to the Knight, who had
delivered this false message.

Away (quoth she) with this black tel-tale of sad misfortune, for I cannot but
think him a messenger of lies, because if the Knight of the Cloven Rock were
dead, as thou labourest so to persuade us: all the other that went with him,
would have returned as well as thou.

Rather tell me (false traitor) where have thou left him? betrayed by some
treachery devised in thy disloyal heart, rather than otherwise; else can no one
in the world persuade me, that the famous Knight of the cloven Rock is dead.
After she had thus spoken, she caught her Daughter to her again in her Arms,
and by casting cold water on her face, chafing her temples, and other such like
means, she recovered her former spirits, when looking about her, and seeing
every eye wet with pity in consideration of her case, she thus began to
complain.

Fair Knight of the cloven Rock, is it certain that thou art dead? I cannot
think the auspitious heavens so much envy my good fortune, neither had they so
slender regard of thee offering thy life to so many dangers for my sake. Be
well assured, that so soon as I am more certain of thy death, my soul, which
only depended upon thine, will quickly keep thee company, to the end it may
enicy the pleasure and repose in another World, which in this life it was so
ungently debard of: there shall thou perceive the unfeigned love I bear thee:
for I might be reputed as monstrous ungrateful, if I would make any spare of
my life, seeing thou wast deprived of thine, for my loves sake. Since first
thou had knowledge of me, nothing fell to thy share but pain and travail,
hazarding still thy person for defense of mine: now, let not me bury thy
kindness in oblivion, but by conuersing with thee familiarly in death, make
known the true sympathy of my affections with thine. Peradventure it may be,
that I was unworthy to enjoy thee as myhusband, and therefore Heaven thought
it meet to cut thee off so soon, only to forestall me of so high a happiness,
and that Primaleon might live in better assurance, than he did while thou
liuedst: for none in the world was more likely to take down his presuming
thoughts, than thou, nor any able to finish my solemn vow, but only thou.
These and a number such like lamentations she uttered, swouning many times
whereby Queen Mother greatly despaired of her life, when weeping over her, she
thus spoke.

Alas Daughter, why seek thou to kill me with this grief of thine? Had I
known what entyre love thou did bear the knight, I would have given better
scope to it, than hither too I have done. Believe not (I pray thee) that he is
dead, because the reporter of these news is a liar and a traitor, as evermore
all his kindred have been: let us send for the other which came home with him,
to the end we may perfectly know the certain truth of these things.

Send for them (quoth Gridonia) and let us hear what they say, for if the
Knight of the cloven Rock be dead indeed, make no question, but I shall
speedely follow him. After the other people of the ship were brought before
them, she commanded them to tell the truth, in doing of, they should sustain
no harm, otherwise to assure themselves of grievous punishment. Hereon they
told how al had happened, that Purente likewise said, there would a Knight
arrive there, who should deliver him: marie, their Captain had no will to stay
there such leisure, but would needs depart thence, leaving all the rest
behind in hope to recover him.

Traitor, said Queen mother, I knew my conceit of thee would not prove
false, fair daughter, leave to torment your self with these tormenting
passions, your good Knight will return with speed I warrant ye, and all this
grief shall be converted into mirth and iouisance. Afterward, the lying Knight
was commanded to prison, the rest were set free and recompensed, because they
had told the truth; being not faulty in returning back to Poland, in regard
their Captain enforced them theretoo.

These tidings were not so displesing to both the Queens only, but the Infant
Zerphira took them as heavily, yet not daring to express her grief
outwardly, she conferred with her private thoughts, alleging her misfortune
to be cause of the worthy Knights death. But being a Lady both wise and
virtuous, she concealed her sorrows very discreetly, using many comfortable
persuasions to Gridoma, desiring her not to credit the report of her Knights
death, but rather to expect his happy return, and that speedely.

Sister (quoth Gridonia) I am so unfortunate, and evermore have been subject
to so many mishaps, that rather ill is always ready for me, than good, or
any taste thereof: and I wunder you express no more heaviness for his death,
considering what reckoning and esteem he ever made of you.

My grief (quoth the Infant) would equal yours, were I assured of his death:
but reputing it a fable, I were but unwise in needless hurting of my self.

All this day, Gridonia continued like one half dead, refusing sustenaunce and
company: at night, throwing her self carelessly upon her bed, Queen Mother
lay down by her, to comfort her: and sleep she could not, till extremity of
heaviness enforced both her theretoo.

No sooner were they both asleep, but a strange deformed Dwarffe entered the
chamber, and taking Gridonia by the arm, softly awaked her: whereat she being
amazed, and taking him to be Risdeno. she said. Tell me I pray thee, how came
thou hither at this unfit time? where is thy Lord and mine? for Gods sake tell
me, is he alive or dead? Madam (answered the dwarffe) I am not Risdeno, but one
(as desirous as he) to do ye any service, only for the Knights sake ye love
so dearly, whom you imagine to be dead, as I gather by your sad and woeful
lamentations. I come to assure ye, that he lives, though (a while) enchaunted,
and shall be delivered by a most valiant and worthy Knight, who will set him
free, that to revenge your wrongs, has made himself a prisoner: and of this
assuredly persuade your self, that you shall see him rereturne very shortly.

Now, in regard ye should not dye with conceit of greef, I am expressly sent
hither to tell ye these glad tidings: for should not the Knight of the cloven
Rock find you well at his coming, I know it would be his death immediately.

These news made Gridonia exceeding joyful, and looking about for the
Dwarffe, she beheld a Man of a tall stature, old and wrinckle-faced, standing
by her, which greatly astonished her, saying. What great wunders are these? My
friend, by the reuerendfaith thou bear to God, I charge thee tell me, if the
tidings I haut heard be true or no, and what is become of the Dwarffe that
spoke to me even now, whom I at the first took to be Risdeno servant to the
Knight of the cloven Rock, whose absence thus greeueth me?

Madame, said the old man, doubt not any thing ye have heard, for they are most
certain: concerning the dwarffe yea ask for, my self was he, who did it to
acquaint ye with my powerful skill, that the better credit might be given to
my speeches.

My good friend, replied Gridonia, heaven quite ye for this kindness, how much
have ye eased my troubled mind by this gladsome report? But seeing your skill
is such, I pray ye tell me more, concerning the Knight of the cloven Rock, say
of what race he is descended, seeing you are so well acquainted with him. Fair
Queen, answered the old man, know that the Knight is of so high lineage, such
great valor and esteem, as he has not his equal in the world, except
Primalcon only, to whom you bear such deadly hatred: and here of resolve
your self, no Knight is able to bring ye Primaleons head, but this famous
Knight of the cloven Rock, who indeed shall give it ye, and raise ye to such
dignity withal, as you shall be the only happy Lady of the world. Love him
therefore with all your heart, for ye have great reason to do so: as for
describing him more openly to ye, that will I never yield to, because I should
therein offer him no mean injury, in regard he desires to travail thus
concealed.

Alas my friend, replied Gridonia, in that point I account my self most
unfortunate, because I can attain to no certainty thereof: and seeing you
refuse therein to satisfy me, tell me then the reason, why he is so loath to
have himself known. Because he took such an oath (quoth the old man) when
he left his Country; but the time will come, when you shall better know him,
and then will you esteem your fortune matchless, being Lady of such a Knight,
complete in all perfections: nor can he be fellowed by any one, but he that
must deliver him from this Enchauntment, who is of no less virtues than he,
and travails (shadowed) in such manner as he does. Great friends will both
these Knights be in this voyage, but in time hereafter, their love shall be
converted to marvelous hatred, which will cause more grief in you, than ever
(as yet) ye endured: nevertheless, be of good cheer, and dismay not, for all
your fortunes shall have a successful conclusion. All this I advertise ye of
before hand, to confirm your patience the stronger, and when ye remember me,
to think on these speeches, for more (at this time) may I not reveal unto ye.

Ye have said already (...) much, quoth she, as both rejoices and astenisheth
me, I pray God I may see the happy time whereof you talk: in mean while, I
know not how to express sufficient ^ratitude unto ye, for this your kind
preserving of my life. Madame, said the old Man, I will require nothing of ye
at this time, your gentle offer shall stay till more needful occasion: rather
let me now give you a gift, which is this King, of very great virtue, this
shall assure ye, that whatsoever ye have heard of me, is no dream, but a sound
truth. At these words, he put the Ring upon her finger, wherein was set a most
fair Emeralde, which she graciously accepted, and while she looked down but
to behold it, the old Man was vanished: she perceiving the Ring to beautiful,
and of great value, looking up again, to thank the old Man for bestowing it
on her, wundred what was become of him, greeuing because he had so suddenly
left her, yet determined to be of better courage afterward.

This old Man was the Knight of the Enclosed Isle, who knowing Gridonia at the
very point of death, by the false news of the disloyal Knight, transported
himself thorough the air, and came thus to comfort her. So troubled was her
mind with this strange accident, that she awaked the Queen Mother, to whom
she showed the Ring, and rehearsed beside unto her all the old man's speeches.

The aged Queen admyred her Discourse, aplauding the heavens for these joyful
news, saying: Undoubtedly Daughter, all this cannot choose but be of
certainty, as partly ye may persuade your self, by his great skill, entering
this place in such sort as ye have declared. Cheer up your hopes than (fair
Daughter) and so soon as the Knight of the cloven Rock returns, we will
entreat his travail to Constantinople, because he is the only man that must
revenge our wrongs upon Primaleon, then in short time after, shall both your
desires be effectually concluded. Madame, answered Gridoma, I shall think it
ouer-long till he be here arrived, our affairs can have no good success till
then, and gladly would I see the Knight, by whom he shall be delivered: but I
could not well understand all the Wizards words, because he said, that to
revenge my wrongs, himself was become a prisoner. It may be the same Knight
which sent me Zerohira, who is reputed as valiant as the Knight of the cloven
Rock: I pray God it may be he, then will I labor to set unity between them,
else shall I have but little joy by their dissension. Happen what may (quoth
Queen Mother) God will d^fend them both from harm, being so valiant as they
are reported. In these and such like conferences, they spent the whole night,
until such time as break of day appeared then did Gridonia recite all these
things again to Zerphira, whereby she received great joy and contentment.


