M. PERKINS, HIS EXhortation to Repentance, out of Zephaniah: Preached in 2.
Sermons in Sturbridge Fair.

TOGETHER WITH TWO Treatises of the Duties and Dignity of the Ministry:
Delivered publicly in the University of Cambridge.

With a Preface praefixed touching the publishing of all such works of his as
are to be expected: with a Catalogue of all the perticulers of them, diligently
perused and published, by a Preacher of the Word.

Proverbs 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, But he that
confesses and for saketh them shall find mercy.

LONDON Imprinted by T. C. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound. 1605.

To the right worshipful, my very worthy and Christian friend, Sir William
Gee, Knight, one of his Majesty's Honorable Counsel in the North, Recorder of
the Town of Beuerley, and Hnll, and one of his Majesty's Justices of peace in
the Eastriding of the County of York, a true friend of learning, and piety,
and to the virtuous, and religious Lady his wife. Grace and peace from God etc.
AMongst the many reasons (Worshipful Syr',) which have persuaded me that
Popery cannot be the true religion, this is not the lest: the insufficiency
of their doctrine of faith and repentance: which two things though they be the
chief and principal points in Religion, and so necessary that he, who does
not, both know, and practice them aright, can never be saved yet I dare
avouch, that the faith and Canitius in Catechism. Costerus in Enchiridio.
repentance of the Romish Church, as they are taught by many of the best
approved Papists, are no better then such a faith, and such a repentance as an
hypocrite, and a very reprobate may attain unto: Indeed, to insist upon
repentance only (they make many fair florishes, they call it penance, they
make it a sacrament, and say it is a board that saues a man after shipwreck,
and write great volumnes of it, and of confession, and of Cases of Corradus.
Nauarrus. Loper Sairus. Hallus. Graffius, and many other.
conscience, (as you good Sir in your own reading know better then I) and yet
alas, when all is done, it is but a shadow of repentance; and indeed how can
they teach aright the doctrine of repentance: which err so fowly in setting
down the justice of God, and the vileness of sin, which 2. points a man must
know, else he will never repent: but Popery misconceiuing the justice of God,
teaching it not to be infinite in as much as it needs not an infinite
satisfaction, and misconceiuing the nature of sin, teaching every sin not to
be damnable, (...) to offend Gods Infinite justice, ^^ring (I say) in these 2.
how is it possible they should conceive aright the nature of repentance? by
which a man seeing his sins, their foulness their punishment, and his own
misery by them, confesses them, bewails them, fearing Gods justice, flies
from it, and craves forgiveness of his mercy, and lastly purposes, and
indeuoureth to leave them all, and to lead a new life. The serious
consideration hereof, has often made me wonder, why many Popish treatises
being in some sort exhortations to repentance should be so accounted of, as
they are by some: for though I confess there are in some of them, good and
wholesome meditations, and many motives to mortification, and good life, yet
would I gladly learn of any man but this one thing, how those exhortations can
be pithie, or powerful, sound or any way sufficient to move a man to
repentance, when as, not those books, nor all Popery is able to teach a man
sufficiently what true repentance is.

If any man reply: I will therefore learn the doctrine out of the Protestants
books, and use the Papists for exhortation only: I then answer, is it not a
more compendious, and convenient, and a less scandalous course, to seek
exhortations out of such writers, as do teach the doctrine aright? nay I doubt
how it is possible to find a powerful exhortation to repentance in any
Papist, who erres in the Doctrine: the reason is manifest, because Doctrine is
the ground of exhortation: and if the doctrine be unsound, how can the
exhortation, be any better. Let us therefore leave these muddic puddles, and
fet our water at the fountain: the water of life, at the fountain of life, I
mean the doctrine of faith, and repentance at the written word of God, and at
such men's writings as are grounded thereupon, and agreeable thereunto. Deering^
Grenham. Bradford. and many other.


Now, amongst those many instruments of God, who have labored with profit in
this great point of Religion: namely repentance, drawing their doctrine out of
the two breasts, of the 2. Testaments of Gods book, I may well say, (to say no
more,) that this man of God Master Perkins, deserves to have his place: whose
labors, whilst he lived, and his yet living labors, what they deserve, I had
rather others should proclaim, then I once name: who profess my self to be
one of those many, who may truly say, that by the grace of God and his good
means principally, I am that I am: But leaning him in that glorious mansion,
which Christ the Lord of the Harvest has prepared for him: and now given him.
I return to my self, and do humbly praise the Lord of heaven, who gave me
my time in the University, in those happy days, wherein (beside many other
worthy men of God, whereof some are fallen asleep, and some remain alive unto
this day) this holy man did spend him self like a Candle to give light unto
others:

The scope of all his godly endeavors was to teach Christ Jesus, and him
crucified, and much labored to move all men to repentance, that as our
knowledge has made Popery ashamed of their ignorance: so our holy lives might
honor our holy profession. And as repentance was one of the principal ends,
both of his continual preaching and writing: soespecially and purposely has
he twice dealt in that Argument.

First, in his Treatise of Repentance: published 1592. wherein briefly (as his
manner was) but soundly, pithily, and feelingly, he lays down the true
doctrine, and the very nature of repentance: and after the positive doctrine,
he touches some of the principal controversies and difficulties in that
doctrine, but afterward thinking with himself, that he had not seriously and
forcibly enough, urged so great and necessary a Lesson as Repentance is,
therefore shortly after, being desired and called to the duty of preaching, in
that great, and general assembly at Sturbridge-Faire, he thought it a fit time:
for this necessary and general exhortation to Repentance: to the intent, that
as we were taught the doctrine of Repentance, in the former treatise: so in
these sermons we might be stirred up to the practice of it. And certainly,
(Good Sir:) I judge there could have been no matter, more fit for that
assembly then an exhortation to repentance, for as the audience was great and
general, of all sorts, sexes, ages and callings of men, and assembled out of
many corners of this kingdom so, is this doctrine general for all: some
doctrines are for Parents, some for children, some for scholars, some for
tradse-men, some for men, some for women, but repentance is for all: without
which, it may be said of all, and every one of age, not one excepted: No
Repentance, no salvation

These Sermons being in my hands, and not delivered to me from hand to hand,
but taken with this hand of mine, from his own mouth, were thought worthy for
the excellency, and fit for the generallity of the matter, to be offered to
the public veiwe: I have also other works of his in my hands: of which
(being many,) I confess my self, to be but the keeper for the time, taking my
self bound to keep them safely, to the benefit of Gods Church, of whose
treasure upon earth I make no question, but they are a part: and I heartily
desire you (my godly friends) and all other faithful Christians to solicit
the Lord in prayer for me, that I may faithfully discharge my self of that
great charge which in this respect lies upon me: and that his grace and
blessing may be on me, and all others, who are to be employed in this service,
wherein (had the Lord so pleased) we could heartily have wished never to have
bin employed: but that his life might have eased us of the labor: and that as
I begin with this, so I, or some other better able (which I rather desire) may
go forward, undertaking the weight of this great burden, and not faint, till
he have made a faithful account to the Church of God, of all these Jewels
delivered to our trust.

And now these first fruits of my labors, in another man's vineyard, as also
all that hereafter do or may follow, I humbly consecrate to the blessed Spouse
of Christ Jesus, the holy Church of God on earth, and namely to the Church of
England, our beloved mother, who may rejoice, that she was the mother of such a
son, who in few years did so much good to the public cause of religion, as
the wickedness of many years shall not Master Perkings, but forty years old
at his death.
be able to wear out. But first of all, and especially, I present the same
unto you (my very worsh* and Christian friends) who (I must needs say) are
very worthy of it in many respects.

1 For the matter it self, which is repentance, my self being able to
testify, that you are not hears. but doers, ripe in knowledge, and rife in
the practice of repentance, insomuch as I dare from the testimony of my
conscience, and in the word of a minister pronounce of you, that as you have
heard and known this Doctrine of repentance, so blessed are you, for you do
it.

And 2. for him, who was the author hereof (whose mouth spoke it from the
feeling of his soul, and whose soul is now bound up in the bundle of life:) I
know and cannot in good conscience co^ceale the great delight, you have always
had in the reading of his books, the reverend opinion, you had of him living,
and how heavily and passionately, you took his death, and departure: therefore
to cheer you up in want of him, I send you here this little book, his own
child, begotten in his life time, but borne after his death: observe it well
and you shall find it, not unlike the father, yea, you shall discern in it the
fathers spirit, and it doubts not, but to find entertainment with them, of
whom the father was so well respected.

And for my self, I spare to rehearse what interest you have in me, and al my
labors, it is no more then you worthily deserve, and shall have in me for
ever: you are the fairest flowers in this garden, which in this place I after
others have planted for the Lord (or rather God by us): And two principal
pearls in that caowne, which I hope for, at the last day from the Lord my God,
whose word at my mouth you have received with much reverence, and with such
profit, as if I had the like success of my labors in others, I should then
never have cause to say, with the Prophet, I have labored in vain, and spent
my strength in vain, but my judgment is with the Lord. and my work with my
God.

And if I knew you not, to be such as take more delight in doing well, then in
hearing of it, I would prove at large, what I have spoken of you: yet give me
leave to say that, which without open wrong, I may not conceile, that beside
your rare knowledge, and godly zeal to religion, and other duties of the first
table to God himself: your charity and pity to the needy distressed
Christians, at home and abroad: your merciful dealing with them, who are in
your power; your benevolence to learning, and namely to some in the
University; do all proclaim to the world those your due praise: which I
(well knowing your modesties) do spare once to name: neither, would I have said
thus much, were it not for this cold and barren age, wherein we live, that so,
when our preaching cannot move, yet your godly examples might stir up. Pardon
me therefore I pray you, and think it no wrong to you, which is a benefit to
Gods Church: But go forward in the strength of the Lord your God, and hold on
in that happy Psalm. 11. 16 Apoc. 2. 10 1. These. 5. 24.
course you have begun, be faithful unto the end, the Lord will give you the
Crown of life, faithful is he, which has promised, who will also do it:
proceed (good Sir) to honor learning in your self and others, and religion
especially, which is the principal learning; and proceed both of you, to
practice religion in your own persons; and in your family: hold on to shine
before your family, and amongst the people, where you dwell, in zeal and
holiness: hold on hereby, still to shame popery, to stop your enemies mouths,
and to honor that holy religion, which you profess, to gain comfort of good
conscience to your selves, and assurance of eternal reward: and lastly, to
encourage me in those painful duties which lie upon me: for I openly profess
that your religious zeal and love of the truth, with ma^y other good helps,
are principal encouragements in my ministry, and especial motives unto me, to
undertake the charge of publicatio^, of so many of the works of this holy man
deceased, as may not in better manner be done by others. But I keep you too long
from this holy exhortation following, I therefore send you to it, and it to
you, and from you to the Church of God, for I dare not make it to be privately
yours and mine, wherein the whole Church has interest, as well as we: It was
preached in the field, but it is worthy to be admitted into our hearts: I found
it in the open field, but upon dilligent view, finding it to be Gods corn, and
a parcel of his holy and immortal seed, therefore I brought it home, as good
corn deserves: And as it is Gods corn, so in you I desire all holy christians
to lay it up in Gods garners, that is in their hearts and souls.

And thus committing this little volume to your reading, the matter to your
practice: you and yours, to the blessed favor of that God, whom you serve: and
my self and my endeavors. to your hearty love, and holy prayers. I take
leave: From mie study. August. 7. 1604.

Yours in Christ Jesus, ever assured. WILLIAM CRASHAVVE.

To the Christian Reader, and especially to all such as have any Coppies of the
works of Master Perkins, or intend any of them to the Press.
FOrasmuch as there has been lately signification made, of diverse of M.
Perkins his works hereafter to be printed, in an Epistle to the Reader
praemised before the Treatise of Callings, and that signification being but
general, might peradventure give occasion to some, to set out some particulars
(without the consent of M. Perkins his assigns) as imperfectly as are these
two books, entitled The reformation of Covetousness, and The practice of
Faith, justly and truly (for ought that I see) censured in the aforesaid
Epistle: It is therefore now thought good, to mention the particular
Treatises, and works of his, which shall hereafter (if God will) be published,
for the benefit of Gods Church: I do therefore hereby make known to all,
whom it any way may concern, that there were found in the study of the
deceased, and are in the hands of his Executors, or assigns, and preparing for
the Press.

1 His Expositions on the Epistle to the Galathians. 2 On the Epistle of Jude.
2 His Book of the Cases of Conscience. 3 His Treatises, 1. Of Witchcraft. 2.
Of Callings.

All these he had perused himself, and made them ready for the Press,
according to which Coppies by himself so corrected, some of them already are,
and the rest will be published in due time: And hereupon we desire all men who
have Coppies of them, not to offer that wrong to that worthy man of God, as to
publish any of their own, seeing the coppies hereof which are to be printed,
are of his own correcting: but rather if they can help to make any of them
more perfect by their coppies, they may therein do a good work to the benefit
of many, and much comfort to themselves.

And further, I do hereby make known, that I have in my hands at this
present of his works, taken from his mouth, with my own hand, hereafter (if
God will) to be published, with the allowance of our Church, and for the benefit
of his children, these particulars.

1 His Expositions or readings, on the 101. Psalm. 2 On the 32. Psalm. 3 On
the 11. Chap. to the Hebrews. 4 On the 1, 2, and 3. Chap. of the Revelation.
5. On the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of Saint Matthew. 2 His Confutation of Camsius
his little Popish Catechism. 3 His Treatises, 1. Of Imaginations Out of Genes.
8. 2. 2. Of Temptations, out of Matthew 4. 3. Of Christian equity, out of
Phillippians 4. 3. 4. Of the Callings of the Ministry, out of two places of
Scripture. 5. Of Repentance, out of Zephaniah, 2. 1.


Besides many other particular Sermons, and short discourses made upon
several, and special occasions: of al which, some are already published by
others, and some by my self: and all the rest that remain, as they be the
Jewels of Gods Church, so did I willingly dedicate them to the public and
general good: Iudgeing it were a foul sin in me, or any other, to
impropriate to our selves, or our own private use, the labors of This, or any
other learned man, which are in my opinion, parts of the Treasury of the
militant Church: And as it were wrong to the Church, if I should conceal them,
so doubtless were it to him and his children: If I should publish them for
mine own alone, and not for their benefit. If I do, I think it may be justly
said unto me, or whosoever does so, Thy money perish with thee. And what
herein I have said for my self: I know I may boldly and safely say, for his
Executors or assigns, which have or had in their hands, any of those which
were found in his Study: In the publishing of alwhich, as we do intend to
deal truly with the Christian Reader, and not to commit any thing to the
Press, which has not either been written or corrected, by the Author
himself, or faithfully penned according to the truest Coppies taken from his
own mouth, and since by others of sufficiency and integrity, dilligently
perused: so we purpose to refer them to the benefit of the Authors wife and
children, as much as may be, wishing that upon this Caveat, men would not be
so hasty (as some have been) to commend to the world, their vnprefect notes,
upon a base desire of a little gain, both to hinder the common good of the
Church, and to defraude the said parties of their private benefit, to whom in
all equity and conscience, it does principally appertain: And desiring all
who have any perfect Coppies of such as are in my own hands, that they would
either help me with theirs, or rather take mine to help them. That by our
joint powers and our forces laid together: the walls of this worthy building,
may go up the fairer and the faster. And so I commend them all to Gods
blessing, who endeavor to commend themselves, and their labors to God and to
his Church.

Your brother in the Lord. W. C.

AN EXHORTATION TO REPENTANCE.
Zophoniah, Chap. 2. verse. 1. 2. Search your selves, euensearch you o nation,
not worthy to be beloved: before the Decree come forth, and you be as Chafe
that passes on a day.
THe Prophet in the first Chapter of this prophecy, rebukes the Jews of three
notable crimes, Idolatry, fraud, and cruelty. In this second he exhorts them
to repentance, and withal reproves some of their special sins. In the
three first verses he propounds the Doctrine of Repentance, and adds some
special reasons to move and stir them up to the practice of it. In
propounding the Doctrine of repentance, he directs it to two sorts of men.
First to the obstinate and impenitent Jews in the first and second verses.
Secondly, to the better sort of them, in the third. So that the sum and
substance of these two first verses, is a brief and summarie propounding of
the doctrine of Repentance to the obstinate Jews. The words contain in them
5. several points, touching the doctrine of repentance.

1 The duty to be performed, Search:

2 Who must be searched: your selves.

3 Who must do it. The Jews: who are further described to be a nation, not
worthy to be beloved of God, these are in the first verse.

4. In the second verse: the time limitting them, when to repent, before the
decree come forth that is, before God put in execution the judgments which are
already decreed and appointed for them.

5. A forcible reason urging them to do it which lies hid, and is necessarily
implied in the fourth point: namely, that there is a decree against them, which
wants nothing but execution: which also shall come unless they repent, whereby
they shall be fanned: and if they shall be found to be chafe, they shall fly
away with the wind of Gods justice. Of all these points in order.

For the first, the holy Ghost says; Search your selves. The words are
commonly read thus. Gather your selves, which, though it be good, for that in
repentance a man gathers himself, and all his wits together, which before
were dispersed, and wandered up and down in vanity: yet I rather allow their
translation who read thus. Search, or fan your selves: but either of them may
stand, because I^unius.
the word in the original does co^prehe^d both significations; yet it seems
that to search, or sift, fits this place better, considring the same manner of
speech is atterwards continued in the word Chafe: so that the meaning of the
Holy Ghost seems to be this: Search, try, and fan your selves, least you
be found light chafe, and so fly away and be consumed before the justice of
God.

Concerning this duty of searching, let us observe first, that the holy Ghost
urging the Jews to repent, uses not the word Repentance, but bids them search
themselves: yet meaning, he, would have them to repent: giving us to
understand, that no man can have true and sound repentance, but he who has
first of all searched and examined himself: and this stands with good reason,
for no man can repent, who first of all does not know himself, and his own
wretchedness. But no man can see into himself, nor know himself, but he
that does diligently search himself: so that the beginning of all grace, is
for a man to search and try, and fan himself, that thereby he may know what
is in himself: that so upon the search, seeing his fearful and damnable
estate, he may forsake himself and his own ways and turn to the Lord. Thus
speaks the holy Ghost in the hearts of holy men; Let us search and try our
ways: and Lamen. 3.
make what follows; and turn again to the Lord: as though there were no
turning again to the Lord, but after a searching of our selves. With this
testimony of the holy Ghost, agrees the testimony of al holy men's
consciences, who all know, that the first beginning of their turning to the
Lord, was a searching of themselves: Let any repentant sinner ask his
conscience, and call to mind his first calling and conversion, and he will
remember that the first thing in his repentance was this; that he searched into
himself, and looked narrowly into his ways, and finding his ways dangerous,
and his case fearful, did thereupon resolve to take a new course, and turn
to the Lord for pardon and mercy, and for grace to enter into more holy, and
more comfortable courses.

The man that passes upon ridges of Mountains, and sides of hills, or that
goes over a narrow bridge, or some dangerous and steep Rocks, at midnight;
fears not, because he sees no danger: but bring the same man, in the
morning, and let him see the narrow bridge, he went over in the night, under
which runs a violent stream, and a bottomless gulf, and the dangerous
Mountains, and rocks, he passed over, and he will wonder at his own
boldness, and shrink for fear to think of it, and will by no means venture
the same way again: for now he sees the height of the Mountains; the
steepness of the Hills, the cragginesse of the Rocks, the fearsul downfall,
and the furious violence of the stream underneath, and thereby sees the
extreme danger, which before he saw not: therefore he wondreth, and reioy ^oth,
that he has escaped so great a da^nger; and will by no means be drawn to go
that way in the day, which he went most carelessly in the darkness of the
night, but seeks another way (though it should be far about:) So a sinner in
his first estate, which is natural and corrupt (as we are bredde and borne)
has a veil before his face: so that he sees nothing: the wrath of God and
the curse due for sin, Hell and damnation seeking to devour him, he sees
them not, although (living always in sin,) he walks in the very Jaws of
Hell it self: and because he sees not this fearful danger, therefore he
refuses no sin at all, but rusheth securely into all manner of sin: the
night of impenitencie, and the mist of ignorance so blinding his eyes, that he
sees not the narrow bridge of this life, from which if he slide, he falls
immediately into the bottomless p^t of Hell.

But when as Gods spirit has by the light of Gods word opened his eyes and
touched his heart to consider his estate, then he sees the frail bridge of
this narrow life, and how little a sleppe there is between him and damnation;
then he sees Hell open due for his sins, and himself in the high way to
it: sin being the craggy rock, and Hell the gaping gulf under it; this life
being the narrow bridge, and damnation the stream which runs under it:
Then he wondreth at his miserable estate, admireth the mercy of God in
keeping him from falling into the bottom of hell, wondreth at the presumptuous
boldness of his corruption, which so securely plodded on toward destruction,
and being ashamed of himself, and these his ways, he turns his heart to the
God that saved him from these dangers; and sets himself into more holy ways,
and more comfortable courses, and confesses that ignorance made him bold, and
blindness made him so presumptuous; but now he sees the danger, and will by
no means go the same way again: and thus the searching and seeing into the
foulness of sin, and the danger thereof, is the first beginning of
repentance, and the first step into grace.

This doctrine teaches us what faith and repentance is general in the world:
All men say, they believe, and have repented long ago; but try it well, and
we shall find in the body of our Nation, but a lip faith, and a sippe
Repentance: for even when they say so, they are blind and ignorant of their
own estate, and know not themselves, but presume of themselves, that because
they are baptized and live in the Church, therefore they are in Gods favor,
and in very good estate, when as they never yet were reconciled to God: and are
so far from it, that they never yet saw any sins in themselves whereof they
should repent: as a man traveling in the night, sees no danger, but plods on
without fear: So the most part of our common people, in the night of their
ignorance, think and presume they love and fear God, and love their Neighbor;
and that they have ever done so: Nay, it is the common opinion that a man may
do so by nature, and that he is not worthy to live, who does not love God with
all his heart, and believe in Jesus Christ: But alas poor simple souls, they
never knew what sin was, never searched nor saw into theirown hearts with the
light of Gods law, for if they had, they should have seen such a Sea of
corruption, that then they would confess it to be the hardest thing in the
world, to love God, and to believe in Christ, and for sake sin: it is
therefore manifest, that they have not yet begun to believe or repent, nor have
entered into the first step of grace, which leads to repentance, for that they
have not learned this lesson, which the Prophet teaches: that is, to search
themselves.

Furthermore, let us in the second place, observe better the signification of
the word: it signifies to Search narrowly, as a man would do for a piece of
gold, or a p^cious Jewel, which is lost in a great house: Or as a man may
search for gold in a Mine of the earth, where is much earth, and but very
little gold Oar.

Hence we may learn, that in true Repentance, and conversion, we must not
search so only, as to find the gross and palpable sins of our lives: but so
as we may find those sins which the world accounts lesser sins, and epsy
our secret faults and privy corruptions. Some corruptions see memore near a
kin to our nature, and therein men hope to be excused, when they forsake many
other greater sins: But a true penitent sinner must search for such, so as a
good Magistrate searches for a lurking (...) which is (...) into some close
and secret corner, and he must ranfack his heart for such corruptions, as
wherein his heart takes special delight, and must thank that no sin can be
so small, but it is too great to be spared, and that every sin great or
little, must be searched for, as being all Tray (...) to Gods Majesty.

But alas, the practice ^^ the world is far otherwise, great sins are
little sins, little sins are no sins: Nay, after a little custom, great
sins are also little or nothing, and so at last men make no bones of gross
and grievous sins: and for the most part men search so superficially, that they
scarce find any thing to be sin: such excuses are made, such distinctio^s
are devised, such mittigations, such qualifications, such colors are cast
upon all sins; as now up and down the world, gross sins are called into
question, whether they be sins or no: and the great transgressions of the law
are counted small matters, necessary evils or inconveniences, tolerated to
avoid other evils: and what is he counted but a curious and a precise fool,
which stands upon them: Ignorance after five and thirty years preaching is
counted no sin, blind devotion in Gods service no sin, lip labor in
praying, vain and customable swearing, mocking of religion, and the professors
thereof, no sin: profaning of the Saboath, contemning of preachers, abusing of
parents* no sins pride in apparel, superfluity in meats, beastly and
ordinary drunkenness, fornication, no sins. Nay, decites, Cosonages,
oppressing usury, notorious briberie, and covetousness, that mother sin; these
are counted no sins: these beams are made but moates by profane men, and
they are so minced and carved, or there is some such necessity of them, or
some such other flourish or vernish must be cast upon the^, as that they are
little or none at all. Alas, alas, is not that a simple and a silly search
where such blocks as these are, lie unspied? what are moulehils, when such
mountains are not seen? Moates will be little regarded, where such beams are
not discerned: but it is clear, that therefore there is no true trial nor
diligent search made: for a true convert will search his heart for all, and will
spare none: He deals in searching his own heart, as a good Justice of peace
in searching for traitors or Seminary Priests. He seeks not superficially,
but most exactly, and leaves never a corner unsought, and he thinks great
sins to be infinite, and little sins great, and judges no sin so small,
but that it deserves the anger of God, and therefore he wonders at the mercy
of God, which throws us not al down to hell in a moment: and he cries out
with holy Jeremy: It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed. Lam. 3. 22
Away then with this superficial and hypocritical search, where so many sins
are spared and not found out. It is Pharisaical, for even so the Pharisie, when
he came into the Temple to reckon with God, and to tell what Traitors he had
found, that is, what sins, upon good search he had espied, he returns his
precept, all is well, he has found never a one, but begins to thank God
that he was so good, and so good, and not so il, and so il, nor yet like the
Publicane. The world is full of Pharisees, not only the popish Church: but
even our Church swarms with these superficial searchers, who cannot (because
they will not,) find any sins to present unto God, Men think in the
Country, a Church Officer hazards his Oath, if he present all well, and
finds no fault in his Parish, to present as punishable to the Ordinary: for
men think it impossible, that there should be none in a whole parish: then
how does that man hazard his own soul, who being made ouerseer and searcher of
his heart, finds nothing in it to present to the Lord. For it is not more
easy to epsy outward and actual tra^sgessions in a whole parish, then it is
to find a heap of corruptions in a man's heart, if a man will search into the
bottom of it with the light of Gods Law. Therefore when the Lord comes and
keeps his visitation, what shall become of such a man, but to undergo the
strict and severe search of the Almighty, because he would not search
himself?

Our bodies and lives are free from spanish Inquisition (which is one of the
last props, which Satan has lent the Pope, wherewith to uphold his declining
kingdom) and the Lord grant we may be ever free from it. But in the mean time,
that might put us in mind how to deal with our corrupt hearts, and unmortified
affections, even to erect an Inquisition over them, to lay in wait for them,
to search them narrowly, and to use them roughly: yea, to set our hearts upon
the rack of Gods law, that so it may confess the secret wickedness of it: for
the Papists do not think us Protestants, greater enemies to their
superstition, then the inward corruptions of our hearts, are to our salvation:
therefore it may be a godly policy for every man, curn to erect an
Inquisition over his own heart and conscience, and not to spare his most
secret and dearest sins, and such as are nearest allied to his own nature:
for that is the true search here commanded by the Prophet, and practiced by
all Godly and holy men: when a man purposes to find all that are, and to epsy
eue^ al his sins: for a godly man is never satisfied in his search, but still,
the more he finds, he suspects the more are still behind: and therefore he
continues searching his own heart all his life long: Therefore let every,
professor look to it betwixt God and his conscience, that he dally not with
himself in ths case: for if he do, then, when God comes with his privy
search, his hypocrisy shall be discovered, and his nakedness shall be laid
open in the view of men, and Angels: to his eternal confusion.

Thirdly, Search, says the Prophet, but not so content: he forces it again,
Even search you. In thus repeating and urging this exhortation, the holy Ghost
gives them, and us to understand, that the true searching of a man's heart, and
life, is a duty of a great moment, and special necessity: therefore he leaves
it not after once naming it, but inforceth it the second time, as being no
matter of indifferency, but of great necessity: thereby showing, that it is a
principal duty in repentance, even the beginning and foundation of all true
grace.

And further, it is a means also to prevent Gods Judgments: for when men
search not themselves, then God sendes the fire of afflictions, and Crosses to
try and Search them: but, when they Search themselves, then God spares to
Search them by his judgments.

Now in that this duty of searching, is both the beginning of all true grace,
and the mean to stay Gods judgments, and therefore is so pithely, and
forceably urged by the holy Ghost, it must teach us all a necessary lesson:
namely, to make great conscience of searching our selves. First, because God
has so commanded, and we are to make conscience of obedience to every
commandment. Secondly, because thereby we shall reap two so great commodities,
as first, thereby we shall lay a sure foundation for the good work of grace in
us, and secondly, shall stay the hand of God, and his judgments from being
executed upon us. Let us therefore hearken to this counsel of the holy ghost,
let us take the fan of the Law, and therewith search and winnowe our hearts
and lives. Our hearts, for secret and hidden corruptions. Our lives, for
committing of evil, and omitting of good. Do with your hearts as men do with
their wheat: they will not suffer their corn to lie long in the chafe, least
the chafe hurt it, but commits it to the fan that the wind may separate
them: So the graces of God in our hearts are pure corn, our sins and
corruptions are Chafe: look well, and thou shall find in thy self much
chafe, and but little corn: let not then the chafe lie too long mingled with
the Corn, lest it corrupt the corn. Let not thy sins lie mingled with the
grace of God in thee, if thou do, they will choke it in the end, and so
deprive thee of all grace; therefore rippe up thy heart, and look into thy
life, and when thou have sinned, enter into thy self, ask thy conscience what
thou have done, and be not quiet till thou have found out thy sin, and the
foulness of it: and never think that thou know any thing in Religion,
till thou know what is in thine own heart. And what are thy special and
priuiest corruptions, and look into thine own faults, not with a partial eye,
but with a censorious, and a strait judgment, spare sin in no man, but
especially condemn it in thy self.

But alas, these times of ours, cry out of an other state, for even Ieremies
case is ours: We may complain as he did, No man repents him of his
wickedness, Iere. 8. 6.
saying what have I done? the same is the sore of our people, and the sickness
of all Nations: that every man runs on in his sins, from sin to sin
carelessly: even as the barde horse into the battle. But how rare a thing is
it, to find a man, that daily searches himself, and examines how he lives, and
how the case stands betwixt GOD and himself: and that when he has done
amiss, enters into the closet of his heart, and strikes himself upon the
breast, and disputes the case with himself, saying: What hane I done? O what
is this, that I have done against God, against his Church, and against my own
soul?

The want of this, is that, which the Prophet complains of in that place: not
as though it were sufficient thus to do, in a man's own conscience: but
because it is a good beginning, and a step to further grace. For if a man did
seriously thus deal with his conscience after his sin, his conscience would
shape him such an answer, and would tell him so roundly, what he had done,
that he would take heed, how he did the same again, and look more
narrowly, and warily to himself all the days of his life. Seeing therefore it
is so necessary a duty, let every one of us endeavor the practice of it,
namely, to rippe and ransacke our hearts, and to search our ways unto the
bottom.

Now for your better instruction, and furtherance in the performance hereof:
you must know that this Search is to be made by the Law of God, for nothing
else, but Gods law can help us, and let us see yt which we must search for: for
if we search by any other means, we may seek and search long enough, ere we
find any thing that will be matter of repentance. Ask the devil, he will tell
thee all is well, and that thou art in an excellent estate: and God loves thee,
and thou art sure of Heaven: this song the devil always sings for the most
part til a man comes to die, for then he appears in his colors, but till
then, he labors, to sing, and lull all men a sleep in the cradle of
security. Ask our own flesh, and our own hearts and natures, and they will
answer, and say, that all is well and safe, and that we have believed, and
loved and feared God all our days. Ask the world, and men in the world: and
they will answer, all is well; and they will say further, that thou art a
right good fellow, and art worth twenty of these curious fools that stick
upon points, and stand upon circumstances, as swearing and drinking, and good
fellowshippe, and gaming, and such other nice and circumstanciall points: thus
will worldly men answer: for thy profane course is acceptable to them,
because thereby thou approuest the same in them. Nay, go further, and ask all
humane learning in the world, and it cannot tell thee what one sin is, nor
what it is to offend God: so that there remains only the law of God, the
light whereof will disclose the darkness of our hearts, and the justice
whereof will reveal the unrighteousness and the perverseness of our natures:
therefore to the law of God must we fly to help us in this Search.

And yet for our better help in this duty, and that there may be nothing
wanting to that soul, that seeks God, therefore we are further to know, that
if we will search our selves by the law profitably, we must mark three rules,
the truth whereof unless we know, acknowledge, and feel: we shall never see
our own estate, nor profit by this Search, but plodde on from finne to sin,
until we plunge into hell.

The first Rule is, that every man that came from Adam, sinned in the sin of
Adam: Thou must therefore know, that his sin in eating the forbidden fruit,
was thy sin: and thou sinnedst therein, as well as he (though thou wast then
unborn) and that thou art guilty of it before God, and must answer for it to
Gods justice, unless Christ do it for thee. The reason hereof is, because we
are his seed and posterity, we were the^ in his loins, he was the father of
us all: and was not a private man as we are now, but a public person, the
pledge of al mankind, and bare the person of us all at that time: therefore
what he did then, he did it for himself, and for us: what covenant God made
with him, was made for himself and us: what God promised him, and he to God,
he promised for himself, and for us: what he received in his Creation, he
received for himself, and for us: and what he gained or lost by his fall, he
gained and lost for us, as for himself. He lost the favor of God, and
original purity: therefore he lost it for all his posterity: guiltiness,
and Gods anger, and corruption of nature which he gained, he got for us all, as
well as for himself. If we doubt of this point, it is proved by the Apostle:
where the holy Ghost says; Sin entered by one man, and death by sin: and that
sin went over all, and that it went over Romans 5. 14
all them, which sinned not in the like transgression with Adam (that is, even
our children) who as they are borne, are borne not only tainted with original
corruption: but guilty also of Adams sin. This is a most certain truth,
though it seem strange, for few men think of it, that ever they shall answer
for Adams sin: and therefore if any object, what reason is there that I
answer for another man's sin? I answer, true, if it had been Adams sin
alone: but it was his and thine also: for he was thy father and stood in thy
room: and thou also since thou wast borne, have confirmed what he did. Now
therefore though not one of many thinks seriously thereof: namely, that he
should stand guilty of a sin committed more then five thousand years before he
was born, yet seeing it is most true, both in Scripture and good reason: let
every man subscribe in his conscience to this truth. And let this be thy first
resolution in this Search, that thou stand guilty of Adams transgression.

The second rule to be known is, that in every man are all sins: more
plainly, that in every man by nature are the seeds of all sins: and that not
in the worst, but in the best natured men: make choice of the best man and the
greatest sin, and that worst sin is to be found in that best man. If any
doubt of this, let him consider what original sin is, namely, a corruption
of the powers of our souls; and that not of some, or in part, but of all, and
wholly. This corruption has two parts. First a want, not of some, but of all
good inclination, a want of all goodness. Secondly, a deprauation and
pronenesse, not to some, but to all evil: and not a pronenesse only, but
original sin infuseth into every man's heart, the seed of all corruption.

Many men stand much upon their good meaning, and upright heart, and brag of
a good nature: but they are foulely deceived; for take the ciuilest man upon
the earth, and the seeds of all sins in the world are in him by nature. But to
explain this point fully, observe these two clauses.

First, I say not, the practice of all sins, but the seeds; for all men
practice not all sin: the seeds are in their nature* but the practice is
restrained, sometime by education, sometime by good and wholesome laws,
sometime the constitution of men's bodies deny the practice of some sins,
sometime the Country a man dwells in, or calling a man lives in, keeps him
from the practice of some sins: and always a general and limitting grace of
God, restraines the natures of all men from running into many sins: which
hand of God, if God should take away, and leave every man to his nature, we
should see that every man would practice any sin in the world: yea, even the
greatest sins that ever we heard to be done in the world. All men which
know themselves know this to be true. And the more a man knows his own
heart, the more he sees that his heart is a sea of all wickedness: and that
it is the mercy and grace of God, that he has not fallen into the mightiest
and most monstrous sins in the world.

Secondly, I say, by nature. For I know by good education, and by grace, it is
otherwise: grace rectifieth nature, but that is no thanks to nature: for it is
as evil and corrupt still, being severed from grace: and therefore nature must
be fully abolished, before man come to heaven. And yet (though all this be true
(I say not, that sin breaks out in all natures alike, though all natures be
alike corrupt: for the course of nature is restrained in some more then others,
by the means aforesaid; but this is the truth, that whereas some are not so
angry, some not so wanton, some not so cruel, some not so covetous, some not so
ambitious, etc. as others: that comes not from any goodness of nature in them,
above the other originally, but from Gods hand, which tempereth, restrains,
and moderateth every man's nature as he sees good.

And if God did not thus moderate and restrain the natures of men, but suffer
them to break out to the full: there would then be no order, but all confusion
in the world: therefore, (as especially for his Churches quietness, so also
for the preservation of public peace, and the upholding of society in the
world between man and man) the Lord holds a hand over every man's nature, and
keeps every one in a certain compass limited by the wisdom of his power,
which restraining hand of his, if the Lord should take away: all societies and
common wealths would be turned vpside down, because every man by the
universal corruption of his nature, would break out into every sin: I end
this point with appealing to the testimony of the consciences of all men, and
especially of the best and holiest men, of whom I would ask this question,
whether they find not in their natures an inclination, even to the foulest
sins in the world; if shame, or fear, or else the grace of God restrained
them not? so that the best men do know well enough, what ado they have with
their corrupt natures, to keep them within the compass of Obedience.

Nay, I yet add further, the nature of men, and of all men is so corrupt,
since Adam: that even the seed of the sin against the holy Ghost, and a
pronenesse to it, is in the nature of every man (though not one man amongst
many thousands do commit that sin,) for seeing in that sin, there is a
heap or Sea of all sins gathered together, he therefore that has in his
nature the seed of all sins, has also the seed of it. And again, seeing
all evil tendes to a perfection, as well as grace does; what reason therefore
is there, but we may safely think that the Devil would hale every one to
that height of sin: if it were not that the powerful hand of God prevented
him, who will neither suffer wicked men, nor the Devil himself to be so
wicked as they could, and would be.

The use of this second rule, is notable. For in this searching of our selves,
it shows us what we are, without all colors or deceit, and fully discouers
unto us, the ugliness of our natures: and it may teach us all how Genesis 4.
Exodus I. Genesis 18. 2. Sam. 15 and 16. Esaias. 38
to think and esteem of our selves, when we hear of Caines unnatural
murder, Pharohs unnatural cruelty, the Sodomits unnatural lust, Achitophles,
diuilish policy, Senacheribs horrible blasphemy, Judas monstrous treason,
Iulians fearful Apostacy. When we hear of the fearful murders, treasons,
periuties, sins against nature, blasphemies, Apostacies, witchcrafts, and
other the horrible sins of the world: let us then return into our selves,
and look homewards, even into our own hearts, and confess every one, that
these should have been even thy sins also, if Gods grace had not prevented
thee.

This will humble thee, and make thee think vilely, and basely of thy self,
and so consequently bring thee to repentance and true amendment: and the very
reason, why men repent not, nor amend their ways, is, because they are
Pharisees by nature, and think highly of themselves, and of their own
natures, and their natural inclinations: this will be a harsh and a strange
Doctrine to them: Oh, they have excellent natures, and they cannot endure such,
and such sins, and they thank God, they are not as ill as others: but let
all such men know, they must cease magnifying nature, and learn to magnify
Gods grace. Let them know, that nature in them, is in the Root, as much
corrupt, as in the worst man in the world, and every man's heart is a
bottomless fountain of all sin; therefore praise not thy nature, but Gods
grace and mercy, in giving thee so good a nature; or rather, so well
restraining, and rectifying thy nature; and stay not there, but desire of the
Lord, that as he has given thee a better tempered nature, the^ to other men:
so also he would bestow on thee his special and saving grace: and as he has
kept thee from the fearful sins of others (thou being as ill, naturally, as
they) so he would also lead thee into the way of salvation, which else the best
nature in the world, can never attain unto.

The third rule to be known and practiced by him, who will truly search
himself, is, that every man borne of Adam, is by nature, the child of wrath,
and Gods enemy: this is true of all without exception; High or Low, Rich or
poor, noble or simple, borne in the visible Church or without. And further, by
being enemy of God, he is therefore borne subject to hell, to damnation, and to
all other curses: so that look as a Traitor convicted, stands thereby in his
Princes high displeasure, and is sure of death without special pardon: so
stands every man, when he is borne, convicted of high treason against God, in
his high disfavor; and is in danger of Hell, which is the fulfilling of the
wrath of God. Thus David confesses of himself. I was borne in iniquity, and
in sin has my Mother conceined me: If in sin, then in Gods wrath, and
under the danger of damnation, If any ask, how, or why this is so. I answer,
the truth, as also the equity of this third rule depends on the two former:
for, because every man is borne guilty of Adams great sin, and also tainted
originally with all corruption and a pronnesse to all sin: therefore it
follows in equity and justice, that every man is borne under the wrath and
curse of God. This point is a plain and evident truth: yet men in the world
think not so, and it is the cause, why men repent not of their sins: for
most men think that by nature, they are in Gods favor; and therefore they
need not to sue for it in humiliation and repentance; but only live ciuily,
and do no open wrong, and all is well: whereas (alas) there is no condemned
Traitor, more out of his Princes favor, nor more sure of death without a
pardon, then al we are out of Gods favor, and sure of damnation, unless we
procure Gods favor again, by faith and repentance,

For the better opening of this third rule, and the manifesting of the truth:
let us know further, that the curse of God, under the which we are all borne,
is three-fould.

The first, is a bondage under Satan: It is a certain truth that every man as
he is borne of his Parents, and till he repent, is a slave of Satan: man or
woman, high or low, Satan is his Lord and Master. He sittes as judge in his
heart; and in this sense Satan is the King of the Nations, and God of the
world. Men will in words defy Satan, and not name him without defiance, and
spitte at him; and yet (alas,) he is in their hearts: they spit him out of
their mouths, but he is lower; they should also spitte him out of their
hearts, and that is true defiance indeed: for alas, he lodges in thy heart,
and there he makes his Throne, and reigns until the spirit of regeneration
dispossess him: and till then, no servant is so subject to his master, no
slave to his Lord, as is the heart of man by nature unto Satan, the prince of
darkness. Nay, our bondage, is more fearful, then the slavery of any poor
Christian, in the Spaniards, or in the Turks Galleys: for their bodies are but
in bondage, and at command, and under punishment: but our best part, our
heart, our conscience, our soul it self is captiuated unto him, and under his
command, who is the King of cruelty, and confusion, and Lord of Hell, whose
commandments are Injustice, whose service is sin, and whose hyre is
damnation.

The second part of the Curse, is the first death, or the death of the body:
that is, a separation of the soul and body a sunder for a time, namely, till
the last judgment. This death is duly and justly the punishment of any one, or
the least sin: therefore, how due and just a punishment upon that horrible
heap of sinfulness, which is in every man's nature* and it is a most terrible
curse. For it is the very gate of hell, and the downfall to damnation, unto all
men, but such, as by faith and repentance do get their death sanctified by the
death of Christ: unto such men indeed it is no curse, but a gracious and
glorious blessing, for it is altered by Christ his death. But unto all men by
nature, and which repent not, it is the heavy curse of Gods wrath, and the very
downfall into the gulf of Hell.

The third part of the curse, under which every man is borne, is, the second
death: the death of soul and body; which is the eternal want of Gods
presence, and the accomplishment of his wrath: and an apprehension and feeling
of that wrath, seazing on body, soul, and conscience. The first curse, was a
spiritual death; the death of the soul, The second a temporary death, the
death of the body. The third, is an eternal death, a death both of soul and
body together; and for ever. This eternal death is the curse of all curses,
the misery of all miseries, and torment of all torments: and I show it thus.
Often when thy tooth acheth, and sometime when thy head acheth, or in the pain
of the stone or collicke, thou would give all that thou have in the world to
be eased of that pain: Nay, in the exstremitie of some fitts, many will wish
themselves even out of the world: Now, if the pain of one tooth, can so far
distemper mind and body, that it cannot be releiued with all the pleasures of
this life; O then, what a torment shall that be? when not one kind of pain,
but the whole viole of Gods wrath shall be powered, not on one member, but on
the whole soul body, and conscience, and that not for a time, under hope of
better: but eternally without hope of release; and that not in this world,
where there are comforts, helps and remedies: but in that ugly and darksome
place of torments: and that not amongst living men, which might mittigate thy
pain, or else bemone thee, and beway leit with thee: but with the Devils, and
damned spirits, which will now laugh at thy destruction, and solace themselves
in this thy misery, and will rejoice, as thou did serve them in earth, so
now in hell to be thy torme^ters. It may be therefore (by the way), good warning
and wisdom to us all, when we feel the extremity of some bodily pain, to
consider with our selves, and say: O then, what shall be my misery and torment
if I repent not; when not one member, but soul, body, and conscience, shall
be racked and tormented in the feeling and apprehension of the anger of the
Lord of Hosts.

In these three points, stands that curse and wrath of God, under which every
man is borne. And these do answer to the three degrees of sin, which are in
us: for as the two first Rules taught us, there is in every man by nature, till
he repent, a threefold guiltiness. First, a guiltiness of Adams sin.
Secondly, the taint of original, and universal corruption. Thirdly a pollution
by many outrageous actual sins. In the first of these, every man is equally
guilty. In the second, every man is equally corrupt. But in the third, every
one keeps that compass, within which the Lord will keep them, by his
limitting power.

Now as in our guiltiness of Adams sin, sin has his beginning: In original
sin, his continuance: in actual sin, his perfection: So answerable hereunto,
the wrath of God (which always stands opposite to sin) is begun in leaving
us by nature to the slavery of Satan, is continued by death, and is
accomplished in damnation.

And now these three Rules, I commend to the careful and Christian
consideration of you all: certifying you from God, that as you can never be
saved, unless you repent: nor repent, unless you Search your selves (as here
the Prophet bid death) So, that you can never search your selves aright, til you
be persuaded, and resolved of these three Rules, and of the truth of them all,
even in your hearts and consciences: namely, First, that thou art guilty of
Adams sin. Secondly, that thou art prone by nature to al evil in the world.
Thirdly, that for these, thou art subject to the wrath of God, and to all the
curses of his wrath: but when thou art in heart, and conscience resolved, that
these are true, then thou art a fit Scholar, for this Lesson of the Prophet,
Search thy self. For when thou go, thus prepared unto this Search, and
esteemest of thy self, as these three Rules have described thee: then if thou
Search into thy self, thou will find thy self, and thy estate to be such, as
will cause thee to repent, return and take a new course: therefore, what the
Prophet said to those Jews, I say unto you also, my brethren of this Realm of
England, who are here now gathered together out of so many countries, and
quarters of this Realm: yea, in the name of the same God, I cry unto you.
Search, O Search your selves: and think it not a matter indifferent to do, or
not to do it: but know it, that God commandes you, as ever you will come to
salvation: Search your selves. And the rather, because by these three Rules*
you see how much chafe of corruption is in your nature, and what need
therefore it has to be searched into, and fanned by Repentance. Be well
assured: thou man, whatsoever thou art: there is so much Chafe in thee, that
if thou search not, and fan it not out, thou will prove nothing but Chafe at
the last day, and so be blown away with the wind of Gods justice into Hell.
Take hold therefore of this exhortation, and defer it not.

Thou will not suffer thy Wheat to lie too long in the chafe, for fear of
hurting it: Is it then safe to suffer the chafe of thy sins and corruptions,
to lie cankering and rotting in thy heart? Be sure that that little portion of
grace, which thou attainest unto, by living in the Church, and under the
Ministry of the Word of GOD, will be putrifyed, and clean corrupted with the
Chafe of thy sins: therefore again, and again, I exhort you to make
conscience of this duty: Search into your selves, fan out this Chafe, this
presumption of ours, and high esteeming of our own nature, and conceits of
Gods favor before we have it: that so this Chafe being blown away, the Lord
may then bestow upon us foundnesse of grace, and the foundation of al goodness,
which is a holy and humbled heart.

Salnation is such a building, as the foundation thereof had need to be sure
and strong: Ignorance, blindness, and presumption, are not sufficient
foundations for such a building: therefore as no man will build a strong house
upon any earth, but will first search it, least it prove Sandy, and so
overthrow all: So a wise Christian will not build his salvation, upon fancies
and conceits, and natural presumptions: but will Search, and look into his
heart: and finding these to be sandy, and rotten, and therefore too weak for
the foundation of so glorious a building, will refuse them all, and labor to
furnish his heart with such sound grace, as whereupon he may trust so weighty a
work, as is the Salvation of his soul. Again, if thou will stand in the day
of trial, then Search thy heart betime, and discern betwixt Chafe and Wheat:
thou see, that chafe flies away before the wind; but good corn indures the
Fan, and the fury of the wind: so in the day of trial, temptation, sickness,
or open persecution, the chafe of natural presumption, and outward formalitie
in Religion, will fly away: and it must be the penitent, humbled, and believing
heart, which must then abide it out, and endure the fan of temptations and
persecutions.

And to conclude, Let not the Devil deceive thee, in making thee imagine or
hope to please God, and yet to let thy corruptions lie unseen, and thy sins
unsearched out, least thereby thou mar all: for thou use not to lay
vp-wheat in thy garners, until it be purged from the Chafe: so think not to
store up any saving knowledge, or any other grace of God in thy heart, until
the chafe of vanity be first blown away, that so the holy graces of God, may
be laid up in the garners of thy soul. And therefore questionless (to speak
one word to touch our common professors, in the very sore of their soul) al
knowledge that is stored up in these impure and unsearched hearts: is even as
Wheat laid up in the Chafe, which is (a thousand to one) sure to be eaten up
by the chafe, so that, when the winnowing time of trial and persecution
comes: I fear, that such men will (for all their knowledge) shrink aside, and
betray the truth: there knowledge then proving no better then chafe, because
it was laid up in an unholy heart: If therefore, thou would stand and
endure when Popery, or persecution, or temptations come, if thou would
abide the fury of the fan of temptations: now, then exercise thy heart with
the fan of GODS law, Search and ransacke it, purge out the chafe of
corruption, and store up knowledge in an holy heart, and a good conscience, and
that will abide the violence of all temptations: yea, when God suffers the
Devil to do with us, as he did with Peter, to winnow us like Wheat, to sift
and try us, as he did Job, with the furious wind of all his malice: this
knowledge will prove Wheat, that will abide the wind, and gold that will
abide the fire: thus glorious will it be in the end, if we follow this holy
Prophets council, and Search our hearts.

And thus much for the first point (namely) the duty of Searching here
commanded, in which we have stayed the longer, because it is the foundation of
all the rest: and this being well laid, the whole building wilt go up the
faster.

Now we come to the second general point here laid down: that is, whom must we
Search? the Prophet answers: your selves not other me^, but your selves.
This search so urged and enforced by the Prophet, must not be of other men's
hearts and lives, but of our own: our own are our charge, and not other men's:
and therein is the saying true, which else is most false: Every man for
himself: for as every soul must be saved by it self so must it believe,
Repent, and search it self.

The duty therefore here commanded, is, for every man that would have his
soul to be saved, to Search it, and reform it, and leave others to be
searched by themselucs. Here the holy Ghost meets with the common corruption
of this world, (and that is) that men are Eagle eyed, to see into the lives of
other men, but to look into their own hearts, and lives, they are blinder
then Moles: they can see moates in other men's lives, but discern not beams in
their own: whereby it comes to pass, that they stumble and fall fowly: for the
eyes of most men are set upon others, and not upon them selves: and thereupon
it is, that an evil, man seeing other men, and not himself: thinks best of
himself, and worst of other men: but contrariwise, a good man seeing himself,
and not other men, thinks worst of himself, and better of other men: an evil
man looks outward, and judges other men: but a good man looks homeward and
judges himself: and in judging, condemns himself, far above other men:
and that because by searching into his own heart and ways, he knows that by
himself, which he knows not, by any man in the world besides.

So then we must search, not other men, but our selves: our own hearts and our
own lives are our charge, and burden: the lives of other men concern us not,
being private me^, further the^, either to follow them being good, or take
heed of them being evil: but to search, or to be inquisitiue into them, is no
duty commanded us, but rather a foul and a base vice forbidden of God.
Indeed Magistrates in their people, Pastors in their congregations, and
house-holders in their families are to search: but they can search only for
criminal causes, or open actual sins: but this searching must be of our
hearts, which no man can search, but our selves only. Few men have a calling
to enquire into other men's lives, but every man has a calling to search into
himself: but (alas) men do far otherwise, they suffer themselves to rotte
in their own sins, and erect an Inquisition over other men's lives, and it is
to be seen in daily experience, that those men, who are the great Searchers
and priers into other men, are the neglecters and forgetters of themselves: And
contrariwise they who do narrowly search themselves and their own ways, and
look into the corners of their own hearts, do find so much work to do with
themselves that they little busy themselves, with other men.

And thus much may suffice for that point.

It follows.

O Nation not worthy to be beloved.

The third point: Who must search? the Jews, who are here termed a Nation, not
worthy to be beloved: and yet for all that, they are bid to search themselves,
that so upon their Repentance, they might be beloved. Where, we may see the
unspeakable love of God, and his wonderful mercy, offering grace unto such
men, as are altogether unworthy of it. Gods children are by nature like other
men, and God finds nothing in them, why to respect them above others: but even
of his own mercy, makes them worthy, who of themselves are not: therefore how
worthy is that God, to have all the love of our hearts, who loved us, when we
were not worthy to be beloved.

But let us examine more particularly, why GOD does call the Jews a Nation,
not worthy to be beloved: I answer, God had blessed them above other Nations:
He gave them his Covenant of grace, and thereby made them his people, and
committed to their trust, his holy word and Oracles: but Romans 3. 2.
he dealt not so with other Nations, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his
laws. Besides all this, they had a better Psalm. 143. 20.
land then others about them, it flowed with Milk, and Honey, (that is, with
all commodities, and delights) and though their Country was but little: yet
themselves so populous, and so powrefull, that whilst they pleased GOD, no
enemy durst set upon them.

Thus for soul and body, they were every way a Nation, blessed of God, a
people beloved of God above all others. Now, how did this people (thus beloved
of their God,) requite this his love, which they had no more deserved, then any
other Nation? Certainly, as they deserved it not before they had it: so they
requited it not, when they had it: but requited this love of God with sin,
with rebellion, and with disobedience. They tempted him, they provoked him to
wrath, they presumed of his mercy, and proved a most stubborn and stifnecked
people, a froward generation: Moses partly saw this in his own experience,
and better discerned it in the spirit of Prophecy: and therefore wondering at
this their wickedness, he cried out, Do you thus requite the Lord: O foolish
people, and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 5
thus: that is with sin, and disobedience, which is the only means to
displease the Lord, and to provoke him to wrath: for this cause, they are
worthily called a foolish and unkind people by Moses, and here, by the Prophet.
A Nation, not worthy to be beloved, namely, for their unthankfulness, and
unkindness: which was such, as they not only were slack, and careless in
performance of such duties as God required: but even multiplied their sins,
and committed those foul rebellions, which his soul hated.

And amongst many, the Prophet here in this Chapter, notes three of their
great sins: for which they were a Nation not worthy to be beloved.
Covetousness, Cruelty, and Deceit: all which were the more heinous and
intolerable, because they were the sins of their Princes, their Rulers, and
their priests: who should have been lights and examples to the rest.

Now, although every sin in it self, is of that ill desert, as it is able to
cast us out of Gods favor, and deprive us of his love: yet, behold, here God
complains, not upon a little cause, but for wonderful, and exceeding
unthankfulness, and unkindness in them: who of all other should have loved
the Lord.

As a man cares not for hard usage from him, whom he esteems not: but a
little unkindness does greatly greiue a man, from him who is loved and
respected: so is it with the Lord our God, he loved not the Gentiles, as he
did the Jews, neither was he so bountiful unto them: and therefore, Psalm.
147. Acts 17. verse. 30.
(as we may see) though they lived always in ignorance, and continued always
in disobedience, yet, the Text says, the time of that ignorance God regarded
not: but when as the Jews, his own people, whom he chose out of all people,
and bestowed his love upon them, and made his Covenant of grace with the^, when
they became unkind, unthankful, forgetful, stubborn, and rebellious, that
caused the Lord even to complain of the indignity, and to cry out by Moses.
Do ye thus requite the Lord: O foolish people and unwise? And hereby the
Prophet, O nation, not worthy to be beloved: and therefore there is no man, but
if he be asked what he thinks of this Nation of the Jews: he will answer,
that they are a most vile and wicked people, a froward generation, and that
they are worthy to taste deeply, of all Gods plagues, who so far abused his
love and mercy.

But what does this belong to them alone? and is Israel only a Nation not
worthy to be beloved? Nay, I may cry out with as good cause: O England, a
nation not worthy to be beloved. For, God has been as good a God to us, as he
was to them: and we have been as unkind a people to him, as they were to him:
But that I may be free from discrediting our nation, and from defiling my own
Nest: let us prove both these points, and lay them open to the view of the
world.

1 First therefore, the same mercies, and far greater, have been powered and
heaped upon us: he has called us out of the darkness; First, of Heathenisme,
and then of Popery: his covenant of grace and salvation, he has confirmed
with us, his treasures of his word and Sacraments, he has imparted to us: his
holy word never better preached, and the mysteries thereof never more plainly
opened, since the time of the Apostles: and as we have Religion, so we have
it under a religious prince, whereby it comes to pass, that these blessings of
salvation, we enjoy not in secret, or by stealth: but we have it countenanced
by authority: so that religion is not barely allowed, but even as it were
thrust upon men. Besides all this, we have a land also, that flows with milk
and honey, it is plentiful in all good things: we have liberty, and peace
under a peaceable prince, and the companions of peace: prosperity, plenty,
health, wealth, corn, Woole, gold, silver, abundance of all things, that may
please the heart of man: thus has God deserved the love of England.

2 But now England, how have thou requited this kindness of the Lord?
certainly even with a greater measure of unkindness: that is, with more and
greater sins then ever Israel did: so that if Moses spoke true of them: then
may our Moses much more truly cry out against England, do thou thus requite
the Lord, thou foolish people? And if this Prophet said thus of Israel for
three sins: then may it be said of England, for 300 sins (O England) a
Nation not worthy to be beloved: for thou have multiplied thy transgressions,
above theirs of Israel; even as though, thou had resolved with thy self,
the more Gods kindness is heaped on thee, the more to multiply thy sins
against him. For thou England, as thou have requited the Lord with sins; so
not with a few sins or small sins; or sins, which hardly could have been
prevented: for that had been a matter of some excuse, or not of so great
complaint. But thy sins are many, and grievous, and capital. And which is
worst of all, wilful and affected, even as though God had deserved evil of us
and that therefore we ought maliciously to requite him.

If any man make doubt of this, and therefore think I speak too hardly of our
Church: I will then deal plainly, and particularly, and rip up the sores of
our nation, that so they may be healed to the bottom.

The common sins of England, wherewith the Lord is requited, are these. First,
ignorance of Gods will and worship, (I speak not of that compelled ignorance,
in many corners of our Land, which is to be pitied because they want the
means) but wilful, and affected ignorance. Men are ignorant, even because,
they will be ignorant. Means of knowledge were never so plentiful, and yet
never more gross ignorance: is not he wilfully blind, who will not open his
eyes in the Light? and can there be any darkness at Noone day, but it must
be wilful? but our Nation is dark and blind in the Sunshine of the Gospel:
and grossly ignorant, when the Gospel beats their ears, and light shines
round about them; so, as if they closed not their eyes, and stopped not their
ears, they could not, but both hear and see; who would look for ignorance
after 35 years preaching? and yet, many are as ignorant, as if they had bin
borne and brought up under Popery: so that our people are as evil as those in
the days of Christ, of whom the holy ghost says Light is come into the world;
but men love John. 3. 1^
darkness more then light: so knowledge is come into England: but many
Englishmen love ignorance better then knowledge. Alas, how many thousands have
we in our Church, who know no more in religion, then they hear in common talk
of al men, and which is worse, they think it sufficient also, and which is
worst of all, whereas they might have more, they will not, but care not for it.

2 The second maine sin of England, is: Contempt of Christian Religion.
Religion has bin among us these five and thirty years: but the more it is
published, the more it is contemned, and reproached of many: in so much, as
there is not the simplest fellow in a country town, who, although he knows not
one point of religion, yet he can mock, and scorn such as are more religious
then himself is: this is one of the moaths of England, that eats up religion,
this is grievous in whomsoever, but most intolerable in two sorts of men.
First, in them, who are altogether ignorant: that they should mock they know
not what. A pitiful thing to hear one, who himself cannot give the meaning
of one petition in the Lords prayer, to vpbraide other men, because they are
too forward: but it is the worst of all, when men of knowledge, and such as
live ciuilly, and would be counted good christians: and are indeed of the
better sort: cannot abide to see others go, a little before them: but if they
do: presently, they are Hypocrites and dissemblers: Thus not profaneness,
nor wickedness; but even Religion it self is a byword, a mocking-stocke, and
matter of reproach: so that in England, at this day, the man or woman that
begins to profess religion, and to serve God, must resolve with himself to
sustain mockes, and injuries, even as though he lived among the enemies of
religion, and not among professors: and as religion increases and spreads it
self: so does the number of these mockers: O what a cursed sin is this? to
contemn the greatest favor, that God can give us; that is his holy religion:
for the which, we should rather praise him all the days of our lives. All
that God can give a man in this world, is his Gospel: what then can God give
to be regarded, when his gospel is contemned?

This sin was never amongst the Jews: they indeed regarded it not so as it
deserved, but who did ever make a mock and a scorn of it but England? O
England, how can thou answer this. God sends thee the most precious Jewel,
that he can send to a Nation; and thou scornest it, and them that bring i^, and
them that receive it; even as though it were no blessing, but a curse: so that
as Christ says to the Jews, for which of my good works do you stone me; So
may the Lord say to John. 10. 32.
England: I have given thee a fruitful land, a blessed Prince, gold and
silver, peace and liberty: plenty and prosperity: for which of these (O
England) do thou contemn my religion? The least of these deserve love; but
England has a better then all these; that is, his Gospel and word of
salvation: and yet, that also is contemned (as being nothing worth) and those
which confess it, and those that bring it, and consequently God himself that
gave it. If England had no more sins but this: this deserves, that it should
be said of us, that we are a Nation unworthy to be loved above all Nations,
for some Nations would have religion, that they might love it, but they cannot
have it: some have it, and do love it: some have it, and love it not: but in
noe Nation is it made a mocking-stocke, but in England. And where are those
men, but in England, who (like the dog in the manger) will neither entertain
Religion themselves, nor suffer them that would: let us in time take heed of
this sin, as a sin that cries to God, to revenge so vile a dishonor done
to his majesty: neither is there any sin that more certainly foreshewes, and
more forceably hastens the removing of the Gospel from us. For high time is it
to cease loving, where love procures disdain. And to stay giving, where gifts
are scorned. There were then present inhabitants of London, York, Cambridge,
Oxford. Norwich, Bristow, Ipswich colchester Worcester, Hull, Lin, Manchester.


Carry home this lesson to your great towns and cities, where you dwell, for in
these populous places are these great mockers, for where God has his
professors, the devil has his mockers; and repent betimes of this sin, for
hold on in mocking, and be sure that God (who will not be mocked) will remove
his gospel from you; but if you leave this sin, and entertain the gospel, (as
it worthily deserus) then be sure of it, God will continue Kendal, Couentry,
Nottingham, Northampton, Bathe, Lincoln, Durby, Leicester, Chester. Newcastle,
and of many other most populous cities and towns. of England
the Gospel, to you, and your posterities after you, in the face of al your
enemies round about you.

3 The third common sin of England, is, Blasphemy, many ways, but
especially in vain swearing, false swearing, and forswearing, and the abuse of
all the names and tytles of the Lord God. This sin is general, even over the
whole land, especially, in Fayres, and Markets, where men for a little gain,
will not care to call the Lord of Hosts to be witness to a lie, and the God of
truth, to testify an untruth. And which is worst of all, Gods holy name is
used in vain oaths, and ordinary talk. When men have no cause to swear at
all: so that, it is most lamentable to see and observe, that the name of any
man of honor, or worship, is used more reverently, and less abused, then that
fearful and glorious name: the Lord our God.

4 The fourth general and great sin is, Profanation of the Saboath. A
common sin every where, and yet so great a sin, that where it reigns, in
that Country, congregation, family, man or woman, there is noe fear of God,
nor any true grace in them: for the keeping of the saboath, is the maintaining,
increasing, and publishing of religion.

5 The fifth sin of our Nation, is, unjust dealing in bargaining betwixt man
and man. How hard is it to find an honest, simple, plain dealing man: and
that even in such great assemblies as this is, I fear present experience will
testify: you are now many thousands gathered together, some to buy, some to
sell, some to exchange: Remember, that I have told you, an honest hearted and
plain dealing man is hard to find: therefore labor to approve your selves
sincere hearted men. remember the counsel of the holy Ghost: Let no man
oppress nor defraude his brother, in bargaining: for the Lord is the auenger
of all such things These sins are general and universal as a cancker: And
so are the sins of the 6. 7. and 8. Commandments (though they be not
altogether so common as these be) Murders, Adulteries, Vsuries, Briberies,
Extorsions, Cousenages, they are a burden, under which, our earth groans; and
they cry against us to heaven, so that upon as good or much beter cause may it
be said to us, as to the Jews: O Nation not worthy to be beloved.

Look at the outward face of our Church, at the signs of Gods love, which are
amongst us, and at Gods dealing with us; and behold, we are a most beautiful
Church, a glorious Nation, a Nation to be admired, and wondered at: but look
at the lives of our ordinary professors, look at our sins, and at our
requiting of Gods love: and we are a people of Sodom, as full of iniquities as
they were, whose sins are so many, so rife, and so ripe; that at the last
they will eue^ bring down fire and brimstone, or some other strange judgment
upon us, if repentance do not prevent it, or the cries and prayers of holy men
stay not Gods hands. So, then let us all here assembled, grant and confess,
that we are a Nation so far from being worthy to be beloved, as that we are
most worthy to be hated, and to have all the wrath of God powered upon us.

Now then, are we so? and shall we continue so still? Nay, that is the worst,
and most wretched of all: then let every one of us learn this duty, enter into
our selves, Search our hearts and lives, that they may lie open to our own
sight, to the confusion of us in our selves, that in God by repentance we may
be raised up.

Our sins lie open before the face of God, and stincke in his presence, and
and cry for vengeance: and before the face of Gods Angels, who bewail it, and
before the face of the Devil, who rejoices in our confusions: and shall they
lie hid only to our selves? Now then, if we would have them hid from God,
and stop the cry, that they make against us, and keep them from Satan, who
accuses us for them: we must so Search our selves, that they may lie open to
our own hearts: remember thou thy sins, and God will forget them: lay them
open before thy own face, and God will hide them from his: write them up for
thy own self, and God will blot them out of his remembrance: but if
contrariwise, thou hidest them: then assure thy self, the more thou hidest,
and buriest them, the more open do they lie in the face of GOD: and then what
will follow, but that they will all be disclosed at the last day, to thy
eternal confusion. Therefore again, and again, I exhort you in the name of
GOD, Search your selves, find out your sins, confess them to GOD, freely,
and ingeniously; confess their desert to be Hell and damnation, humble your
hearts to God, cry and call for pardon, as for life and death, purpose and
promise to leave them, begin a new course of life, believe steadfastly, and
doubt not of pardon and forgiveness in the blood of Christ, continue in that
faith, and that new course of life: So may England prevent Gods judgments,
and quench that great action of unkindness, which God has against them, and
become a Nation as worthy (upon their faith and repentance) in Christ to be
beloved: as for their peace and prosperity, they have been of all nations of
the earth admired.

Hitherto, of the third general point.

4 The fourth general point in this exhortation, is the time limited them,
when they should Search. Before the Decree come forth etc. As though the
Prophet should say. Israel, repent, before God execute his judgments on thee.
For behold the gracious dealing of God: Man sins, his sins deserve
plagues: but GOD presently plagueth not, but deferres it, he puts a time
betwixt the sin and the punishment (ordinarily:) this he does to show his
mercy to mankind, because that he would not destroy them, if they would
amend. Therefore, after the sin, he smites not presently, but puttes of his
punishment, that in the mean time man may Repent. Here the Prophet compares
the Lord to a mother; for as she conceiues the fruit in her womb, and bears
it a long time, ere she bring it out: so the Lord after a man's sins, or a
peoples sins, conceive (that is) ordaines, and decrees a judgment for it,
but he keeps it up, and all that while he hears it: But as she, when her time
is come, then travails and bringes forth: so, when the time that God has
appointed, is come, and still sin is not repented of: then his justice
travails to be delivered of that judgment, which mercy has kept up so long a
time. Thus the old world had an hundred and twenty years given them for time
of repentance; all that while God was in conceiving, at last when there sins
were ripe, and no hope of amendment: then GOD traveled, and brought forth a
fearful birth, namely the universal flood, to wash away, and take revenge
upon the universal iniquities of those times. So many hundred years he gave
unto the Jews, long he was in conceiving their destruction, and oftentimes
he had it at the bringing forth, as in the captivity of Babylon, and under
Antiochus; yet his mercy stayed it: and still he trauailled longer: tells
them here by the Prophet, that yet the Decree is not come forth, (though it be
conceived:) but at last when Israel would not Repent, but grew worse, and
worse; (as in Christ his time) then he could contain no longer, but traveled
indeed, and though it be with grief, yet he has brought forth: and what?
a most fearful birth, even an utter disolation of that kingdom and Country,
of their City, and Temple, and a dispertion of their Nation over all the
world: but as a woman at last is delivered with danger, and difficulty, with
pain and sorrow: so the Lord long conceiues, but at last bringes forth his
judgments: yet it is with grief and unwillingness, and he is loath (as it
were) and much agrieued to execute his most just judgments on those, who have
professed his name: he often touched the Jews a little, and as being
unwilling to smite them: he drue back his hand again: but at last when
their sins did so increase, and were so strong, that they even did wring out,
by violence his plagues from him, then with much bewayling of their great
misery (as we may see in Christ, weeping for them,) he executes his
judgments on them. But as they are long a coming: so, when they come forth,
they were the heavier; as a child, the more fullness of time it has, is the
greater, the liuelier, and the stronger: so, Gods judgments, the longer God
deferreth them, and is in conceiving them, the heavier are they, when they
come: that is manifest in the Jews* once his own people, for he has
destroyed their land with an irrecouerable destruction, and smitten their
posterity with a blindness of mind til this hour, so that to this day, when
the old Testament is read, the veil is over their eyes, that they cannot see
the light of Christ Jesus, but plodde on in fearful and palpable blindness.

This Doctrine has special use to this our Church, to teach us to look to
our selves betimes, and try our own ways, and turn to the Lord, for we
cannot tell how far of his judgments are: in reason they must needs be near,
they have been so long deferred, and yet been so justly deserved of us.
Certainly God has long been in conceiving judgments and plagues for the
sins of England, and often has Gods hand been upon us by war* famine,
pestilence, inundations: and yet it has been pulled back again: and his sword
has been put up into his sheath, and God has stayed his birth even in the
very travel, and we have escaped, even as a man, whose neck has been upon
the block, and the Axe holden up to strike: so then, yet the day is not come,
yet we have time: happy we that ever we saw this day, if now we have grace
to repent, and search our hearts, for then we shall stay this Judgment
decreed, that it shall never come forrth against us: but if we defer to
repent, and put off from day to day, and lie rotting still in our sins: then
know and be assured that as the Decree is established, so it must needs come
forth: and then, when judgment is come forth, and the stroke stricken,
Repentance is too late: therefore what he said to the Jews, I say unto us,
Search thy self, O England, (a Nation not worthy to be beloved) before the
Decree come forth, which is already past against thee.

Thus much for the fourth point.

5 Now follows the last point: the reason of all. Why should we search our
selves? The reason is included in the fourth point: For there is a Decree come
forth against thee. And though the execution be deferred, and though God be
unwilling to take it out, yet without Repentance, it is most certain, it shall
come forth and be executed at the last. In one word, this is the reason.
Repent, or else certainly God will take vengeance: But (will man's heart say)
is this true? Or rather these be but words to fear men, and to keep them in
awe. I answer, for the proof and experience hereof, never go further, then
this place, and present example we have in hand: the Prophet bids them Search,
Search, and repent, else, as certainly, as there was a judgment conceived, so
certainly it should be executed upon the^: they would not hear, nor Search,
nor repent: but what followed; let all me^ judge whether God is not true, of
his word to them or no: yea, alas, who sees not that God has traveled
indeed, and has brought forth a fearful judgment on them, and has made
them for these thousand years and a half, the gazing stock, the by word, and
the amazement of all the world.

Thus was it threatened to the Jews, and thus it is performed: and certainly
thus has it been threatened, and thus shall it be performed to thee, O
England, except thou prevent the judgments that are coming: O happy England,
that I may say to thee, it is yet but coming. For as for the miserable Jews:
upon them (alas) it is come already: to those poor souls it can be said no
more, Repent before the Decree come forth: for it is now past: but thou art
happy, for thy day is not yet come: yet I may say to thee: Repent before the
Decree come forth: and O happy England, that thou may hear this word:
(Before) sounding in thine ears. Therefore my beloved brethren, who are hear
assembled out (almost) of every corner of this kingdom, hear my words: and
carry them home with you into al countries. God is the same God still, as just,
and as jealous, as ever he was: our sins are as ill, nay, much viler then
the Jews were: how can it be then, but that must fall to us that fell to them?
therefore the zeal of Gods glory, and my desire of your saluations, make me,
that I dare not flatter: but tell you the truth: that is, that out of all
question, if we search not our selves and repent, there is a general judgment
in preparing for us: certainly the Decree is out, and what can stop the
execution of it, but Repentance: God has long spared, and he has been long
in traveling, therefore (though nothing can be said in way of prophecy) I am
in my conscience persuaded to fear, and that out of infallible grounds of the
word of God, that a plague, and a judgment, and that most fearful, hangs
over England: and that it is already pronounced upon this Nation, and shall be
as certainly executed, without a visible reformation: and because I may seem
to speak somewhat at large, give me leave to give you the reasons inducing me
hereunto.

1 First, the Gospel has been preached these five and thirty years, and is
daily more and more, so that, the light thereof never shone more gloriously,
since the Primitive Church: yet for all this, there is a general ignorance,
general of all people, general of all points, yea, as though there were no
preaching at all: yea, when Popery was newly banished, there was more
knowledge in many, then is now in the body of our Nation: and the more it is
preached, the more ignorant are many, the more blind, and the more hardened
(even as a Stithi^ (the more it is beaten upon, the harder it is) so they, the
more they hear the Gospel, the less esteem they it, and the more they
contemn it; and the more God calls, the deafer they are: and the more they
are commanded, the more they disobey. We Preachers may cry, till our Lunges
fly out, or be spent within us, and men are moved no more then stones, O
alas, what is this, or what can this be: but a fearful sign of destruction?
Will any man endure always to be mocked, then how long has God been mocked?
Will any man endure to stand knocking continually? If then God has stood
knocking at our hearts five and thirty years: is it not now time to be gone,
unless we open presently?

But, if we will know what this argues, to contemn the Gospel, and not to
repent, when the word is so abundantly preached: read the Story of Ely his
wicked sons. He spoke unto them, and gave them godly counsel, but they
hearkened not unto the 1. Sam. 2. 13.
voice of their Father: But will some say, that is no great matter, not to
hear their Father is a common thing: but mark what follows. They would not
bear their Father, because the Lord would destroy them: a fearful thing.
Even so it is with a nation, or a people: are they taught, and are they worse
and worse? take heed: If Elyes sons obey not, it is, because God will
destroy them.

If therefore Ely, and many Elyes have spoken to England, and England hears
not, England obeys not, England repents not: take heed the Lord in heaven say
not, England will not hear the voice of the Prophets, because I will destroy
it. Let no man say, we take upon us to prophecy: we only give warning, and
shewethe danger, by example of the like.

My second reason is this. One judgment executed: and not working Repentance,
is always a forerunner of another, that Rule is certain, and an evident
truth, and needs no proving. Now; we have been visited with Famines,
Earthquakes, pestilences, inundations, Thunder and lightning in winter, and
most strange and unseasonable weather: but alas, all these have taken no
effect: where is the humiliation, repentance and reformation which they have
wrought? therefore it must needs be, there remains behind a greater
judgment. Men may be so mad to think these to be ordinary things, and to
come by course of Nature, and ordinary causes: but certainly, they are the
shaking of the Rod, and forerunners of a greater judgment, unless Repentance
cut of their course. For look as one cloud follows another, till the Sun
consume them: so one judgment hastens after another, and repentance only is
the Sun, which must dispel them.

3 Thirdly, it stands with the justice of God, according as he has revealed it
in the Scripture, especially in Deuteronomy. 28. out of the whole Chapter, it must
needs be gathered as a Rule. I will curse that people which break my laws: now
we may not deny but this land of ours, is for abundance of sin, a people of
Sodom. All kind of sins, in all estates of men, rage and reign every day
more and more: therefore I conclude, that unless we repent, and so dissolve
this cloud of judgment, that hangs over our heads: it cannot be, but a most
fearful tempest is to come at the last, and when it is come, it will be too
late to wish we had done it. Therefore in the bowels of Christ Jesus, Let this
be to entreat and exhort you all, to search and look into your selves, that
so Repenting and changing your ways, you may get the sword again into his
sheath, which is already drawn out, but yet has not stricken home, and may
quench the wrath which is already kindled, but yet burns not out as it will do,
if by repentance we quench it not: and do this every one as you tender the
salvation of your own souls, and the continuance of the Gospel to this
glorions Nation, and the peace and prosperous state of this Church and common
wealth. For let men make what causes they will, it is certainly sinfulness
that ouerturnes kingdoms, and changes states, as all these kingdoms and
states have felt, who have continued finally to contemn the Gospel.

It follows:

And you be as Chaff, that passes on a day.

The Prophet proceeds, and describes more plainly, the manner and state of
that plague, which God will send upon the^: the meaning was partly opened
before, to be in effect thus much; Search your selves, least God take his
fan and try you, because you would not try your selves, and finding ^ou upon
the trial, not sound wheat, but light chaff: blow you to hell with the wind of
his wrath: the Metaphor which the Prophet uses is this, he compares the Lord
to a husband man, great and rich, the whole world is his corne-field: several
nations, (as this of ours for one,) are his heaps of Corn: but these heaps
of corn be full of chaf, that is, these particular Churches, are full of
hypocrites: now a wise husbandman lets corn and chafe lie together no
longer, then til the wind does blow, and then he appoints his fanning time to
sever his corn from his chafe, and to blow away his chafe, and lay up his
corn: so God, the great and wise husbandman, will not let the Chafe lie for
ever amongst the Wheat, he has therefore appointed his fanning times, when to
blow the Chafe into hell, and to gather his wheat into heavenly garners.

Now Gods winnowing times are two: the one is at the last day, after this life,
and that is Gods great winnowing day of all his Corn (that of al^ men) when
the bad shall be severed from the good for ever, never to be mingled again
with the^, but by the strong and powerful fan of his last and final
judgment to be blown into Hell: the wind of whose wrath, at that day, shall
be stronger to blow them all away, then all the wind in the world to blow away
one handful of light Chafe.

2 Gods other fanning time, is in this world: and that is also double. The one
is, when the word is preached: the preaching of the word is one of Gods fans.
For when the Gospel is preached to a Nation or Congregation, it fannes them,
and tries them, and purges them, and so seuers them, that a man may see a
manifest difference of the chafe and the wheat, that is, of the godly man,
and the wicked man: this preaching of the Gospel, does John the Baptist,
Matthew. 3.
expressly call a Fan: where the holy Ghost pursues this whole Metaphor, most
plainly speaking of Christ, he says; Whose Fan is in his hand, and he
will ^roughly purge his floor, and gather his w^eat into his garner, but the
chafe he will burn with fire unquenchable. The wind of this fan of the
word preached is so strong, as that it seuers the Chafe from the Wheat, that
is, good professors from hypocrites in the visible Church, and blows so
strongly upon the wicked, that it brings them to the beginning of Hell even in
this world, for it so works upon the conscience, as if it cannot convert
them, it strikes them with fear, terror and torment, either in life or at
death, which torment of conscience is the very flashes of hellfire.

But, when this first Fan of the word, will not serve to bring men to
repentance, (for the word preached, does not confound a man actually, but only
pronounce the sentence, and thereby strike the conscience) then God has
another fan, and that is the fan of his judgments: and that fanning or
winnowing time is, when he executes his vengeance and his judgments on a
Nation: this is his latter fan, (...) the first will not prevail, this ^^
his powerful and strong fan driven about with the wind of his wrath, this
fan went over the old world, and swept them all away, and went over the
nation of the Jews, and we see they are no more.

1 These three fannes of God make a threefold separation of the Chafe from
the Wheat, that is, of the wicked from the elect: with the fan of his word
which is powerful, he seuers them in affection, and disposition, and makes a
distinction of them, so, as generally the Wheat is known to be Wheat, and
Chafe discerned to be Chafe, by the preaching of the word: but though the
tare be known to be tare, yet both grow together, so that the word only
seuers them in affection, and sets several notes of distinction upon them both.

2 But then the second fan of his Judgments is more violent, for thereby, he
seuereth them a sunder in soul, gathering the godly men, as his wheat into the
heavens, and blowing the souls of the wicked into hell: but yet the bodies of
them both lie together, as partakers of the same judgment, so subject to the
same corruption, and are all lodged in the same grave of the earth, and death
has like dominion over them all.

3. But afterward at the last day, at Gods great harvest, and great winnowing
time, he then with the wind of his power, seuereth them a sunder in soul and
body. Wheat from the Chafe, sheep from the Goats, and separateth them,
never to be mingled again for ever and ever: and then with the wind of his
wrath, he blows the chafe into fire unquenchable, and with his loving favor
gathers his wheat into the everlasting and glorious garners of heaven.

So then the first seuereth them in affection. The second in soul for a time.
The third, actually in soul and body for ever and ever.

Now of these three winnowing times, the holy Ghost speaks here properly of
the second: namely the fan of Gods judgments: so that, the meaning of the
Metaphor is this: search your selves and repent betimes, least God come upon
you with some fearful judgments: because you have so long contemned the fan
of the word, and finding you too light to abide the try all, do take you away
in the judgment, and cast you into hell: for as sure as the fan of the word
has made difference of you, which are chafe, and which are wheat, so sure
shall the fan of his judgments blow away the chafe to hell and damnation.

Thus much for the meaning.

Now for the use, for us in England, the case stands thus: Our church
doubtless is Gods corn field, and we are the corn heap of God: and those
Brownisles and Sectaries are blind and besotted, who cannot see that the
church of England is a godly heap of Gods corn: but withal, we must
confess, we are full of chafe: that is, of profane, and wicked Hypocrites,
whose hearts and minds abound in sins and rebellions: and many of our best
professors are also too full of chafe (that is) of corruptions, and do give
themselves too much liberty in many sins: but alas, the pure wheat, how
thin is it scattered? how hard to find a man (at least a family) which
dedicate themselves to the Lord in holy and sincere obedience, and labor to
make conscience of all sins: now therefore, seeing we are Gods corn field,
and we have some pure wheat amongst much chafe, therefore God will winnow us,
to find out the corn, if he have but one corn of wheat in a handful of
chafe, but one good man of many, he will stir all the heap for those few
corns, he will not care to blow all the chafe to hell, to find out those
few corns of wheat, to lay them up in heaven: so that out of all question,
England being so full of chafe, must look to be winnowed.

Now for the first Fan of his word, it has been used in this land these
five and thirty years, and that as powerfully, and as plentifully as any
where in the world, and yet (alas) many are more Godless, more ignorant, more
profane then ever they were, yea wickedness grows, and the Chafe
increases above the Wheat: be sure therefore, that God will bring his second
Fan upon us; because we will not suffer the first and the mild and gentle
fan of his word to try and search us: therefore he will bring the fearful
fan of his judgments, and with it, he will blow soul and body into hell,
with those our sins and corruptions, which we would not suffer the Fan of
Gods word to blow from us. The first has so long blown in vain, that the
second must needs come upon us, and it has already begun to blow: three or
four blasts have blown over us; famine, pestilence, earthquakes, fire, water,
wind, these have so blown some of us, that they have taken away a great
number of us. For us that remain, this only remains, that we In the plagu
at London there dyed some weeks almost 2000 a week in 92. but in 1603. there
dyed 3300. in a week.
strengthen our selves by grace, to be able to stand against the next blast,
for come it will, and when it comes, no wealth nor worldly thing can enable us
to endure it, only faith and repentance, and the grace of God will stand at
that day. Now therefore, in that so fearful a fanning abides us: seeing it is
so near (as appears by the blasts already past over us, which are nothing but
the forerunners of a greater tempest:) what should be our care (except we care
not to be blown body and soul into hell) but to labor to efchew this fearful
fan of Gods wrath: or at least, if it come upon us, that it may not blow us to
hell, but hasten us to heaven. It thy heart be touched to ask, how this may
be: I answer thee, only to follow the Prophets advice in this place, by
Searching and trying our selves. The way to escape Gods trial, is to try thy
self: and to escape Gods judgment, to be a judge to thine own soul: and so
the way to escape the fearful fan of God, is to fan thine own heart by the
law of God. For whomsoever the first fan (that is the word of God) does work
upon: these men are never blown away with the fan of Gods judgments. O
then, entertain the word of God into thy heart, submit thy soul unto it, let
it pearce, and try, and ransacke thy heart, and lay before thee thy wretched
estate by thy sins, and when thou see thynakednesse and misery, confess
it, bewail it, be humbled for it, cry and call for mercy and forgiveness;
pray against thy special sins, strive to purge them out as the poison of thy
soul, crave grace from God against al thy sins: and if thou see any sins
more welcome to thy nature, more dear unto thee, and which more prevail
against thee, then others do: pray against these sins, and strive against
them above all: and endeavor, that by the fan of Gods word, they may be
blown away from thee. When thou have done this, then mark, what will come of
it: when thou have fanned thy self, God will not fan thee: but when the
fan of his judgment comes; and blows so strongly upon the wicked, then the
Lord finding thee already fanned, and cleansed by his word, will spare thee, and
his judgment shall either blow over thee, and pass by thee untouched (as over
Lot, in the destruction of Sodom) or else shall fan out all thy corruptions,
and blow thee up to heaven, to be laid up as pure wheat in the heavenly
garners, and mansions of glory, which Christ ascended to prepare for thee.

Now then amongst those many businesses, with which this world does comber
every one of us (all which shall perish with the world it self) let us good
brethren, spare some time for this great business. Martha may be combred about
many things, but this is that one thing, which is necessary: therefore
whatsoever is done, let not this be undone. Once a day put thy self and thy
life under the fan of Gods law, try thy self what thou art and thy life,
how thou live. Once a day keep a Court in thy conscience, call thy thoughts,
thy words, and thy deeds to their trial: let the ten Commandments pass
upon them, and thy sins and corruptions which thou find to be chafe, blow
them away by repentance, so shall thou remain pure and clean wheat, fit for
the house and Church of God in this world, and for his kingdom in heaven. But,
if we will not do this, then alas, what will follow? my heart grieueth to utter
it: but I must unless I should be a false prophet: And therefore I will. Our
long peace, plenty, and ease, have bred great sins, so great that they reach
to heaven, and provoke Gods Majesty to his face, and so strong, that they will
violently draw down judgments from God upon us: which when they come, they
will be so powerful, and so violent, that they will blow us away like chafe,
and bring this kingdom to some miserable ruin. O therefore how happy are we,
if we can entertain this Doctrine, and practice it: for in so doing, we shall
prevent Gods judgments, we shall continue the Gospel to this land, and
preserve this glorious Nation from being destroyed or dispeopled, by some
fearful judgment.

Beloved, you come hither to this At Sturbridg fair
place, purposely to buy and sell and thereby, to better your estates in this
world: how happy then are you, if besides the good markets, you make for your
bodies and estates, you learn also how to make your selves abide the trial of
Gods judgments, and how to be made pure corn, fit to replenish the garners of
heaven, and how to continue Gods favor and the Gospel to this Nation. If thou
go away with this lesson, thou have a Jewel more worth, then if thou should
go home possessed or all the huge riches of this Fair: you call this and such
like times, Fair times: but if thou learn this lesson right, then thou may
say, that this was the fairest day in deed, that ever shon upon thee, since
thou wast borne. This precious Jewel which I have spoken of all this while, I
hear offer unto thee. Every one brings hither something to be sold, this is
the merchandise that I bring and set to sale unto you: what ever commodity any
of you bring, it is from some quarter of this land, but all is from the earth:
but this that I bring, it is from heaven: and all the earth cannot yield it:
and as it is from heaven, so it is of a heavenly virtue, and will work that
which all the wealth in this fair is not able to do: therefore cast not, to
buy the basest, and let pass the best of all: and never allege that it is
above thy compass, and being a Jewel, it is too dear and costly for thee:
for I offer it freely unto you, and to every one of you, I pronounce unto you,
from the Esa. 55.
Lord, that here this blessed doctrine is offered unto you all, in his name,
freely, and that you may buy it without money. Happy is that day when thou
coming so far to buy things for thy body, and paies so dear for them,
do meet with so precious a Jewel, the virtue whereof, is to save thy
soul, and payest nothing for it. Thou may hereafter rejoice and say: I went
to buy and sell, and to help my body: but I have also learned to save my
soul. I went thither to help to maintain my own estate: but I have learned
to help to maintain England in prosperity: for assuredly, if we would all
of us learn this lesson, and practice it, we might assure our selves of the
glorious prosperity of England, to continue from generation to generation:
whereas alas, if we continue and go forward in our sins* and impenitency, it is
greatly to be feared, that neither the Gospel nor this peace, will reach to
our posterities. Therefore now to make an end: I once again: and lastly,
commend this doctrine to you al, and every one of you (for this merchandise
that I bring, is of that nature, that though some take it, yet there is also
enough for every one) and I commend it unto you, even from the very mouth of
God himself? think of it I charge thee, as ever thou look to appear
before the face of Christ Jesus the great judge, at the last day; and if thou
would escape the rigor of that judgment, enter now into judgment with thy
self, and search thy self: if thou now wilt not receive this doctrine, then
shall it at the last day be a bill of Enditement against thee, for if it save
thee not, it shall condemn thee, think of it therefore seriously, as a matter
that concerns thy soul and body: yea, and thy posterity, and this whole
Realm, all which shall smart for it, if we repent not. And if the body of our
people, and those, whose hearts are wedded to this world, will not enterteine
this doctrine: then I turn unto you that fear the Lord, and to you I direct
my last warning, Search, O search, and try your hearts and lives, renew and
revive your faith and repentance, that if judgments do come and blow upon
this Nation, and drive the Gospel from it, and it to hell: that yet you may
have a testimony to your consciences, that you did not pull down this general
calamity, but for your parts labored to have prevented it, by your earnest
prayers and hearty repentance: that so, the posterity ensuing; may not curse
you, but speak reverently of you, and praise God for you, and wish that al had
done as you did; for then had they enjoyed this goodly land, and al Gods
blessings with it, as we their forefathers did before them: and so shall our
names not rot, but flourish amongst the posterities to come, which shall be
partakers of the desolation: And when we have renewed our repentance, let us
then every one of us, deal with the Lord by earnest prayer for this Church and
Nation, that the Lord would show his mercy upon it, and continue unto it, this
place and the Gospel: it is nothing with the Lord to do it, his powerful
hand is not shortened, he can continue our peace, when the Papists look for
hurli-burlies, he can continue the gospel, when they hope to set up their
Idolatry again: let us therefore apply the Lord with our prayers, and with
Moses set our selves in the breach, and pray for the ignorances of the
multitude, and bewail their sins, who bewail not their own, So did Eze.
14. 13. 14.
Noah, Daniel, and Job, in their ages, and prayed for the people in general
calamities: Let us all be Noah's, Daniels, and Jobs, in our generations; if we
do thus: then when Judgments come, we shall either turn them away from our
Nation, or at the least we shall deliver our own souls.

Let us now turn to the Lord in prayer, and because it cannot be hoped, but
that this our general sinfulness must needs end with some heavy Judgment: let
us desire the Lord still to defer our deserved punishments, and still to spare
us, and to give us time and leisure to repent: that so, we entering into our
selves, and searching our hearts, and turning to the Lord: we may turn away
his imminent judgments, and that when his wrath does burn out indeed, we may
then be counted worthy in Christ, to escape those things which must needs
come upon the world. Amen.

WILLIAM PERKINS.

Lament. 3.

Let us Search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

Trin. vni Deo gloria.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Edward Cook Knight, his Majesty's Attorney
General, and Sir Thomas Heskith Knight, Attorney of his Highness Court of
Wards and Liueries, and one of his Majesty's Honorable Counsel in the North,
Grace and peace from Jesus Christ.
RIght Worshipful, give me leave to put you both in one Epistle, who^ one
service, one place, one profession, one order, and one Religion have so nearly
combined: As you are Brethren many ways, and especially in the profession and
practice of one Religion: to vouchsafe to be joint Patrons of this little
afterbirth, this faetus posthumus, of that worthy man Ma. Perkins, now
deceased. I send you here one of the shortest, and one of the sweetest of his
Treatises: had it been as well brought forth by me, as it was begot by him it
had been a child not unworthy of so great a father: but seeing it is now as a
fatherles child, be you the Tutors to this Orphane, at whose hands Orphans and
Wards have ever been well used. The father whilst he lived was a shining light
in this our Church, and being dead, is a shining star in heaven, for he
turned many to righteousness, and his doctrine will shine Dan. 12. 3.
in Christian Churches whilst the Sun shines upon the earth. The subject of
this Treatise is the Ministry, whereof are laid down the duties and
dignities. And well does he couple these two together: for some can challenge
the dignities of the Ministry, and cunningly cast the duties from their
shoulders: others perform the duties, but are kept from the dignities duly
belonging to that calling: but as he that will do the duties, may justly
challenge the dignities, so he that will expect the dignities, must do the
duties of a Minister: therefore in this building, these two beams are in great
wisdom well set together by this wise Master builder, and so closely
coupled, as the idle or ambitious man cannot look at the dignities, but he
must withal behold the duties, nor the painful and laborious man see his duty,
but withal sha^ see the dignity thereto belonging.

And surely (Right Worshipful) none might better have written of this subject
then he: for who may more worthily describe the dignities of the Ministry,
then he, who neither by doctrine nor conversation, was ever the least disgrace
unto his Ministry? or who may better challenge the honor of his calling,
then he who was ever an honor to his calling; And who might better teach the
duties of the Ministry, then he who so discharged them, as En^ie it self
cannot justly reprove, and the enemies themselves cannot but Answer to Perkins
his reformed Catholic, by B. a Priest.
commend? and who may better teach them to others, then he that carefully
practiced the^ in his own person: And as none could be a fitter Author of this
discourse then he, so not many fi^ter Patrons then your selves: not many in
your profession better scholars, nor any that better love scholars then your
selves: and you are some of those few in this wicked age, who willingly yield
all dignities and due reverence to such Ministers as you see willingly to
discharge the duties of good Ministers. Well would it be with the Ministry of
England, (and the better with it, the better with England) if all as great as
you, were as good friends to it as you. And if the Papists except, and say how
can this be, for that you have been persecuters of their Priests, let me
answer once for you, who often answer for many distressed men: they persecute
you with slander, that say you persecuted the^, (but be content to bear your
part in popish slanders, with our Prince and state, our Counselors and
Clergy, our Parliaments and Laws, for none of these have escaped these
viperous tongues) for though you have executed the Laws upon some of them in
your several places, yet not with sharpness nor severity but with merciful
justice* and that also not as they were Priests, but Plotters, Practisers,
subuerters, and seducers: and as they were Priests, you sought their
reformation, not their ruin. And if they, who can hardly discharge themselves
from being Priests of Baal, have had but justice, and that also tempered with
mercy, it shows how good regard you have, and how much you esteem all good
and faithful Ministers, which are God Interpreters. In a word, if all our
Ministers were such as this Treatise describes, or came but as near it as the
Author hereof did, and if all our great ones did use and esteem good ministers
as you do, we should then soon pull the Ministry from under that foot of
contempt, with which this profane age does daily tread upon it. The Church of
Rome, who are far wiser in their kind then the children of light, have taken
other and strange courses to magnify the Clergy. They teach, that the state
Ecclesiastical, is so far more excellent then the Civil, as the Sun is then
the Moon, and that not in spiritual only, (for that we deny not) but in
temporal power, pomp, and estate: and that therefore the Chief of their
Clergy, is as far above the mightiest Emperor, as the Sun is above the
Moon; and as the Moon borrows her light from the Sun, so does the
Emperor is state and power from the Pope.

They teach, that the Clergy is a state so distinct, and so absolute of it
self, as it has not to do with the Civil stat^, yea they exempt their
Clergy, from being any way subject to the temporal Magistrate. And though
their crimes, be never so many or monstrous, yet the Prince, or civil
authority, has nothing to do to take notice thereof, much less to punish
them: and hereupon great volumes are written, and many Acts and decrees are
made in their Cannon Law, De exemptione Clericorum. They extol their Clergy
above the Temporaltie, allowing the Priests both Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, but leaving the Laity bread alone. They make them in their mass,
mediators betwixt Christ and God the Father, and Creators of their Creator and
Redeemer, when and as often as themselves list. And finally, they send for the
most part, all their Clergy immediately to heaven without let, whereas all the
Temporaltie (except Martyrs) must pass by Purgatory. Here are great
buildings, but on a sandy foundation, goodly Castles, but built in the air; if
these devises were of God, they would certainly stand, but their long tottering
threatens a sudden fall.

Contrariwise, our Church, or rather the corruption of our Church, by avoiding
this Scilla, have fallen into Charibdis, by avoiding one extremity, have fallen
into the other, by taking too much dignity and authority from our Ministry,
and by laying too much poverty, contempt, and baseness upon it. It were a
work worth the labor of the wisest heads, to put down the true mean betwixt
both extremes, and worth the labor of our Noble King, to take order that that
mean be kept, without rising to the right hand, or falling to the left. This
short Treatse may hap to give some light and directions therein, or at least
may encourage and stir up their hearts in whose hands it is to do it: Under
your worthy names would I have it see the world, not so much for that I am
bound to you both in many private and particular respects, (though that be
much) as for that know you both to be o^ so right and reformed a judgment in
this case, as you would have none Ministers but of sufficient gifts, and
unblameable lives, nor those Ministers put to their Pensions, or uncertain
salailes, but to have certain and sufficient maintenance proportionable to
their charge, and beseeming the honor of a Christian Church: God continue you
still in that mind, and make many more of the same with you, so should we have
as flourishing a Church as any Christendom has seen. Go forward in that, and
other your religious resolutions, it is the true way to honor, both here and
in a better world: stand firmly for the truth, and boldly against the Popish
enemies thereof, as hitherto you have done: Religion had never more cause to
thank you, and all that do so, then now it has, for her enemies were never
so insolent since they were our enemies: but if you and others hold on, as in
your several places you have well begun, and others take the like course, there
is hope their insolences will be easily (if timely) repressed, and themselves
nearest the fall, when they imagine they are in the full. The Lord bless and
assist you in your painful places, and make you on earth Instruments of his
glory, to the good of his Church, so shall you be vessels of glory in the
kingdom of Heaven: And thus commending this little treatise to your reading,
and my self to your favor, I take leave, and will ever rest, 1605.

Your Worships in the Lord, VV. Crashawe.

A Treatise of the duties and dignity of the Ministry.
Job. 33. 23. 24. If there be with him a Messenger: An Interpreter, one of a
thousand to declare unto man his righteousness:

Then will be have mercy on him, and will say, deliver him that he go not
down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation.


IN this Chapter and the former, Elihu a The Co^^rence of these words with the
rest.
holy, learned, noble, and wise young man, had conference with Job in matters
of high and excellent Divinity: the points of his conference are these: From
the first verse of this chap. to the 7. verse, is a Praeface to his speech.
From thence to the 13. he repeateth certain propositions of Job, and reproves
them: from thence to these words, he instructs Job in certain points
touching Gods dealing with sinners: and those are two.

1 How God preserves a sinner from The parts of this Chapt.
falling.

2 How God restores a sinner being fallen.

1 The means whereby God preserves a sinner, are set down to be two
principal.

1 By Admonitions in dreams and visions.

2 By scourges and chastisments, when the first will not prevail. And these
are laid down from the thirteen verse unto these words.

2 Then follows the 2. point, namely the restoring of a sinner: when both the
means formerly spoken of, have not prevailed with him, but that through his
corruption he is fallen: and concerning this point, he handles these
particulers.

1 The remedy and means of his restoring.

2 The effect that follows thereupon. 1 The remedy is laid down in these
words now red unto us, then follows the effect, which is, that when a sinner
is restored by repentance, then the graces of God are plentifully powered upon
him both for soul and body: from these words to the end of the Chapter.

The intent then of this Scripture, is, The some and scope of this text is a
description of the instrument by whom God raises a sinner into the state of
grace and salvation.
that God uses means in his mercy to preserve sinners from falling into
sin, but if they do, then he in much greater mercy afordeth them means
and helps to rise again. And this is the sum and substance of the words.
Now, that means and remedy is the matter I purpose to speak of, out of these
words: The means then to restore a sinner after a fall, is to raise him by
repentance to a better Namely a Minister of his word, and he is described.
estate then he was in before, and that is inclusiuely, and by implication
taught in this Text: But the instrument by whom that great work is to be
wrought, is here in plain terms laid down to be a Minister of God, lawfully
called and sent by God, and appointed by his Church to that great duty. So
that these words contain a worthy description of a true Minister, and he is
here described.

1 By his titles, 1. By his titles.
which are two, An Angel. An Interpreter.


2 By his rarnesse, One of a thousand.

3 By his office: which is, to declare unto man his righteousness.

4 By the blessing that God gives upon the labors of this true Minister:
which is, then God will have mercy upon the sinner.

5 By his Commission and authority in the last words: God will say, Deliver
him that he go not down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation.

Let us speak of them in order as they lie in the text, and first of his
titles.

1 The first title of a Minister of God is, 1. Title an Angel.
he is called a Messenger, or an Angel: and not here alone, but elsewhere in the
Scripture, Malachy 2. 7. He is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. And in the
Revelation, Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters.
the Ministers of the 7. Churches are called the Angels of those Churches. So
that it is apparent, a true Minister is an Angel He is Gods Angel and the
Churches.
of God in one place, and in the other place, the Angel of the Church. He is
an Angel or Messenger sent from God to his Church. Use 1. for Ministers.


This consideration affords matter of much use. And first for Ministers
themselves.

The most of us in this place This sermon was in the university church, to the
body of the university.
are either Prophets, or sons of the Prophets.

If thou be a Prophet, thou art Gods Angel. If a son of the prophets thou
intendest to be, then mark thy duty, prophets and Ministers are Angels in
the very institution of their calling. Therefore 1. Use for Ministers. Go they
must preach gods word, as Gods word.
thou must preach Gods word as GODS word, and deliver it as thou receiuest it:
for Angels, Ambassadors, and Messengers, carry not their own message, but the
message of their Lords and Masters who sent them, and Ministers carry the
message of the Lord of Hosts, therefore they are bound to deliver it as the
Lords, and not their own.

In the first Epistle of Peter, 4. 11. we are bid, If any man speak, let him
speak, not only the word of God, but as the word of God Gods word must be
spoken, and as Gods word: then show thy faithfulness For they carry not the it
own message but gods.
to the Lord, in discharging thy hands sincerely of that message, which he has
honored thee to carry, Gods word is pure, thercfore purely to be thought upon,
and to be delivered. Then let all that are Gods Angels, and would be honored
as his Angels and Ambassadors, think it no less reason to do the duty of
Gods Angels, least (as many men mar a good tale in the telling, so) they take
away the power and majesty of Gods word, in the manner of delivering it.

The second use concerns the ministers 2. Use for minister. They must dreach
Gods word in the evidence, and demonstration of gods spirit.
also: are they Gods Angels? therefore they must preach Gods word in the
evidence and demonstration of the spirit of God: for he that is Gods Angel,
the spirit of that God must speak in him: Now to speak in the demonstration
of Gods spirit, is to speak in such a plains, and yet such a powerfulnes, as
that the capacities of the simplest, may perceive, not man, but God teaching
them in that plainness: and the conscience of the mightiest may feel, not man,
but God reprove them in that powerfulness: That this is so, appears by Saint
Paul. If a man prophecy aright. (says the holy Ghost) the unlearned 1. Cor.
14. 24. 25.
or unbelieving man comes in, he thinks his secret faults are disclosed and
laid open, he thinks all men see his nakedness, and do reprove him for it,
he therefore falls down and says surely God speaks in this man.

In which words, observe an admirable This is done
plainness, and an admirable powerfulness (which a man would think could not
so First by teaching plainly.
well stand together.) First plainness, for whereas the unlearned man
perceives his faults discouerrd, it follows necessarily he must needs
understand, and if an unlearned man understand it, then consequently it must
needs be plain: Secondly powerfulness, in that his conscience is so
convinced, his secret faults so disclosed, Secondly. powerfully in that
plainness.
and his very heart so ripped up: that he says, certainly God speaks in this
man. This is the evidence and demonstration of Gods spirit: It is thought good
commendation before the world, when men say of a Preacher, surely this man has
shown himself a proper scholar, of good learning, great reading, strong
memory, and good delivery, Ministers must magnify Gods spirit, and not
themselves in preaching.
and so it is, and such commendation (if just) is not to be contemned: but
that, that commends a man to the Lord his God, and to his own conscience, is
when he preaches so plainly to the capacity, and so powerfully to the
conscience of a wicked man, as that he thinks doubtless God is within him.
Art thou therefore an Angel of God, then magnify the spirit of God, and not
thy self in thy preaching of his word.

The next use is for the hearers, and they are here taught, that if their
Ministers be The 2. use for hearers.
Angels sent them from God, then are they to hear them, gladly, willingly,
reverently, They are to receive the^ and their doctrine willingly and reuerenly.
and obediently: gladly and willingly, because they are Ambassadors, reverently
and obediently, because they are sent from the high God the King of Kings, and
do deliver his embaslage. God says, the people must seek the Law at his
mouth: Malach. 2. 7.
and good reason, for if the law be the revealed will of God, and the Minister
the Angel of God, then where should they seek the will of God, but at the
mouth of his Angel? The reason therefore follows well in that place: they
should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the lord of
hosts: and this must all Christians do, not only if their Doctrine be
pleasing unto them, but though it cross their corruptions, and be quite
contrary to their dispositions, yea though For it is Gods message, though they
be men that bring it.
it be never so unsavory and hard unto nature, yet in as much as it is a
message from thy God and King, and the teacher the Angellor messenger of that
God: therefore both he and it must be received with all reverence, and with
the very obedience of the heart and soul. And this is the cause why a
convenient reverence and honor is to be given of all good Christians, even to
the persons of Gods Ministers (especially when they adorn their high calling
with a holy life:) even because they are Angels of God. Saint Paul teaches,
that women ought to be modestly altired in the congregation 1 Corinthians. 11. 11.
because of the Angels: it is not only, because the holy Angels are present,
and always beholders of our service of God, but even because the Ministers,
which are Angels and messengers sent from God, are there, delinering their
message and Embassage received from God: And thus we have the first title given
to the Minister: he is an Angel.

An Interpreter.

Secondly he is an Interpreter, that is, 2 Title, an Interpreter, and that two
wa^es.
one that is able to deliver aright the reconciliation, made betwixt God and
man: I say not, the author of that reconciliation, for that is the godhead it
self: nor the worker of this reconciliation, for that is the second person,
Christ Jesus: nor the assurer or ratifier of it, for that is the holy Ghost:
nor the instrument of it, for that is the glad tidings of the gospel: but I
say he is the interpreter of it, that is, first one that can open and explane
the covenant of grace, and rightly lay down the means how 1 Gods interpreter
to his Church.
this reconciliation is wrought: Secondly, one that can rightly and justly
apply those means, for the working of it out. Thirdly, one that has
authority to publish and declare it when it is wrought: and by these three
actions he is Gods Interpreter to the people. 2 Man's interpreter to God.


Then he is also the peoples interpreter to God, by being able to speak to
God for them, to lay open their wants and nakednesses, to confess their
sins, to crave pardon and forgiveness, to give thanks in their names for
mercies received, and in a word to offer up all their spiritual sacrifices
unto God for them: and so every true Minister is a double interpreter, Gods to
the people, and the peoples to God. In which respects, he is properly called,
Gods mouth to the people, by preaching to them from God, and the peoples mouth
to God, by praying for them to God: and this title shows how great and
glorious a calling this ministry is if it be rightly conceived. Now then for
the use of it.

First, if every true Minister must be 1 Use. Ministers must have the tongue
of the learned.
Gods Interpreter to the people, and the peoples to God, then hence we learn
that every one, who either is or intends to be a Minister, must have that
tongue of the learned, whereof is spoken in Esaias 50. 4. where the prophet says
(first in the name of Christ, as he that is the great Prophet and teacher of
his Church; and secondarily in the name of himself, and all true Prophets
while the world endures.) The Lord God has given me a tongue of the
learned, that I should know to speak a word in season to him that is weary:
where note the weary souls, or troubled conscience, must have a word in
season spoken to him for his comfort, and that cannot be spoken without the
tongue of the learned, and lastly that tongue of the learned must be given
First he must be furnished with human learning. 2 with divinity.
of God. Now to have this tongue of the learned, which Esaias speaks of, what is
it but to be this Interpreter, which the holy Ghost here says a Minister must
be: But to be able to speak with this tongue is, first to be furnished with
humane learning. Secondly, with Divine knowledge, as far as it may by outward
means be taught from man to man: but besides these, he that will speak this
tongue aright, must be inwardly learned, and taught by the spirit ^. He must be
inwardly taught by Gods spirit.
of God: the two first he must learn from men, but the third from God: a true
Minister must be inwardly taught by the spiritual school-maister the holy
Ghost. Saint John in the Revelation must take the book, Revel. 10. 8.
that is the Scripture, and eat it, and when he has eaten it: then (says
the Angel) he must go preach to Nations, tongues, people, and to Kings: which
was done, not that Saint John had not eaten that book, in the coming down of
the holy Ghost, the Acts. 2.
very end of whose coming was to teach them spiritually: but that in him
Christ might teach his Church for ever, that no Minister is fit to preach, to
nations and to Kings, until they have eaten the book of This is to eat the
boo of God.
God: that is, till after and besides all the learning that man can teach them,
they be also taught by the spirit of God himself, and this teaching is it that
makes a man a true interpreter, and without this he cannot be, for how can a
man be Gods interpreter to his people, unless he know the mind of God
himself, and how can he know the mind of God, but by the teaching of the
spirit of God. For as no man knows the thought of a man, but the spirit 1. Corinthians.
of man that is in him. So the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of
god. Indeed we may be man's interpreter by humane teaching, and may interpret
the Scriptures truly and soundly as a humane book or story, for the increase
of knowledge, but the divine and spiritual interpreter, which shall pearce the
heart, and astonish the soul of man, must be taught by the inward teaching of
the holy Ghost.

Let no man think I here give the least allowance to Anabaptisticall fancies,
This is no approbation to Anabaptists who depend only on revelations, and
neglect all means.
and revelations, which are nothing, but either dreams of their own, or
illusions of the Devil, for they contemn both humane learning, and the study
of the scripture, and trust wholly to revelations of the spirit; but Gods Spirit
works not but upon the foundation of the word: only I teach this, that a
Minister must be a divine Interpreter, an Interpreter of Gods meaning. And
therefore he must not only read the books, but eat it, that is, not only
have the knowledge of Divine things flowing in his brain, but engraven in his
heart, and printed in his soul by the spiritual finger of God: and therefore
for this end, after all his own study, meditation, conference, Commentaries,
and after all humane helps, he must pray with David, Psalm. 119. 18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law. The discerning of
those wonders requires a spiritual illumination, and the opening of them
requires the tongue of the learned. Therefore after all the study which flesh
and blood, and humane reason can yield, pray with the Prophet, Lord give me
the tongue of the learned, that I may be a right interpreter of thy holy will.

Furthermore, inasmuch as ministers are 2 Use. For ministers. Esaias. 13.
Interpreters, they must labor for sanctity, and holiness of life. In Esaias,
the king of Assiria is said to be sanctified or set a part They must be holy
and sanctified men: and so be first of all interpreters to themselves.
to destroy Gods enemies. If there be a certain kind of sanctification,
necessary for the work of destruction, then how much more is true
sanctification necessary for this great and glorious work of the edification
of Gods Church? A Minister is to declare the reconciliation betwixt God and
man, and is he himself not reconciled? Dare he present another man to Gods
mercy for pardon, and never yet presented himself? Can he commend the state
of Grace to another, and never felt the sweetness thereof in his own soul?
Dare he come to preach sanctification with polluted lips, and out of an
unsanctified heart? Moses might not stand upon the Mount in Gods presence, till
he had put off his shoes from off his feet. Exodus 3. and dare any man presume
to come into this most high and holy presence of the Lord, until he have
mortified his corruptions, and cast off the unruliness of his affections?

In Exodus, the priests are bid to sanctify Exodus 19. 20. Leuit. 10. 3.
the people, and in Leuiticus it is said, that God will be sanctified in all
that come near him, but who come so near unto God as the Ministers do? So
that it is apparent, Ministers do sanctify the people, and in some
construction, God himself: Now, shall they one way be sanctifiers of the
people, another way of God himself, and For else they will hardly do good to
others.
no way of themselves? Surely if it be so, they are but lame Interpreters. And
this is the reason doubtless, why unsanctified Ministers, and such as are of a
loose conversation, bestow such fruitless labors in the Church: many want no
learning, no ability to interpret, and yet how few souls do they bring to
God? Some it may be are converted by their Ministry, that God may show, the
efficacy is not in the person of man, but in the ordinance of God, but few
doubtless (for ought that we can see:) to teach us, how God hates him which
will take in hand to reconcile others to God, himself being unreconciled.
Seing-then Ministers are Gods Interpreters to the people, to declare and
publish their reconciliation with God, and that they cannot be reconciled,
unless they be sanctified, and can so hardly be sanctified by the ministry
of an unsanctified man: let therefore all true Ministers of God: first be Gods
Interpreters to their own consciences, and their own souls Interpreters to
God, then shall they know more perfectly how to discharge the office of true
Interpreters betwixt God and his people.

And thus we have the true titles of a true Minister.

Now it follows in the Text.

One of a thousand.

Here is the second part of this description, 2. Part of the description is the
rarenes of a good Minister. He is one of a thousand.
which is by the rareness, or scarceness of good Ministers: which is laid
down in a very strange phrase, namely, that a true Minister one that is a
right Angel, and a true Interpreter, is no common or ordinary man, but thin
sown, one of many, Nay, one of a thousand.

The meaning hereof is to be conceived The meaning.
either properly, or figuratively: in the figurative sense, it is spoken in
relation to ministers themselves: in the proper sense, it has a comparison
with all men: the figurative and hyperbolicall sense is, that of all the
Ministers in the world, not one of many is a right Angel, and a true
Interpreter: the plain and proper sense is, that amongst the men of this
world, there is not one of a thousand which proves a true Minister. For this
point let us examine three points: the truth of it, the reasons of it, and the
use of it.

The truth hereof is manifest, by the experience 1. The truth hereof.
of all ages, wherein it is strange to observe, how few men of any sort,
especially of the better sort, affect the calling of a Minister: and which is
more strange, how few of those that are Ministers in name and title, do
deserve these honorable names of an Angel, and an Interpreter, and the truth
is too manifest in common practice, to insist much upon it: rather therefore
let us see the reasons of it, and they be these principally.

First, the Contempt that lies on that 2. The reasons hereof.
calling, it being always hated, by wicked and profane men, because it
discouers their filthiness, and vnmaskes their hypocrisy: 1. Reason the
contempt of it: it being always hated by wicked men.
and their doctrine oftimes is a fretting corrasiue to their conscience, that
they cannot welter, and wallowe so quietly, and secretly in their sins, as
otherwise they would, therefore is it that they spurn both against the
calling, and the men, and watch them narrowly, and take hold of their least
infirmities, thereby to disgrace them: judging that to cast contempt on that
calling, is to remove shame from their own shameful courses: nor is it
possible, but that they should thus hate this calling, inasmuch as they hate so
deadly both that law and Embassage which they bring, and that GOD, whose
Ambassadors they are.

This hatred and disgrace in the wicked world, was that that caused Jeremy to
cry, woe is me, and made him in the seeming of his natural reason, curse ye
time yt ever he was Jeremy, 15. 10.
a prophet, for says he, I am a man of contention, every man is at strife and
at enmity with me.

The next reason is The difficulty of discharging 2. Reason, the defficultie
of discharging the duties.
the duties of his calling: to stand in Gods presence, to enter into the holy
of holiest, to go betwixt God and his people, to be Gods mouth to the people,
and the peoples to God: to be the Interpreter of the eternal law of the old
Testament, and the everlasting Gospel of the New: to stand in the room, and
to bear the office of Christ himself, to take the care and charge of souls,
these considerations are so many amazements to the consciences of such men, who
do with reverence approach, and not with rashness, rush unto this sacred seat:
this made Saint Paul cry out, who is sufficient for these things. And if Paul
2. Corinthians. 2. 16.
said, Who is? no marnell though many a man say, I am not sufficient, and do
therefore draw their necks from this yoke, and their hands from this plough,
until God himself or his Church do press them to it.

The last reason is more peculiar to this 3. Reason* want of maintenance.
age of the new Testament, namely, want of maintenance and preferment, for
them that labor in this calling: men are flesh and blood, and in that respect
must be allured, and won to embrace this vocation, by some arguments, which
may persuade flesh and blood: the world has in all ages been negligent
herein, and therefore God in his law took such strict orders, for Deuteronomy. 10. 9.
and 28. 2. Number. 18. 26.
the maintenance of the Levites: but especially, now under the Gospel, this
calling is unprovided for, when it deserves best of all to be rewarded:
certainly it were a worthy Christian policy, to propound good preferments to
this calling, that thereby men of the worthiest gifts might be won unto it,
and the want thereof, is cause why so many young men of special parts, and
greatest hope, turn to other vocations, and especially to the Law, wherein at
this day the greatest parts of the finest wits of our This makes many of our
best wits turn from Divinity to Law.
kingdom, are employed, and why? But because they have all the means to rise,
whereas the Ministry, for the most part yields nothing, but a plain way to
beggary: this is a great blemish in our Church, and surely I wish the Papists,
those children of this world, were not wiser in their kind, (in this point)
then the Church of God: the reformation hereof is a work worth the labor of
prince and people* and special care is to be had in it, else it will not be
reformed, for doubtless had not God himself in the old testament, taken such
straight orders for the livings of the Levites, they had been put to no less
extremities, then is the Ministry of this age. And this reason added to the
other, makes them perfect; and all put together make a reason infallible: for
who will undergo so vile contempt, and undertake so great a charge for no
reward: and where there is so great contempt, so heavy a burden, and so mean
a reward, what marvel, if a good Minister be one of a thousand?

Now let us make use of this doctrine: 3. The use of it.
The use is manifold, and yields instructions to many sorts of people: First,
Rulers 1. To Rulers to maintain Universities, Colleges, and schools of the
Prophets.
and Magistrates are here taught, if good Ministers be so scarce, therefore to
mainetaine and increase, and do all good they can to the schools of the
Prophets, to Universities, Colleges, and Schools of good learning, which are
the Seminaries of the Ministry: herein the example of Samuel, is very worthy
to be followed, in whose days the schools of the Prophets flourished, 1. Sam.
19. 20 21, 22, 23, 24.
and even Saul himself, though he did much hurt in Israel, yet when he came
to the schools of the Prophets, his hard heart relented, he could do them no
hurt, nay, he put off his robes and prophesied amongst them. So should all
Christian princes and magistrates advance their schools, and see them both
well maintained, and well stored, the reason is evident and forcible.

A good Minister is one of 1000. If therefore The rather, because the Pope does
so to uphold his superstition. At Rome Reimes Doway.
they would have the number increased, let them maintain the Seminaries. And
again, if Antichrist to uphold his kingdom, the Kingdom of Satan, be so
careful herein, to erect Colleges, and indowe them with living, to be
Seminaries for his Synagogue, and use so great means to sow his tares in the
hearts of young men, that so they may sow them in the hearts of the people
abroad: shall not Christian princes be as careful, or rather much more
zealous, for the increasing of the number of godly Ministers? 1. Kin. 18. 22.
shall Baal have his 4. hundred prophets, and God have his Elias alone? great
shame must it be to Ahab, or to any king, whose kingdom is in that estate.

The Jesuits diligence is such in teaching, And the Jesuits to continue their
late founded Hierarchy.
and the readiness of some of their nouices such in learning, (the devil
himself doubtless, putting to his help withal) that in three years (as
some of them say of themselves) they proceed in humane learning, and in the
fourth, in Divinity: which if it be so, then it may be a good Lesson, for
these our schools of learning, and an inducement to move all that have the
government thereof, to labor to advance learning, by all good means, and to
give it more speedy passage: And it may shame some that spend so many years
in the University, and yet alas for all that prove not one of a 1000. In these
our schools are by Gods mercy, many young trees planted by the river side of
this goodly Orchard, which by good ordring and dressing, may prove goodly
trees in the temple of God, and strong pilstrong pillars in the Church: but
they are like tender plants, and must be cherished. Princes and great men, by
allowing maintenance, and the Governors by establishing good orders, and
looking carefully to their execution, must see that these plants have
sufficient moisture to grow speedily to perfect ripeness, and that then they
be transplanted in due time, into the Church and common wealth: these be the
trees spoken of in Ezechiel, which grow by the sides of the river, which
flows out of the sanctuary: Ezchiel, 47. 1, etc.
Waters out of the Sanctuary must norish them, and so they grow unto their
perfection: but take away these waters: take away the liberality of princes
and good discipline from the Universities, and these trees must needs decay
and wither: which if they do, then the small number of good Ministers will be
fewer and fewer, and of one of a 1000. there will not be one of 2000

In the next place, Ministers themselves are here taught: First if good
Ministers 2. Use for Ministers.
be so scarce, then let every man fear to make them fewer then they be:
every man therefore for himself, labor first for ability, then for
conscience to discharge 1. Let every man fear to make them fewer.
his duty: namely, to be an Angel, to deliver faithfully Gods Embassage, and
a true Interpreter betwixt God and his people: thus if thou do, then
howsoever the number of good Ministers is small, yet it shall be nothing
smaller for thee.

2 If they be so few, labor to increase them, for the more they are, the
less burden lies upon each particular 2. Labor to increase them, by winning
others to it.
man, therefore let every Minister by his teaching, and by his conversation
labor, so to honor his calling, that he may thereby allure and draw others
to a love and liking thereof.

3 Are good Ministers so thin sown? are there so few of them? then let all
good and godly Ministers give the right hand of fellowship one to another, and
join together Galath. 2. 9.
in love, and by that means arm themselves 3. Let them one love an other and
join together.
against the scorn and contempt of the world: we see they that are of a
kindred, or a brotherhood, or any kind of society, the fewer they are, the more
closely do they combine, the more firmly do they hold together against all
foreign force: so ought Gods Ministers to do, because their number is so
small: if they were many, less danger in their disunion. But seeing they are
so few, the more it concerns them to cut off contentions, and all occasions
of debate, and to join hand in hand against these common adversaries.

In the third place, young Students are 3. Use for students. 1. To consecrate
themselves and their Studies to that calling.
here taught, seeing a true Minister is but one of a thousand, that therefore
they bend their studies, and their thoughts to the Ministry, for they well
know it is an old proverb, the best things are hard to come by: and certainly
there are so few good Ministers, because the holy Ministry in it self is so
high and excellent a calling: and as it is a shame to the men that there are so
few good Ministers, so it is a commendation to the calling: whose honor and
excellency is such, that as we see here scarce one of a thousand attaines
unto it, therefore men of the most excellent gifts, are here invited to
dedicate themselves unto the most excellent vocation, yea, very reason it self
would urge a man to be one of a thousand.

2 And further, as they are to intend To furnish themselves with the true
ornaments of a Minister.
this calling as the most rare and excellent: so this must teach them like
wise, to hasten to furnish themselves with all good helps and means, that
they may become true Ministers and able Interpreters, and not too long to
stick in those studies, which keep a man from the practice of this high
function: for it is not to live in the University, or in the College, and to
study, though a man never so fast devour up learning, but to be a good
Minister, is that that makes a man one of a thousand.

In the last place, Hearers are here taught their duty, first, to respect
with reverence 4 Use for Hearers. 1. To reverence the person and receive the
doctrine.
the person, and to receive with reverence the Message of every true Messenger,
seeing it is so rare a thing to find a true Minister for as nothing is more
vile or base then an evil and lewd Minister, (whom Christ compares to salt
which has lost his Math 5. 13.
savor, which is good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden down of
men:) so is there none worthy of more love and reverence, then a holy Minister:
for as Esaias says, their very feet are beautiful which bring glad tidings;
and we should kiss their feet which bring news of peace: therefore all good
Christians are to receive and use a good Minister, as S. Paul says the
Galathians Gala. 4. 16.
did him, even as an Angel of God Have thou then a godly pastor, run to him for
conference, for comfort, for counsel, use his company, frequent his fermons,
account him worthy of double honor, think it no small or ordinary blessing,
for thou have one of a thousand, and bless God for bestowing his mercy on
thee, which he had denied to so many others: for some have no Minister: some
have a Minister, but yet (...), he is not one of a thousand.

And further: all men that are Fathers, 2. Fathers to dedicate their sons to
the ministry.
may here learn to consecrate their children to God in the service of the
Ministry, considering that it is so rare and excellent a thing to be a good
Minister: nay that man should think himself happy, and honored of God, who
may be father to such a son, as shall prove one of a thousand.

In a word to conclude this point, all men must here learn, seeing good
Ministers 5 Use for all men. Pray that God would increase the number.
are so scarce, to pray the Lord of the harvest, to thrust out more laborers
into his harvest: and for those that are called already, that God would make
them faithful in that high function. And as Elisha craves of Elias, that the
good spirit may 2. Reg. 2, 9.
be doubled, and trebled upon them, so that the number may be increased. And
thus we have the truth, the reason, and the use of this, that a good Minister
is one of a thousand.

It follows. To declare unto man his righteousness.

Here is the third part of the description 3. Part of the description by his
office that is to declare unto man his righteousness.
of a Minister, that is, by his office, to declare unto man his righteousness:
that is, when a poor sinner, by his sins (the foulnes whereof he sees, and
the burden whereof he feels) is brought down, as it were to the very gates
of hell, when this sinner by the preaching of the Law, is brought to a true
sight of this misery: and again by preaching the gospel, is brought to lay
hold on Jesus Christ, then it is the proper office of a Minister to declare
unto that The meaning
man his righteousness. Namely, that though in himself he be as ill, and as
foul as sin can make him, and as the law can discover him to be: yet in
Christ he is righteous, and just, and by Christ so justified, as he is no more
a sinner in the presence and account of God, this is the righteousness of a
Christian man, this is the justification of a sinner. And to declare this
righteousness to him that repents and belieues, is the proper duty of a true
Minister.

In the Acts, Paul says of himself, that he witnessed to the Jews, and to
the Gentiles, Act. 20. 21.
the repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. In which
words is laid down the complete duty of a Minister (as he is a public
Angel or Interpreter,) first, to preach repentance, which a man must perform
to GOD, whom by his sins he has grievously offended; secondly, to preach
faith in Christ, and free forgiveness, and perfect salvation through that faith
in Christ, to all that shall truly believe in him. And after both these, It
com^rehendeth these points.
follows that which is here spoken of, which comprehends both the former,
namely, to declare unto man his righteeusnesse. 1. He must declare where true
righteousness is.
So that in these words, are inclusi^ely laid down, these points of a
Ministers calling: first, a true Minister may and must declare unto a sinful
man where righteousness is to be found, namely, in Jesus Christ: 1. John 2.
the righteous. Secondly, how that righteousness 2. How it may be obtained.
may be obtained, namely, by d^^ing two duties: First, by denying and
disclaiming 3. He must declare it to him, that is 1. Show that it is ready for
him if he believe and repent.
his own righteousness, and that is done by repentance; secondry, by clayming
and cleaning to Christ righteousness, and that is done by faith. Thirdly, a
true Minister may and must declare this righteousness to him, that is first
publish and proclaim, that it is ready to his bestowed on every sinner, which
will thus apprehend it, and that it is able to justify and save him:)
secondly, beside a bare publication of this instification, he must (as Paul 2.
He must testify and assure him of it.
did) witness and testify it to the conscience of the sinner, that it is as
certainly true (...) God is true. For as a witness in: doubtful cases is
called, that by his testimone (...) may clear the truth, so when the
consciences of poor sinners are (...) and doubtful what to believe, when they
doubt of this righteousness, then is a true minister as a faithful witness
of God to auerre and testify this truth, from his own conscience, knowledge
and feeling of the infallible certainty of Gods promises, unto the doubtful
and distres^ed conscience of the sinner.

Thirdly, besides declaration and testificati^n been to maintain this truth,
and this 3 He must maintain it. and auerre it against all doubts and
temptations.
righteousness (if the sinners conscience be yet not quiet) against all gain
sayers, against the power of darkness, and all the gates of helld that this is
true and perfect righteousness^ to him that apprehends it as before is (...)
down (...) this is so infallible to every soul that repents and believes,
that the minister, may assure it to the conscience of the sinner in the word
of truth, and in the name of God, and may call to (...) all Gods Saints, and
all his holy Angels, and may (...) unto him his own (...) upon it, that it is
most true, that this is (...) perfect, and (...) sufficient righteousness.

That we see in some measure, what it is to declare unto a man his
righteousness. And This duty is ordinarily peculiar to Ministers.
this is the peculiar office of a Minister of God, and this is the height and
excellency of his office. In the want of godly ministers, I confess that
godly Christian men may one help another in the performance of these duties,
and that with profit, but it is the proper function of a godly Minister to do
it, and the promise and blessing belong properly to him: as the consciences of
all penitent sinners, will testify in this case: let David's serve for many,
who when he was cast down even to the mouth of hell, by that fearful
discovery of his two hideous sins by Nathans preaching; and when the faith of
his soul began to wrestle against Hell, and strive against despair, and to
apprehend the mercy of God in Christ: then I say, could not the testimony of
all the men in the world have given him that joy, comfort and assurance, that
Nathan did, when he said in the word of a 2. Sam. 11.
Prophet, and of a true Minister, God has taken away thy sin, thou shall not
dye: what did Nathan here, but declare unto man his righteousness? what did
Nathan here, but the duty of every true minister?

If this be the office and duty of a minister; 1 Use for Ministers.
and if such be the height and excellency: of his office, let us see then what
use we may make of it.

First, concerning the Ministry: It First for the Popish ministry, they do
insufficiently declare it.
first discovers how nakedly, weakly, and insufficiently, the Popish Church
does declare unto man his righteousness, who will let a man seek it in
himself* where alas it is not: for Paul himself testifies, that his desire
is, that he may be found out of himself, and in Christ; and yet certainly,
if Philip. 3. 8, 9.
ever man had righteousness of his own worth trusting to, Paul had: this is
the cause why so many of that religion find not that righteousness, which
will pacific and satisfy their consciences; when they come to dye: and why so
many of them, when it comes to the pinch, do then go out of themselves, and
with us do seek for this righteousness in Christ, where both assuredly, and
sufficiently it is to be found.

Then for our own Ministry, here they are taught: first the true manner of
teaching, and declaring righteousness, Secondly our own.
namely this, not to preach the law alone, or the Gospel alone, as some
unadvisedly do (but both without profit) but both the law and the Gospel;
the law to breed repentance the gospel to work f^^th^ but in order; first
the law to breed repentance, Both the law and the gospel.
and then the gospel to work faith and forgiveness, but never before.

Secondly, they are taught to be holy: to be sanctified and reconciled
themselves 2 To be holy men themselves.
for is it thy office to declare unto man his righteousness, and not thy own
to thy self? and how, can thou be a true witness to testify betwixt God,
and the soul of a sinner, when thy own soul knows not, nor feels the
truth of it? certainly such men are but lame witnesses betwixt God, and the
sinners soul. David says to the sinner, I will instruct three in the way Psalm.
32.
wherein thou shall go: but he first of all in the same, sets down his own
experience in a large story of his own repentance, and of Gods mercy on
himself. For else they will convert but few.
And though God some time do satisfy, and save the poor distressed soul of
a sinner, by the testimony of such men, to teach us, that the virtue is not in
the men, but in the truth of Gods covenant: yet alas how few are they, to
teach us, how pleasing it is unto him, when a Minister is a declarer of that
righteousness to others, which he first has himself: and is a witness of
that truth to others, which he first knows in his own experience. 3. Use to
Ministers, not to care for the contempt of the world.


Thirdly, the consideration of this high excellency of their calling, must
arm all true Ministers against the scorn and contempt of the world, which by
wicked men is cast like dust and mire into the face of Ministers: let this
suffice them, they are the men that must declare unto man his righteousness,
even he that scorns and contemnes the ministry, he has no righteousness
in him, unless it be by the means of a poor Minister: then do thou thy
duty, and be that mockes thee, has cause to honor thee. And let this
encourage Students to consecrate themselves 2 Use for Students.
to the ministry, for what calling has so high an office, as this, to declare
unto man his righteousness? And assuredly how ever To consecrate themselves to
the high calling.
in this wicked world, thou art little accounted of (for if it did not so, it
were not wicked:) yet thou art honored in the hearts of all Gods children* and
even in the conscience of some, whose tongues do smite thee: and the souls of
thousands, when they dye shall bless thee, who in their lives cared not for
thee: and the devil himself does envy, and the holy Angels themselves do
wonder at the excellency of thy calling, in that thou have power to declare
unto men his righteousness.

In the next place, hearers may here 3 Use for the hearers. Seek
righteousness both in the law and the Gospel.
learn; first if their righteousness be thus to be declared as before, then
if they will have it, they must seek it as it may be found, namely, both in
the law, and in the Gospel and not in the Gospel alone: and first in the
law, then in the Gospel: for he must never look to taste the sweetness of the
Gospel, which has not first swallowed the bitter pills of the law: if
therefore thou would be declared righteous by the Gospel, be content first
to be pronounced miserable by the law: if thou would be declared righteous
in Christ, then be content first to be pronounced sinful 2 What to esteem
of Gods ministers.
and unrighteous in thy self. Secondly, all men may here learn, how they are
to esteem of Gods Ministers, and what reverence and obedience is due to their
persons, and their doctrine: these are they which must declare unto thee thy
righteousness, if thou have any: Art thou beholden to him, who, when thou have
lost a Jewel (which was all thy wealth) can tell thee where it is, and help
thee to it again? or to him, who, when thy cause is in trial at the bar,
will plead it for thee? or to him, who, when thy health is lost, can tell thee
how to get it again? then behold how thou art beholden to a godly Minister,
who when Adam had lost both himself and thee, that Jewel of righteousness,
which was, and is the whole wealth of thy soul, can truly tell thee where it
is, and how it is to be had again: and who, when the devil haleth thee to
the bar of Gods justice, to receive trial for thy sins, can draw thee
there such a declaration, as the devil himself shall not be able to answer?
and who, when thy soul is sick to death, and even to damnation, can heal the
deadly wounds thereof. A good minister therefore is worthy (as the Apostle
says) of double honor, whose duty we see is to declare unto man his
righteousness. And to conclude this point also, the consideration of the
height of this office of a minister, may encourage fathers to dedicate their
sons to this holy 4 Use for fathers, to make their sounes Ministers.
calling: for the Physicians care for the body, or the Lawyers for thy cause,
are both inferior duties to this of the Mininister. A good Lawyer may be one
of ten: a good Physician one of 20. a good man one of 100. but a good
minister is one of 1000. A good Lawyer may declare the true state of thy cause;
a good Physician may declare the true state of thy body: No calling, no man can
declare unto thee thy righteousness, but a true Minister. And thus we see the
office or function of a minister. Now follows the blessing.

Then will he have mercy upon him.

The fourth general part of this description, 4. Point, the blessings: then
will God have mercy on the sinner:
is the blessing which God gives to the labors and function of a true
Minister: then that is, when a man by the preaching of the law, is brought to
true humiliation and repentance, and by the preaching of the Gospel, to true
faith in the Messiah: then will he (that is, God) have mercy on him (that is,
on the penitent and believing sinner.) Behold here the admirable simpathy, and
the cooperation of God, and the Ministers office. Man preaches, and God
blesses: Man works on the heart, and God gives grace: a minister declares
unto man his righteousness, and God says so be it he shall be righteous: a
minister pronounces mercy to a penitent sinner, and forthwith God has mercy
on him. Here we see the great and glorious God and his Minister work
together.
account which God makes of the word of his ministers, by them truly taught
and rightly applied, namely, that he as it were tyeth his blessing unto it: for
ordinarily till a man know his righteousness, by the means of an
Interpreter, God has not mercy on him, but as soon as he does know it, then
as we see here God will have mercy on him and will say deliver him, etc.

This is no small honor to ministers, and to their Ministry, that God
himself gives a blessing unto it, and works when they work, and as it were
staieth waiting, when they declare unto a man his righteousness, and then has
he mercy on him: so powerful and so effectual is the word spoken by a
minister of God. This is that Math. 16. 16.
which Christ avouches, Whatsoever you loose in earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Will John. 20. 23.
you know the meaning hereof? Read Saint John, whose sins soever you remit,
they are remitted; whose you retain, they are Esaias. 44. 25, 26.
retained: will you have the meaning of both? read Esaias, God destroys the
tokens of Soothsayers, and makes Wisards and Astrologers fools, turns
worldly wisemen backward and makes their knowledge foolishness: but he
confirms the word of his servants, and performs the counsel of his
messengers, Thus God binds and loses with them, remitteth and retains
with them, by confirming their word and performing their counsel: For example.

A true minister sees a sinner hardened in his sins, and still rebelling
against the will of God, he therefore declares unto him his unrighteousness, and
his sin, and denounces unto him, the misery and curses of Gods justice, as due
unto him for the same: here he binds on earth, here he retains on earth, this
man's sins are likewise bound and retained in heaven. On the other side, he
sees a man penitent, and believing, he pronounces forgiveness of sins, and
happiness unto him for the same: he loses him from the band of his sins, by
declaring unto him his righteousness, this man's sins are likewise loosed and
remitted in heaven, and God himself does pronounce him clear in heaven, when
the Minister does on earth. Thus God confirms the word of his servants, and
performs the counsel of his messengers,

The use of this doctrine is, first for rulers 1 Use for rulers to give due
reverence to the ministers.
and great men of this world, this may teach them to be nursing Fathers and
nursing Mothers unto the Church, whose authority they see is so great over
them, as that their decree stands ratified in heaven: Therefore though their
place be great, Psalm. 82.
and they be Gods upon earth, yet must they withal acknowledge, that in
justifying a sinner, in interpretation, in declaring unto man his righteousness;
in binding and loosing, their power also is immediate from God, and above
theirs, and they themselves, as they are men, must submit themselves to this
powerful word of the ministers, to be taught by it, and to be reconciled by
means of it, and highly must they respect it; for though a man speak it, yet
is it the word of God: this is to lick the dust of Christ's feet, which the
Prophet speaks Esaias. 2 Use for Ministers.
of: not as the Pope would have it, to hold the stirrup, and lead the horse,
and hold the water to the Pope, to kiss his toes, to hold their kingdoms of
him, as tenants at will, or by courtesy, but reverently to acknowledge the
ordinance to be Gods, the function and duty to be high and excellent, to
acknowledge the power of their keys and censures (being rightly applied, their
promises and their threatenings to be as from God, and to submit to them
accordingly.

Secondly, Ministers themselves here must learn, when they take the word of
reconciliation into their hands and mouths, to call to mind whose it is, even
the Lords, and 2 Use Gods word reverently.
that he works with them, and has the greatest hand in the work, and that
therefore they must use it in holymaner, with much fear and reverence: It is
not their own, they may not use it as they list. And lastly, Hearers are here
taught, first to see how mad such men be which carelessly, and sildome hear
sermons, but upon any 3 Use for Hearers. 1 Hear Gods word often and reverently.
occasion fly to wisards and charmers, which are the devils Prophets: for see
the difference of these two, the wisard and charmer has society with the
devil, the Preacher with God: the charmer has his calling from the devil, the
Preacher is from God: the Charmers charm is the devils watchword, (when he
charmeth, the devil does the feate): the preachers doctrine is Gods watchword,
when he truly applies it, GOD himself ratifieth and makes it good: therefore
let all men fear to have thus to do with the devil, by seeking to his
slaves, and let them draw near to God, by entering into fellowship with his
holy prophets, and godly Ministers.

And further, if when they preach, and thou 2 See the dignity and pre^ogatiue
of the Ministers calling.
belieuest, then GOD has mercy on thee, then learn what reverence they and
their word is worthy of, which is thus accompanied with Gods mercy and
forgiveness: and then learn to hear the Word with fear and trembling, for it
is Gods word, and not theirs: and when a true Minister says unto thee, on a
true ground, I denounce thee a sinful man, and under the curse, or I declare
thee to be righteous, and a child of grace, it is all one, as though God from
heaven had said so unto thee. If any man ask; But is it not as good if another
Object. But may not another Christian do it?
man pronounce forgiveness unto me upon my repentance? I answer, yes
undoubtedly, if it be in extraordinary times or places, when there are no
Ministers: for otherwise, certainly this blessing is principally tied unto the
And not ordinatily.
Ministers calling: for it is not said of any private men's calling any where in
the scripture, as it is here said of the ministers.

If an Angel, an Interpreter come to a man ^ For they have not the same
promise.
and declare unto him his righteousnesss, then (mark the conexion) then will
GOD have mercy on him, and will say, Deliver him, etc. Whence comes this
blessing? from this promise of God. If therefore other callings will challenge
ordinarily the same blessing, then must they have the same prosmise. Besides,
other Christians being private men, though they 2 They have not the same power
to discern.
be sanctified, and have a good measure of knowledge, yet have they not the
same spirit of discerning that godly Ministers have: nor can so fully and truly
judge, when a man has repented, when not; and therefore cannot so truly
pronounce the sentence of the law or Gospel, nor have they ability ordinarily
by their good conference, and Christian counsel, to convert a soul, but to
confirm one converted: but that power ordinarily belongs to the public
ministry of the word, therefore it follows, that ordinarily they have not
the power to pronounce the sentence of binding or loosing upon any man: I
confess, in times or places, where no minister can be In extraordinary times
and in want of ministers they may.
had, God blesses the labors of private men, that have knowledge, sometimes
even for the converting of a man to God, and for comforting him at the hour of
death, and gives a virtue and power to that sentence which they shall pronounce
one upon another repentance: but as this is extraordinary, and in the want of
ordinary Ministers, so in that case a private man of knowledge and Godliness,
is made a Minister for that time to himself, or to another, even as a private
man in cases of extreme danger, when no magistrate is present, is made a
magistrate himself to defend his own life. So then as in want of a Magistrate,
the sword of the magistracy is put into the hand of a private man: so in the
want of Ministers, the keys of the Ministry are committed, and put into the
hands of private men, (as in ye days of persecution) that then they may with
comfort admonish and advise: and with power pronounce mercy and forgiveness
one unto another, upon their true repentance. Yet always remember that in so
doing, a private man is as a minister for that time, and in that case: but
ordinarily (and always in settled Churches) this power pertains to the
Ministry, and is theirs alone by ordination; and to them belongs the
promise and the blessing, that when he has declared to a man his
righteousness, then God will have mercy on him. And thus we see also the
blessing of God upon the function of the Ministry, and annexed thereunto by
the merciful dispensation of God. It follows.

And will say, Deliver him that he go not down into the pit: for I have
received a reconciliation.

The fifth and last part of this description 5. Part, the Commission, which is,
Deliver the penitent man from hell.
is, the Commission and authority given unto him, which is so great, as never
was given to any creature, and is this, when a Minister of God has declared
unto man his righteousness, has brought him to the state of grace, and God in
his favor has had mercy on him; then God says to the Minister, Deliver that
soul from hell, for I have pardoned him in Christ, I am reconciled to him.

In which words, authority is given to How a Minister is a redeemer.
a Minister of God to redeem a man penitent, from hell and damnation: not that
he is the means of working out this redemption, for that wholly and only is
Christ himself: but he is Gods instrument and Christ's instrument: First, to
apply those means unto him: Secondly, to pronounce his safety and deliverance
when these means are used. Here is the principal honor of all, belonging to
that calling: and More then Angels.
it is the greatest that ever was vouchsafed to any creature, Man or Angel: for
it is a plain Commission, to go and deliver such a man from the power of hell,
and to redeem him into the state of Gods children, and to make him heir of
heaven: Angels never had this Commission, they are Messengers set out for the
good of those whom Heb. 1. vlt.
Ministers have redeemed, and they have brought many comfortable messages unto
them: but it was never said to any Angel, Deliver that man that he go not
down into the pit: as it here is said unto a Minister, More then any other
calling of men.
nor any man but Ministers have this Commission. To some callings GOD says,
work thou for man, build him houses, provide him sustenance; to the Physician,
heal that man: to the Lawyer, do that man justice: to the soldier, fight for
him: to the Magistrate, defend him: to the King, govern him, and see that
every one do his duty: to none but to the Minister does he say, Deliver him
that he go not down into the pit.

If this be so then for the use, first Ministers must learn here, that if
they will Use 1. for Ministers.
have the honor of Redeemers, then must they do the duty of Redeemers, they
Ergo, They must pray and preach, diligently.
must pray earnestly for the people, for that is one means whereby they
redeem men.

They must say with Samuel, God forbid that 1. Sam. 12.
I should cease to pray for you: They must mourn for the impenitent, when they
will not turn to God. So did David, Psalm. 119.
his eyes gushed out with rivers of waters, because men kept not Gods law. And
Jeremy, who wished a fountain of water in his eyes, that he might weep for
the sins of the people. They must priuarly confer visit, admonish, and
rebuke, and principally they must preach, and that in such good manner, and in
so diligent measure, as that they may redeem and win souls, and the end
that they must aim at, must be to win souls. Some preach for fear of For
so doing they are redeemers*
the law, to avoid censure or punishment: some for fashion sake, that they may
be like to others: some for ostentation sake, to win credit and praise: some
for ambition, to rise in the world: all these forget their Commission, which
is, Deliver a man Idle Ministers are no redeemers.
from hell.

This should be the end of their preaching, to deliver a soul from hell: and
what should Commissioners do, but execute their Commission? High Commissioners
are worthy to be low Commissioners, or rather, no Commissioners, if they will
not put it in execution. It is therefore lamentable to see, that some by not
preaching; some by vain preaching, show that they intend any thing rather then
the winning of souls to God.

Let then all good Ministers so preach, as they may say with Esaias, Behold Lord
here am I, and the children whom thou have given me. And that they may return
their Commission thus: Whereas thou O Lord gave me this people, and badst
me deliver them, that they go not down into hell, Lord I have done it: it is
the thing my soul aimed at with all my desire and endeavor: and by thy mercy I
have effected it accordingly.

And the rather must all Christian Ministers seriously inte^d the saving of
souls, inasmuch as Antichrist does so earnestly seek the destruction of
souls, by winning Turks and Jews, and Jesuits, are careful to seduce
souls.
them to his Synagogue. The Turk spares no labor, no cost, to infect young
children of Christians with his impure and blasphemous superstition. The Pope
and his vassals (especially Jesuits,) use al means, devise many stratagems,
spare no cost, nor labor, to seduce and inueagle young men, and the best wits.
Surely their care and policy herein is admirable: and yet alas, when (like the
Pharisees) they have compassed Sea and land to make a Proselite, they make him
like themselves, the child of hell.

And they are so far from having any Commission from God to do this, or any
blessing promised, as contrariwise GOD forbids them, and his curse lies upon
them for so doing.

Shall they be so diligent to destroy souls without a commission, and incur
Gods curse for their labor? and shall not Christian Ministers be much more
diligent to win and redeem souls, having so large a commission for the
purpose, and so great a blessing promised thereunto?

In the next place, this doctrine has use to the hearers. First, to let them
see 2. Use for Hearers.
the excellency of this calling, which has a Commssion and power to redeem
them 1 To see the excellency of this calling.
from hell and damnation, and what honor is due unto it: and to let the wicked
man see (which any way abuses either the persons or the function) how base and
unthankful men they are, to recompense evil for good, and therefore no
marvel though evil do never depart from the houses and families of such men:
and further, to encourage all men to give themselves to God in this calling,
for see here what they are, even the high Commissioners of God. We have in our
estate, a power deligated to Ministers are Gods high Commissioners.
certain men of worth, and it is called the high Commission, because they have
power to do great things, and that man thinks himself happy who can bring
his son to this, to be thought fit to be one of this Commission: but behold
here a higher Commission, a Commission from God, to redeem souls from the
power of hell, and the devils claws: this is in deed a high Commission, and so
high as this, was never granted out of the Court of heaven to any creature but
to Ministers: they therefore are the High Commissioners of the high God. Is it
not then an honor and happiness unto thee to bring thy son to this estate?

And lastly, this must teach all hearers, 2. Hearers, Ergo, must submit
themselves to be redeemed.
their duty to Gods word: namely, to submit themselves unto it: for if the
Minister have a Commission to redeem thy soul, it must be by the word and
holy discipline. Therefore thy duty is to hear Gods word patiently, to submit
thy self unto it, to be taught and instructed, nay, to be checked and rebuked,
and to have thy sins discovered, and thy corruptions ripped up. If thou would
have thy cause succeed well, thy Lawyer must discover the weaknesses of it: If
thy body to be cured, thy Physician must purge the corruption of it. So if thy
soul be to be redeemed, thy Minister must see the weakness, and purge the
corruptions of it, and though his doctrine be harsh, and hard unto thy nature,
and ye discipline of ye Gospel seem rough unto thee, yet must not thou rage
and rebel against it, nor hate him, nor rail at his person but submit thy
self unto it, for it is the message and Ministry of thy salvation: if
otherwise, thou do indeed a great wrong to the Minister, for thou
frustratest his commission: but alas, a far greater to thy self, for thou
furstratest thine own salvation.

THE SECOND Treatise of the Duties and Dignities of Ministry, by Master
Perkins.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful and Reverend Judges, Sir John Sauile Knight, one of
the Barons of his Majesty's Exchequer, and Sir Christopher Yeluerion Knight,
one of the Judges of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, and Sir Edward
Phillips Knight, his Majesty's Sargeant at Law, now or late the worthy Judges
of our Northeren Circuit, The spirit of wisdom, zeal and courage be
multiplied.
RIght worshipful, it is said in other Nations, and written in some of their
books, that there are three disgraces of the English Nation: The Ignorance, or
(that I may so call it) the unlearned of our Ge^trie and Nobility, the beggary
of our poor, and the Baseness of the body of our Ministry, The first blot,
our Nobility and Gentry have well wiped off, since the first days of our
blessed Queen Elizabeth, partly by study at home, partly by travel abroad,
and I hope they will do it more and more: The second has been well lessened
by good laws of late, and would he more, if the Execution were as good as our
laws b^e, and it were much honor to our Nation, and more to our Religion, if
it were quite taken away: for he that tells us there shall be poor ever with
us, says also, there shall not be a beggar amongst Mat. 26. 11.
us; If there were no poor, what should become Deuteronomy. 15.
of Charity? for it is Charity, to relieve Poverty, not to maintain
Beggerie: Poverty may be a Cross, but it is no Curse: but Beggerie is a
fearful curse, threatened on the enemies of God* and David says not, he
never saw a righteous man's child poor, but that Psalm. 109. 10.
he never saw him beg his bread. The daily cries in our streets, cry for
yet further reformation Psalm. 37. 35.
hereof, that the impotent poor may be sufficiently provided for, that he
need not, and the Sturdie beggar complied to work, that he may not be
suffered to beg. Happy you, or whosoever can have a hand in effecting this
blessed work, we who can do little else, shall pray for it, and for them
that labor in it. But now for the third, I fear none but the very hand of
God, can wipe out that stain from our Church: The baseness of the general
body of our Ministry, whence is it, but either from the unworthiness, or
Poverty thereof: and the unworthiness, whence is it, but from the Poverty,
and base maintenance of our Ministry, which was once robbed by the Abbeys, and
after by some in our own State, which was then Popish, and Popery that stands
so much upon Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, yet for all
that, would not restore unto the Church her tenthes again. But as popish
Abbeys stole them, so a popish State kept them, and to their shame some of the
good Professors of our Religion have of late restored such as were in their
hands, and there is hope that all our Professors, (unless they care not to be
accounted hypocrus) will make some conscionable restitution We do not crave
that they would with Zacheus restore fourfold (though it is apparent, that
the Luke 19. etc.
tenthes were got from us in old time, by most false and forged Cauillations)
we only crave our own, we would ask no more, nor willingly take less: for
our whole duty is still required: then why should not our whole due be paid?
And yet that the world may learn of us contentedness, as well by our practice
as our doctrine, we would for the present take in good part, and rest contented
with a part of our own: And some competent portions out of the Impropriations,
(proportioned to the quantity of the charge imposed, and the gifts and pains
required) would for a time be a reasonable satisfaction in our Ministry,
until our state found it self, either better enabled or more straightly tied in
Conscience to full restitution. But as I said, this is a work of God himself,
for if a man could do it so many Parliaments would not have slipped it, but some
of them would have eternized it self, with this honorable name to all
posterities. The Parliament that restored Impropriations, but til that, or some
other course (as good) be taken* it is both unseasonable and unreasonable to
complain of the Ignorant, or to crave a learned Ministry. For shall the Oxes
mouth be mousled, 1. Corinthians. 9. 7. 9. 14.
which treads out the corn, or shall a man go to war at his own cost? and
has not God ordained (mark, it is his Ordinance) that those which teach the
Gospel, shall live of the Gospel? But alas, how shall the Ministry of England
live of the Gospel, when my small experience can show that in one Corner of one
County of this Kingdom, wherein there are some 105. parishes, or parochial
Chapels, The East Riding of the County of York.
almost a 100. of them, (if not a full 100.) are Impropriate: and amongst them
I can show the most parishes have but 10 pound or thereabouts some 8. li some
6. li. some ^. li some four pounds, some not 4. pounds yearly living for the
Minister and those impropriations worth some 300. li many 200. li. almost all
100 li. per an yea there is one worth 400 pound per an: where there were but 8
li. left for the Minister, until of late with much ado, 10. pound more was
obtained for a Preacher, and so there is out of 400, 8. pound shared for a
Minister, and 10. pound carried for a Preacher, in that parish where there are
2000. Communican^s. Of all the rest the Crown has some 100 pound rent, or not
so much, and the remainder of 180. pound being a rich living, for a worthy
learned Minister, a competent living for 2. and more then some 7 painful and
able ministers have) I know not what becomes of it, unless it go to the
feeding of Kits and Cormorats. Are not these goodly livings for learned men?
and may not we expect a learned ministry, where there is such maintenance?
and I heartily with that other countries, be not able to show the like
Presidents. I have the rather made relation hereof, that our high Court of
Parliament, may see how great cause they have, to go forward with that motion
already by the made, for the establishing of a learned Ministry. But if they
bring it not to pass, what then remains, but to hope that the great God of
heaven, will put into the heart of the God on earth our noble king (into whose
hands he has put the sword of sovereign authority) an irre^o^able and
unresistable resolution to execute his supreme power, for the reformation of
this evil, which as Master Perkins says in this treatise) may well be called
the Kings evil, for it will hardly be healed, but by the will and power of a
king. In the mean time this. Treatise of that worthy man, may be a motive to
our zealous professors, who have any impropriations in their own hands, to
excite and provoke them to a conscionable restitution, in whole or in part, as
their estate may bear, or their, conscience shall move them. For herein are
laid downs and mixed together, both the duties to be done by faithful
Ministers, and the Dignities due unto them for their duties: and so seeing the
dignities of that calling to be most honorable, and the duties so chargeable,
it cannot but grieve their christian hearts to see the maintenance so miserable.

This Treatise I first of all send to you, and under your names to the world,
and to you first, for as I am sure you loved the Author, and honored those
excellent gifts of God in him, so you cannot but accept this after birth of his
(as a fatherles child for the fathers sake. And for my self, to co^ceale al
personal and private respects, in the name of many thousands in the Northeren
countries, I praise God, for the good done in those parts, by your painful
courses, and religious care, not doubting, but if your selves, or the like be
employed there, to asist our honorable and Religie us Lord President that the
multitude of Popish Priests there lurking, will be daily lessened, the number
of preachers augmented, Popery put down, and the Gospel maintained more and
more. Which blessing GOD grant to that and all other Counteries of this
Kingdom, for his mercies sake: and give unto you, and all others in your
place, the spirit of courage and constancy, in these declining days, that
being faithful in your great charges, unto the end, you may receive the Crown
of life: for which he heartily prays, who will ever rest,

VV. Crashawe.

The second Treatise, of the Duties and Dignities of the Ministry.
Esaias. 6. 5. Then I said, woe is me, I am undone for I am a man of polluted
lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips: for my eyes have
seen the king and Lord of hosts.

6. Then flewe one of the Seraphins unto me, with a hot coal in his hand.

7. Which he took from the Altar with the tongues: and touched my mouth and
said, Lo this has touched thy lips, and thy iniquity shall be taken away,
and thy sin shall be purged.

8. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, whom shall I send, and who
shall go for us? then said I, here am I, send me: and he said go.


IN the five former Chapters are contained such Sermons, as the Prophet had
made under Vzziah king of Judah: At this Chapter begin such as he preached in
the reign of Iotham, and so forward: But before he either The Cohoerence.
preach or prophecy of any thing, in King Iothams days, or his successors,
the Lord in this Chapter gives a new commission to the Prophet, and a new
With a new King, God gives the Prophet a new Commission.
confirmation to this Calling: the old king in whose days Esayah was first
called being now dead, and another succeeding him, God with the new king,
renews the calling and commission of the Prophet: wherein God does not give
him another calling, for one calling to the office of the ministry is
sufficient: but he confirms the calling formerly given, by repeating and
ratifying it. And this God did to Esaias, not as he was an ordinary, but an
extraordinary prophet: for ordinary Ministers need no renouation of their
calling, nor any new signs of confirmation, but extraordinary prophets, who
come in extraordinary manner, and to do many extraordinary works, God in his
wisdom will have their calling confirmed, again, and again, and that by very
extraordinary means. Out of which practice of the Lord, we learn, how great
cause we Ergo, extraordinary.
have to doubt these men, to be either fantastical or worse, who pretend
extraordinary Callings o^ motions in these days are not easily to be believed.
callings in these days, and yet scarce can show us any good signs of an
ordinary, much less of an extraordinatie motion: for if in those days, when
such courses were more common, God will have his extraordinary Prophets calling
to be renewed and confirmed, again, and again, then certainly in these days,
we may justly require, more, and more wonderful signs of an extraordinary
calling before we believe it: and if God himself was so careful to satisfy
his Church in those days of the vocation of his prophet, surely the church in
these days has much more cause to doubt in such cases, and to require many
and extraordinary signs, before it acknowledge any such extraordinary calling:
These men therefore offer much wrong to the Church, and deserve both the
censure thereof, and the sword of the Magistrate, who dare so boldly offer and
obtrude to the Church their own fancies and dreams, as extraordinary motions
of Gods spirit. This is the occasion and coherence.

This Chapter has two parts, The parts of the Chapt.
first, the means of his confirmation, from the beginning to these words:
secondly, the confirmation it self, from these words to the end: the means of
his confirmation is a vision he saw from heaven, of certain holy Angels
appearing and speaking to him, in the first 4. verses. In the confirmation,
which follows in these words, are three points^

1 The effect of the vision, which i The parts of this text.
wrought in the Prophet, it caused him fear, it astonished him, and cast him
down: in the fifth verse.

2 His Consolation, and raising up again after his fear, in the 6. and 7.
verses.

3 The renewing of his Commission again, from thence to the end.

The fear and astonishment of the Prophet, is described,

1 By the signs, of which are two;

1 A note of exclamation, woe is me.

2 By a note of extreme deiection in himself, I am undone.

2 By the causes of it, which are also set down to be two:

1 He was a man polluted, and dwelt amongst people polluted.

2 He had seen the Lord. 1. Point is the fear of the prophet.


Then said I, woe is me, I am undone.

The first point in order is, the fear and ecstasy into which the Lord drove
his holy Prophet, which the Lord did not in his anger, but in his love unto
him, not for a punishment of sin, but as an evidence of his further love: for
the intent and purpose of God in striking this fear into him, was to enable
him to be a true prophet, and a fit messenger for himself. It may seem a
strange course, which God takes to confirm and raise up his servant in zeal
and courage, to strike him into an extreme fear, even to astonish and amaze
him, and yet we see it is the course which the Lord takes: out of which
practice of the Lord, we learn this doctrine: That all true Doct. Best
Ministers most amazed at their entrance.
Ministers, especially such as are deputed to the greatest works in his church,
must be first of all stricken into a great fear, in consideration of the
greatness of their function, yea, into an amazement and astonishment, in the
admiration of Gods glory and greatness, whose room they occupy, and whose
message they bring, and the more they are afraid and shrink, so it be under
the contemplation of Gods Majesty, and their own weakness, the more likelier
it is that they are truly called of God, and appointed for worthy purposes in his
Church: but he that steps to this function without fear, he may thrust in
himself, but its doubtful whether he be called of God, as here the Prophet
was: Nor is it so here alone, but every where when God called any of his
servants, to any great work, be first drove the^ into these fears and a
mazements, as is evident Exodus 3. 11. and 4. 10. 13.
in Moses, in Jeremy 1. 6. 7.
Jeremy, in Act. 9. 6. etc.
S. Paul and others. The reason of this dealing of the Lord is plain: namely,
because man's nature is always ready to take enough and too much unto it self,
God therefore in his wisdom puts a bridle unto the corrupt nature of man, and
astonisheth it, least it presume too much, and take too much upon it self:
Again* a Minister is to preach unto the people, fear and reverence of the
Lord: but how can he do so to others, when he has not tied that bond in his
own conscience, nor was ever cast down in admiration of Gods glory and
Majesty: And lastly, the ministry is a high and excellent calling (especially
the office of extraordinary prophets in the old testament) and is therefore
subject to pride, and to be puffed up with self-conceits, and therefore teaches
the Apostle to Timothy, that a 1. Tim. 13.
Minister may not be a young scholar, least he be puffed up, and fall into the
condemnation of the wicked: giving us to understand, that it is ye peculiar
danger of that calling to have high conceits of themselves, because of the
height and dignity of there function. Therefore to prevent this inconvenience,
God in mercy appoints that all his true Ministers shall have some means or
other, to be cast down even to nothing in themselves, and shall be driven into
such fears and amazements at sight of their own wickedness, as they shall
throw down themselves at Christ's feet, and denying themselves wholly, shall
acknowledge that they are in him whatsoever they are: and do rely, and trust
only on his grace and help. Use. Ergo, Ministers: and especially in the
Universities, labor to be humbled in sight of Gods


The use of this doctrine, as it is for all Ministers, so specially for us
which live in the University: we live as it were in a Seminary, and many of us
are hereafter by Gods grace to be framed to the Ministry, and some of us
already are. Now here we have many occasions to be puffed up in self-conceits: we
see our greatness, and their own meandness.
selves grow in time, in degrees, in learning, in honor, in name and
estimation: and to many of us God gives good portions of his gifts: what are
all these, but so many baits to allure us to pride, and vain opinions of our
own worths? but let us remember the end we aim at, is not humane, nor carnal:
our purpose is to save souls, Then the weapons of our war must not be
carnal, as pride, vaineglory, 2. Cor. 11. 4.
and self-conceit. If therefore we ever look to be made instruments of Gods
glory in saving of souls, then at the first set we not before our eyes the
honor, but the danger of our calling, and humble we our selves under the
mighty hand of our God, that he may exale us in his due time: and let us be
content that God give any occasion or means to pull us down, either by outward
cross, or inward temptation: and let us rejoice, when we are thereby so far
cast down, that we cry out in the astonishment of our spirits, as the Prophet
heere^ Woe is me, I am undone: but otherwise if we will needs follow the
swinge of our proud natures, and trust in our own ability, gifts, and
learning, let us know, we use carnal weapons in a spiritual warfare: and
let us be assured the Lord will work no great work in his Church by our
Ministry: we may raise our selves in worldly estimation, and work out our
own purposes, but we shall do little in the salvation of souls: for those men
do pronounce the most powerful blessings on other men's souls, and speak the
best words of comfort to other men's consciences, which oftenest say unto
themselves; Woe is me, I am undone.

Furthermore, whereas the Prophet at this Vision and Revelation of Gods glory
unto him, cries out of himself, 2 Doct. Ergo, The Prophets hold not the
opinion of the Intercession of Angels.
Woe is me, I am undone: being words of extreme fear and astonishment, and
of so low a deiection as is a degree toward desperation (if it had gone
forward): let us learn that the Prophet held not in his judgment, the
Doctrine of Intercession of Angels and Saints for particular men, for if he
had, he need not at the sight of Gods majesty, forthwith to have cried out,
Woe is me, I am undone, but he might have stayed himself a while in this
cogitation, I will desire Moses, Samuel, or David, to pray to this glorious GOD
for me, or here are holy Angels of the Seraphins here present, they see in
what fearful case I am, I will pray to them to speak to this glorious and
mighty Lord for me, that I perish not in this fear: but he instantly
seeing the Lord appear in Majesty, and fearing his just wrath, (being
guilty of his own corruptions) without any hope or expectation, or (as he
seems) without the least cogitation of help or assistance from any creature,
he cries out, I am undone. 3 Doct. Ergo, The calling to the Ministry is a
work like unto the calling of a sinner to the state of grace.


Lastly, whereas he exclaimeth, Woe is me, I am undone: being words of a
soul humbled and dejected, and hereby shows himself to be in that case,
which a poor sinner is, when the preaching of the Law has humbled him, by
showing him his sins and his extreme danger by them. We may learn, that
to be called to the Mnisterie, is to be as it were converted and regenerate:
and that when a man is called thereunto, it is a work little less then that
whereby GOD calls a sinner from his sin, to the state of repentance: for as
God first casts down the sinner, before he give him grace, or any feeling
of his love in Christ: so here, he first abaseth and casts down the
Prophet in the sight of GODS Majesty, and his own misery, before he honor
him with a Commission to preach his word unto his people. Which I note against
those men, which hold it so ordinary a matter Use. Ergo, (...) be required, to
to enter into the Ministry, as many do, which take it upon them in worldly
and politic purposes. And Qualify a man for the Ministry.
some of a better rank, which think if a man have learning, degrees and age,
he is sufficiently qualified for that calling. But alas, this is not all;
there is a greater work to be wrought then so, he must be humbled and cast
down in sight of the greatness of that calling, of the majesty of that God
whose room he is to execute, and of the unworthiness of himself to so great
a work: he must be resolved, that to call a man to the Ministry, is the
greatest work that GOD works in his Church, but the converting of a sinner,
and calling him to the state of grace: nay it is a work even like unto it: for
as a sinner in his conversion, so he at his Vocation to that place, is often
to cry out in the amazement of his soul, Woe is me, I am undone. As therefore
they are foully deceived, which think any holiness or sanctification, can
sufficiently qualify a man without learning, so are they no less which think
all outward complements to be sufficient without this work, which here was
wrought in the holy Prophet. Thus Causes of we see the fear and astonishment
of the his fear 2. Prophet. It follows.

For I am a man of polluted lips. 1 Cause pollution of himself and his
people.


Now follow the causes of his fear, which are two. The first is, his own
pollution and sinfulness, and the sinfulness of his people: his own he freely
1 His own. He was a man of polluted lips.
confesses in these words; I am a man of polluted lips: that is, I am a
miserable and sinful man, and therefore I fear and tremble to stand in Gods
presence: nay, I dare not look upon the Lord, for my sins. But it may be
demanded, how could the Prophet say thus truly, for he was a holy man, and
justified A he was a polluted man.
in Gods prefence, by his true faith in the Messiah, and sanctified by
repentance: can a man justified and sanctified, say, he is a man polluted? I
answer, And he complains not of capltall sins.
It is doubtless, he was so, he therefore complains here not of any great
and enormous sins, which he had committed to the public scandal of the
Church, but first of the corruption of his But of the corruption of his nature
nature, which in him as in all men is a very sea of iniquity, and which
always appears the more, the nearer a man comes to God, and therefore did now
most apparently discover it self in the prophet, when he was in the presence
of the Lord himself. Secondly, he complains of some actual sins of his life,
and it is more likely of some sins of omission, 2 Of some omission in his
calling.
then of commission: for we find not that the prophet was ever touched with any
great sin, and where we know it not, we are in charity not to imagine it. So
that it is most probable, he complains of some smaller faults, or
negligences in his Ministry: as not preaching to the people at some time when
he ought, or not preaching so willingly or cheerfully as he should, or desire
to leave preaching, because the people were stubborn and disobedient, or some
impatience in his Ministry, when the people were rebellious and resisted his
doctrine, which passion might the rather vex him (as we read it did Jeremy)
the Jews were so stubborn and stifnecked a people: or it may be some want of
zeal or forwardnes, these, or some such were the cause of his fear: And the
conscience of these makes him here cry out that he cannot stand in the sight of
God. Where we learn, first, what a tender Doct. Ergo, Ministers must be men of
tender conscience.
conscience godly Ministers must have above all men: namely, that they must
make conscience, not of the great and gross sins only; but even of the lowest
and least sins: and he must endeavor in his calling, not only to be clear of
great crimes, but as far as may be, to be free from the least appearance of
evil, and from the least negligences in his place, for a small faultin other
men is great in them, and that which may be some ways pardonable in other men,
is no way in them: they must therefore watch over themselves most carefully,
And make confidence of the least sins.
and take heed to all their ways: and for this end is it, that a Minister in
godly wisdom must often deprive himself even of many things (which it may
be, lawfully he might use) least his liberty be an occasion of evil to
others: and must abstain from the least sins, least even they be blemishes to
his calling, and burdens to his conscience. And hence is it, that a minister
cannot be too careful in his calling, in his words, diet, company, recreation,
apparel, gestures, and in his whole carriage, because little sins are so great
in the^, Especially And be most careful in his ministry both publicly and
privately.
ministers must here learn the Apostles lesson, to be instant in season and
out of season: to preach and exhort, to comfort and rebuke, publicly and
privately: to good, to bad: when it is well taken, when it is ill taken: when
they willingly receive it, and when they stubbornly resist it: when they
commend him, and reward him, and when they rail at him, and persecute him for
it: thus must he be diligent in season and out of season, for the least
negligence in his duty, or omitting the least opportunity of doing good, will
when God visits his conscience, be a burden and vexation to him, as it was
here to the Prophet.

And furthermore, if these small sins Use. Vrgo, Ministers for great sins
should be greatly humbled.
thus afflicted the Prophet, then alas what is to be thought of those ministers
who make no conscience of foul and scandalous sins? how shall Symonie,
Incontinencie, Usury, inhospitality, covetousness, Ignorance, Idleness,
careless Nonresidencie, how shall these (I say) and other like grievous crimes
oppress and burden the soul, when as the smallest sins do so affright this
holy man? Surely, when God shall visit them, their states will be most
fearful, nor, shall any man's case be so miserable, as an vnco^scionable
ministers: And though now such loose and licentious Ministers seem to live in
Iolitie, and without any fear, yet when God shall appear unto their
conscience, then will they cry out in fearful anguish, Woe is me, I am
undone. And for great negh^ ge^ce in their calling, else they have no
conscience.


And again, if these small faults so affrighted this holy prophet, and burdened
his conscience, then what pitiful consciences have those ministers, whose
daily negligence, and unconscionable carelessenesse in their places is such, as
all men speak of, and yet they are not touched: surely these men are not of so
tender consciences as the prophet was: and either the prophet here was much
more nice then needed, or else these men will prove to be in a miserable estate.

Lastly, let Ministers of care and conscience, be here comforted in the example
Good and faithful ministers not to be discouraged, though they have some
wants, for so the prophets had, but let them complain of them as here the
prophet does.
of the Prophet: who is there, but may find imperfections and blemishes in
himself, which will often make him cry out; Woe is me? but let not that
discomfort them, but rather rejoice, that they can see their own weakness, as
the Prophet did here: If they have cause to exclaim against themselves, they
are not alone, it was this, and all other holy prophets case before them. In
having imperfections in themselves, they are no more miserable then the Prophet
was: but let them labor to be as blessed in seeing and complaining of
themselves as he was: And let every minister assure himself, that the more
he makes conscience, even of the least sins of all, the more he resembles
the ancient holy Prophets, and the more likely is he to work effectually in
his ministry. For his duty is to work in his people a conscience, not of
great sins only, but even of all: but how can he do that in them, if he
have not first of all done it in himself? hence it is therefore, that godly
ministers find fault with themselves, Godly ministers find^ fault with
themselves when the world cannot.
when other men cannot, and cry out against themselves, for their pollutions
(with the prophet here) when no other man can accuse them of the least crime:
nay, when other do magnify God for his graces on them, and praise their
gifts, and commend their good lives, even then do they condemn themselves,
and exclaim against their own corruptions: and their own smallest
negligences, or omissions, are great wounds to their consciences: and their
least sins, and their most pardonable infirmities, are sore burdens unto
them: for of all men in the world, a godly minister is a man of the most
tender conscience.

Hitherto has the prophet complained generally of his pollution.

Particularly, he exclaimeth against the pollution of his lips. But why will
Particularly he complains against the pollution of his lips.
some say, complains he of the pollution of his lips, rather then of his
heart, or his hands, or any other part of him, were they not all polluted* yes,
all in some measure: and was not he grieved at them all? yes assuredly, we
must grant that also. But the reason is he was a prophet, his duty was to use
his tongue, the practice of his calling consisted For a Prophets duty consists
in the use of his tongue.
in the use of his tongue: for a minister is an interpeter, as he is called,
Job 33. 23. that is, the peoples to God by prayer, and Gods to the people by
preaching: he is Gods mouth, and the peoples mouth: so that the tongue of a
Minister is that part of his body, which is to be used as a principal
instrument of Gods glory, and more to the setting forth of his honor then any
other: Now every man is to be tried what he is by his calling, rather then by
any other accidental or collateral courses: therefore the honor or dishonor
of a minister, is the use or the abuse of his tongue: and his comfort or
discomfort is the well using, or not using of it. The prophet therefore here
affrighted at Gods prefence, His smallest negligence in teaching, checks his
conscience.
and therefore retyring into himself, presently his conscience checkes him for
his most proper sins: namly, for some fault or negligence in his Ministry,
(which is the proper sin of that calling) and therefore is it that he
exclaimeth against the pollutions of his lips: out of which practice of his
we may learn; Use. 1. Vrgo popish doctrine of man's merits is false.


First, the vanity of the Papists, who magnify the merits of holy men's
works: for if this holy prophet, a man truly justified, and extraordinarily
sanctified, yet durst not stand before God in this little appearance of his
glory, notwithstanding all his zeal, and courage, and conscience, and pains,
and sufferings in his function, but was cast down so far, from a conceit of
his own worth, that he cried out; Woe is me, I am undone. How then can we
who are no better, but much worse then he, stand before GOD in the day of
Judgment, in the great appearing of his infinite justice and glory? Rather
doubtless, as here the smallest pollution of his lips, and negligence in his
calling, drove him out of all conceit of merit, when once he came into the
presence of GOD: so the due consideration of our so many and foul pollutions
above his, should beat down all proud conceits of our own goodness, when
we appear before GOD. It is therefore to be feared, that the Papists, who
thus magnify their own merits, do seldom or never enter into earnest
consideration of their own infirmities, do seldom persent themselves in the
presence of Gods majesty. For if they did, then doubtless the least sight of
their least pollutio^, would make them far from ever thinking of their own
merits. And of works of superrogation.


They also tell us, of works of superrogation, but it seems here, this holy
Prophet had none of them. And they teach, a man may in this life And perfect
fulfilling the law in this life.
perfectly fulfill the Law, but who can do it, i^ not ministers? And what
ministers, if not extraordinary prophets? And yet Isaiah (the first and chief
of them) exclaimeth here in pitiful manner against his pollutions: Doubtless,
if the papists would cease flattering themselves, and not examine their
consciences by their own pleasing corruption, but present themselves in the
face and presence of GODS Majesty, they would be far from these conceits.
2. Use. Ergo Ministers must take heed of negligence in their function above all
sins, for that burtheneth the conscience most heavily of all.


In the next place, whereas the prophet complains of the pollution of his
lips: As of the peculiar sin of his place: Ministers are here taught, to
avoid that sin above all other; and to labor in that duty above any other:
for the doing of it, is his most comfort: the want of it is his most vexation:
his tongue is the Instrument given him to honor God, if he use it well, it
yeeldes him comfort, more then any other duties.

But if he use not, or abuse his tongue, the pollution of his lips will be
the heauiest burden of all: they therefore are greatly deceived, who think a
Minister to discharge sufficiently Other virtues are excellent, but cannot
suffice, if this want.
his duty, though he preach not if he keep good Hospitality and make peace
amongst his Neighbors, and perform other works of charatie and good life:
for if a Minister have not this virtue, he has none: If he preach not; If
he abuse his lips: or if he open them not, he has no conscience, nor can
have any comfort, for that is the principal duty of a Minister (though all
the other be required to make him complete): the want of them may condemn
him before men, but it is the pollution of his lips, which presently checkes
him before GOD, as we see here in this holy Prophet: the conclusion then is to
every Minister, that if he had all the virtues and good properties, that can
commend a man in the world, yet if his lips be polluted, either by not
preaching, or by negligent, idle, or careless preaching, this pollution will
so stain his conscience, and so burden him in the presence of God, that the
time will come (notwithstanding al his other good qualities) he will cry out in
far more pitiful manner the^ here the Prophet doth^ Woe is (...) I am
vndo^^, because I am a ^an of polluted lips. It follows;

And I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted 2. His peoples pollution.
lips.

The Prophet not only complains of his own pollution, but of his peoples He
complains of it to teach, 1. That a Minister is to confess his peoples sins
as well as his own.
also amongst whom he lived, and this he does for these causes: First, to teach
us, that it is the Ministers duty to confess not only his own sins, but
the sins of his people, and to complain of them to God: for as he is the
peoples Interpretar to God, he must not think it enough to put up their
petitions, to unfold their wants, and crave relief for them at Gods hand, but
he must further take knowledge of the sins of his people, and make both
public and private confession of them to God: and the more particularly he
can do this, the better: and this he is to do, both For generally he is
accessarie to his peoples sins.
for the peoples good, and for his own also, because it cannot be but the
sins of his people, are in some sort his: for this is the peculiar danger of
the Magistrates and Ministers ^^^ling, that generally the sins of their
people are theirs: I mean, that they are accessarie to the sins of their
people, either by provoking them by their evil example, or by not reproving, or
not hindering or suffering, or winking, or covering and concealing, or not
punishing them, or not carefully enough using means to prevent them: by all
which means and many more, it comes to pass, that the peoples sins are the
Ministers by communication: so that as well for his own sake, as theirs, he
is to confess to GOD their sins, as well as his own.

Now if a Minister must confess his peoples sins, then it follows
confequently, that he must know them; and take notice of them, for else he 1.
Use. Ergo, a minister must know his peoples sins.
cannot confess them. And this is one cause why the holy Ghost commands a
Pastor to know his flock.

He must not only have a flock, and know which is his flock: or have a
general Pro. 2^. 23.
^ye over it, out he must have a particular and (...) knowledge of the state
of it, and the more particular the better.

And if the Minister ought to know and confess his peoples sins, then if
Ergo, it is best for a Minister to be with his people.
follows, first, that it is best for a Minister to be present with his
people, that so he may the better know them and their state: and certainly if
it be a Ministers duty to confess to God the pollutions of his people, then
wilful and careless Nonresidency and all absence, without just and
conscionable causes, must needs be a foul and fearful sin. For how could
Isayah have confessed, that his people were a people of polluted lips, but that
he dwelt amongst them. Nay, says the Prophet, he dwelt in the midst among
them, indeed well may he know and confess his peoples pollutions, that
dwelles in the midst amongst them. 2. Use. Ergo, people must confess their
sins, and reveal the^ to their Minister.


Again, if the Minister be to confess his peoples sins, and therefore must
needs know them, then it follows also that they must discover and confess
them unto him, or else (...) not possible he should perfectly kno^e their
estate: the want of this is a great fault in our Churches, for how ever we
condemn Auricular confession, as a very policy in the deuisers, and as a
rack to the consciences Not popish but voluntary.
of poor Christians, yet we not only allow, but call and (...) for that
confession, whereby a Christian voluntarily And of such sins as disquiet the
conscience.
at all times may resort to his Pastor, and open his estate, and disburden his
conscience of such sins, as disquiet him, and crave his godly assistance, and
holy prayers: great blessing and comfort does doubtless follow them that use
this godly practice, and the want of it, is cause that a minister cannot
discern the state even of his own flock nor can complain to God of their
pollutions, and confess their sins so particularly, as would be good both
for him and them.

Secondly, the Prophet couples together 2. To teach us that a polluted people
make their Minister more or less polluted also.
his own pollution, and the pollutions of his people, as the adjuvant, or
helping cause and the effect: For the pollution of a people, helps forward the
pollution of a Minister, and the worse people they are, the worse do they make
him, though he be otherwise never so good: For even the Prophet, though called
of God himself, and justified and sanctified, and a man of extraordinary grace,
yet dwelling in ye midst of a people so stubborn and disobedient, as the Jews
were, was something touched with their pollutions: Ministers (even the best)
are men, and this comes to pass by reason of the corruption of their nature as
they are me^: the nature of which corruption is to apprehend any evil where
ever it finds it, and to partake with it: regeneration qualifieth and abates
this corruption, but takes it not away perfectly in this life: whereby it comes
to pass, that a Minister, living amongst evil people, cannot but be somewhat
stained with their pollution, of what sort soever they be: insomuch as it is
often seen, that one known to be otherwise disposed of himself, is found to
be disposed to this or that evil, by living amongst a people so disposed. And
again, that a minister in such a place, and amongst such people, free from
such and such sins, removed to another place, is there found more or less
tainted with them, because they abound amongst the people: and yet further,
that a minister, known to be faithful, painful and zealous, and coming to
a disobedient, stubborn, froward, or profane and dissolute people, his faith
is weakened, A wicked people dull and decay Gods graces in good Ministers. Use
double.
his zeal and courage abated, Gods graces in him dulled, and much decayed:
godly Ministers do daily complain hereof, and experience every where shows
it too true. Out of this, we may learn something both for our instruction, and
for our conversation.

For our instruction, it here appears 1. For instruction: 1. See how corrupt
our nature is.
how wicked and wretched the corruption of our nature is, which cannot but
receive some contagion from the pollution of those with whom we live: for this
is so, not only in them who carry a loose hand over themselves, but even in
such as look most narrowly unto their steps: as we see here in this holy
Prophet, who was a man of more then ordinary sanctification: how little cause
therefore has any man to extol nature? and how much less cause the schoolmen
and some other papists, to give the least commendation to our pure naturals:
for if nature rectified by grace, be so hardly kept within compass, alas how
outrageous and perverse is it, when it reigns without controlment?

And for our further instruction, here we may see of what a creeping 2. What
a creeping nature sin has.
and incroaching nature sin is, which like a secret venom in the natural
body, so it in the pollitique body restes not in the place, or party
poisoned, but closely creepes and diffuseth it self into every part and member
of the whole: it creepes from man to man, yea, from an evil man to a good, from
the worst man to the best: from profane men, to godly Ministers: and as from
public persons (as Magistrates and Ministers) it descends It will creep
from Ministers to people, and from people to Minister.
visibly, and the example of their evil life is palpably scandalous: so from
the people to the Magistrate, or Minister, it creeps closely, and ascends
in more secret and insensible manner, yet in the effect it is too sensible: for
it is always seen, that they are something touched with their peoples
pollutions: sin is not only as a poison spreading from the heart to all
parts, from the minister to the people: but as a gangreue, if it begin in the
foot, will without speedy prevention spread privily to the heart: so sin shows
it self, even from the Ergo, stop sin in the beginning.
people to the Ministers: So great cause is there for all men to stop sin in
the beginning, to break it in the egg, to give water no passage, no not a
little: for let this gangreue begin at the feet, it will not rest till it be
in the heart.

For our conversation we are here 2. For our conversation.
taught, first, if a Minister, by reason of the corruption of his own nature,
and the creeping nature of sin, is in such danger to be stained with the
peoples pollutions, then let all Ministers desire, and use all good means to
dwell 1. Ministers, Ergo, labor to live amongst people.
with a people as little polluted as may be: otherwise let him assure himself
to be polluted with them, which is both a great disco^fort to his own
conscience (as here it was to the Prophet) and disgrace to his profession: for
if it be a duty of every good professor of religion, to keep himself
unspotted of the world, then how much more is it the Ministers Iam. 1. 17.
duty so to do? and how foul a stain is it to the honor of his calling,
to be polluted in the common pollutions of his people?

It may be therefore good counsel to all godly Ministers in the placing and
disposing of themselves, not to enquire only how good a living such and such a
place is, how well seated, how healthful and beneficial it will be, (which
are alas the common and almost the only questions now adays) but And in
disposing themselves, rather regard it, then other commodity.
principally, to regard what a people they be: and how affected, amongst whom
they are to live: if godly and well disposed, or at least tractable and gentle,
and willing to be taught, the^ less to regard other incommodities: but if
wicked, and profane, or (which is worse) stubborn, froward, and intractable,
then less to regard the greatest commodities: and certainly if this point be
well considered of, and how bitter it has been in the end, to many who have
not regarded it, it will appear, that this is the best encouragement or
discouragement, the greatest commodity, or discommoditie, and the best reason,
either to win a man to a place, or to draw him from it, how good soever it be
otherwise: they that neglect this duty, and are led (or misled rather) with
carnal and wordly respects, how just is it upon the^ when they are made to cry
in the sorrow of their soul, W^e is me, I dwell in the midst of a people of
polluted lips.

And here such Ministers as have A poor living with good people better then a
great living and evil people.
poor livings, but good people, let them not faint nor be discouraged, they
have more cause to bless God, then to be grieved, for doubtless they are
far better the^ those who have great livings, and an evil people.

But as for those to whom God has been so good, as to bestow upon them
competent livings, and a willing and well disposed people, let them think
themselves double blessed of God, and treble bound to honor God, and to do
good in his Church: and if such men go not before their brethren in all
Ministerial care and duty, their fault is above al men's, and they make
themselves unworthy of so great mercies. 2. Ergo, Ministers must take heed of
their company.


Again, if that a polluted people, pollutes their Minister, here is a good
warning for all ministers to be wary and choice of their company, with whom
they will most privately converse: for, as on the one side they may not retire
themselves into solitariness, nor sequester themselves from all society with
their people, (which is rather a Cimicall and fantastical, then any way a
religious practice): so of all men are they to be most careful, that they do
not loosely and lauishly bestow themselves on all companies, as too many do in
All companies and all recreations are not for Ministers.
our Church, to the great scandal thereof, who care not with whom they
converse, but all companies, all places, all times, all sportes and
recreations, al meetings, all occasions, are one with them: but alas, what
marvel, though such men keep not themselves unspotted of the world, but prove
too offensive to their calling: for seeing the best me^ cannot live with the
best people, but they shall receive some contagion from them, how carefully
ought ordinary ministers to make difference of men and meetings, times and
places, and not diffusedly and carelessly to thrust themselves into all: So
doing shall they keep their calling from much reproach, and preserve
themselves from much pollution, which otherwise from their polluted people,
they shall be sure to receive.

And here people are to be admonished, And people must not draw their Ministers
too much into company.
not too sharply to censure their ministers: though he be not so sociable
with them all, as it may be many would expect: for it concerns no man to be so
wary of his company and his sports, as it does the minister: and if they
would have comfort and honor by their minister, let them be careful into
what recreations and company they draw or desire him: for the more polluted the
people are amongst whom he lives, the more careful must he be to keep
himself clear from their pollutions.

Lastly, here people are taught, not to 3 People must not condemn too sharply
such Ministers as are faulty in their lives* for themselves are the cause of
it, being of evil lives themselves.
be too sharp condemners of those ministers, whose conuersations are not so
unblameable as were to be wished: for as they live ill, generally the cause is,
because they live amongst an il people.

Why then should they so much condemn them, for such faults, as wherein
themselves have made them faulty? I say not, but our Church and state, and
Ministry, are to censure such men, (and it were good they did it more) but it
is against all reason the people should do so, whereas themselves are the cause
of it: For alas, if this holy Prophet was a man of polluted lips, because he
dwelt with a people of polluted lips: what marvel then, though ordinary
Ministers be polluted with the common and universal pollutions of their
people: People therefore, are first of all to see that themselves be well
ordered and godly, and then justly may they complain, if the lives of their
Ministers be not agreeable: but otherwise, it is not possible without very
special grace of God, but that a minister shall be more or less touched With those
crimes which are the common faults of his people. And lamentable experience
daily lets us see, Look what sins aboundes in any place, and there generally
the Minister is tainted with it.
that where a people in a town is given to drunkenness, there the Minister, is
either so for company, or at least too good a fellow: where a people are given
to contention, there the Minister has too many fuites: where the people be
Popish, there the Minister is too superstitious: where the people be ignorant,
there the Minister is no great clarke: where the people are given to any great
sin, there the Minister generally is not clear from the same pollution: and
it is seen, that the best ministers and most careful of all, do complain
bitterly of the pollutions of their people: for that how soever it may be they
escape partaking with their sins: yet they always find, at the least a
dulling and decaying of Gods graces in themselves, where the people are
untoward and disobedient. If therefore a Minister lives with such a people, his
case is pitiful and dangerous, for he walks in the midst of nets and
snares, which are laid for him on every side, and if he escape them (I mean,
if he keep himself unspotted, in the midst of a spotted and polluted people)
his care and his conscience is worthy both admiration and imitation, and
himself is worthy double honor, as being both a zealous minister and a holy
man. But he who^ God has blessed with a good But such Ministers as live with a
good people and yet are loose, they are not worthy to be Ministers, but to be
deprived.
and tractable people, and well affected to the word, and yet himself lives
loosely and scandalously amongst them, a heavy burden and a hard account, lies
on that minister, and no rebuke is too rough no punishment too great, no
censure too sharp for him. And, if this holy Prophet, fear so much the
presence of God for his small pollutions, and yet lived amongst so wicked and
polluted a people, then what heaviness and horror, shall be heaped on his
soul, who cares not with how foul pollutions his life be stained, and yet
lives amongst a godly and well disposed people? And thus we have the first
cause of his fear, his own, and his peoples pollutions.

It follows.

And mine eyes has seen the King, and 2 Cause of his fear, he saw the Lord.
Lord of Hosts.

THe second cause of the Prophets fear and astonishment is, He san the Lord,
who then appeared in glory unto him: not that he saw the substance of God
(for that is invisible How? In a vision.
and incomprehensible) but his glory: Nor the fullness of his glory, for that
cannot be endured, but a glimse of it: nor that with the eyes of his body in
ordinary manner, but in a vision: wherein how far the eyes of his body were
used, neither the Prophet expresses, nor we can well conceive. The meaning
then is; In a vision he saw such glory and Majesty, as he knew there was
an extraordinary presence of the Lord of hosts, who is the King of glory, at
whose sight, and thought of his presence, instantly his conscience is smitten
with fear, for his own infirmities, and the pollutions of his people.

Wherein let us first of all observe the connection and dependence of these two
causes, one upon another: for as they are both jointly the cause of his fear,
so one of the^ is in a sort the cause of another: he fears, because of his
own and his peoples sins, and because he saw the Lord: but why is he afraid
to see the Lord? the cause thereof is his own and their sins, without which he
would never have been afraid, but rather have gloried to see the Lord: but
his conscience checking him, for some defect of duty in his calling, therefore
he trembles at the least glimse of Gods glory. Here let us mark the ground of
his Doct: the man that is in his sins endures not Cods presence. 1 For God
hates sin, above all things.
reason, which is this: That man that is in his sins, is not able to stand in
the presence of God: this is a general and certain truth, and the reasons of
it are; First, the contrariety betwixt God, and the nature of sin, it being
the only thing which offends him, and which prouokes his wrath and just
displeasure: therefore as a subject cannot but be much amazed, if he hap to
come into the kings presence, with any thing about him which the king hates, or
cannot abide to see: so a man cannot but be extreme astonished, if he know
himself to be in Gods presence with his sins, which Gods soul hates. 2
Sin makes a man a debtor to God.


Secondly, sin makes a man indebted to God: for as the Law tyeth him first to
obedience, so if he sin and fail in that, it binds him to punishment: and the
more a man sins, the deeper is he in Gods debt. If then in this world, a man
willingly indures not the sight of him, in whose debt he is; what marvel,
though a poor sinner tremble at the presence of God, to whom he has forfaited
soul and all.

Thirdly, sin is that which provoke 3 Sin is that, that makes God angry.
God to (...): therefore a sinful man fears the presence of God, as a
traitor the face of the Prince, or a malefactor of the Judge. For these causes,
a wicked man endures not Gods presence. Degrees of Gods presence.


Now Gods presence has diverse degeees. First, God is present to our conscience,
1 To our thoughts. 2 To our nami^g him
when we think of him. 2. He is present, when we name him, or hear him named
or mentioned by others, and these are the surthest off: Thirdly, God is nearer
unto us in the presence of his Ordinances, as his Word and 3 Near in his
ordinances
Sacraments, and public service in the Congregation: Fourthly, there is a 4
Necrest at the last day.
most apparent and sensible presence of God, which shall be at the last
Judgment, when all men shall stand before him in his immediate presence, to
receive their judgment. Now all these presences of God, are hateful to a
wicked A sinful man fears all these.
man: for the first, a wicked man by his good will never thinks of God, and if
sometime a thought of God (like lightning) flashes in his mind, presently he 1
He never, or unwillingly thinks of God.
quenches it, as being a most unwelcome and burdensome thought unto him:
therefore says David; The wicked is so proud, he cares not for God: neither
Psalm. 10. 4.
is God in all his thoughts: Nay, God himself is so little thought on, by them,
that they will willingly think of nothing, that might bring GOD into their
thoughts: as namely, Gods great works of his wonderful Judgments: of whom the
same prophet says, in the same place, Thy Judgments are far above, out of
his sight. As if he had said, Psalm. 10. 5.
he labors to set them far from the eye of his mind, that he may never
have occasion to think of them, nor on God by them. That this is true for his
thoughts', I have endeavored thus to prove, by Gods own testimonies, because
thoughts cannot be discerned by 2 He never speaks of God unless it be to
abuse his majesty.
man. But alas, for the second, that is, for his words, that is too apparent in
the sight of all men. For observe it, and you shall never see a wicked man, by
his good will have God in his mouth, (unless it be to abuse his name, by
swearing or blasphemy) nor willingly does he hear any other man talk, or
discourse largely of God, or of his greatness and his Justice; but such talk
is tedious and combersome unto him: and if he cannot break it off with other
discourse, then he sits as mute as a fish, and inwardly either frets with
anger, or is tormented with fear. All this is true in Faelix the Governor:
who whilst Paul discoursed of righteousness, temperance, and Judgment to
come: The Text says, in the mean time, he trembled.

And for the third, we see daily wicked men, endure not Gods presence 3 They
love not the word nor Sacraments.
in the Church: for nothing is more troublesome unto the^, then many Sermons,
often praying, and much receiving of the Sacrament: and therefore they never
come to the Church, nor receive ofter then the Law lays upon them: but
further then that, as the Psalmist says; they never call upon God. But as
Psalm. 14. 4. 4 They wish Christ would never come to judgment.
for the last, that they fear and abhor above all, they wish in their heart
it may never be. And therefore S. Paul makes it a token of a true believer, and
a holy man, to love, and look for the appearing of Jesus Christ. Whereupon it
follows, 2. Tim, 4. 8.
that eue^ so it is a sign of a wicked man, to fear the last judgment, and
to wish it might never be: And when it comes indeed, and they see they cannot
escape it, what the^ do they? Even cry to the mountains, fall upon us: and to
the hills, cover Revel. 6. 16,
us, and hide us: from what? from the presence of God: so fearful and so
hateful is Gods prsence to a sinful man.

Besides these, there is another way, whereby God shows his presence:
Extraordinary apparitio^s of Gods majesty, a sinful man cannot endure.
and that is, by extraordinary revelation of his glory immediately: which was
usual in the old Testament, as here to the Prophet, but now is not to be
expected. But how terrible that is to the sinful nature of man, appears in
this place: for if the Prophet a most holy man, whose conscience accused him,
but of a few and small sins, yet thus cries out, amazed and affrighted, at
the revelation of some part of Gods glory: alas, how would they be terrified
with it, whose consciences are burdened with great and grievous sins, and
that without repentance? Thus we see the ground of his reason, how true it is,
that a man in his sin, cannot cheerfully come, nor boldly stand in Gods
presence. The The first use for Ministers: Ergo. let them not enter into.
use of this Doctrine: First of all, let us see the monstrous presumption of
such minister as dare venture rashly into the ministry, to tread upon the holy
ground of God, with unclean feet; to handle that calling in their sins.
the holy things of God with unwashed hands: For what is it to enter into the
Ministry, but to enter into the chamber of presence of the great King? and
should not a man look about him, For it is into Gods presence chamber.
before he come there? Therefore if God rebuked Moses, for stepping too hastily
toward the Bushe, where his presence is, and said; Come not too near, for
Exodus 3. ^.
the place where thousta^dest is holy ground: then how will God rebuke and
check the consciences of such carnal men, as carelessly and carnally rush into
the Pulpit, and to Gods holy Table, where God is present, in a far more
excellent manner then he was in the Bush? And if they be so to be blamed, who
Nor come to do the duty of that calling without repentance, and holy
preparation.
enter into this calling without fear and reverence, then how much more faulty
are they, who being Ministers, dare venture to preach, or minister the holy
Sacraments, without holy and private preparation, and sanctification of
themselves: but rush upon them, as upon common and profane actions? Whereas
God is present there, in a most holy and glorious manner: these men sure will
say, the Prophet here was of too nice a conscience: but fearfully and
terribly shall God appear at last unto such men, as care not how they appear
in his holy presence.

Secondly, this shows the reason of the practice of al Christian churches: 2
^rgo, They are to pray before and after sermon.
who use to pray before the Sermon and after: namely, not for Decorum only,
and to grace the action, but to sanctify and to humble our selves, because
then we come before Gods presence: they therefore do not think reverently
enough of God, and his presence, who do by their practice in any sort, make
way to the contrary.

Thirdly, we may here learn, the pitiful The 3 Use. Ergo, such men are
extremely desperate who dare come to preach and minister sacraments, in their
sinner.
case of those ministers, who are so presumptuous, as to exercise that holy
function, and yet remain (...) their sins without repentance: what do these
men? they approach to the burning Bush, with their shoes on their feet: that
is, into Gods presence in their sins: what shall come of it in the end?
surely, that burning fire shall consume the^: the least sin, and smallest
negligences affrighted this holy Prophet, when he should go into Gods
presence: But these men Psalm. 50. 16.
dare come into the Sanctuary of God; yea, dare take Gods word in their
mouth's, and yet hate to be reformed, and do cast the glorious Word of God
behind their backs, which they preach to others with their mouths: these men
may wonder at this holy Prophets nicenes, or else all the world may wonder at
their profaneness. A little pollution of his lips, feared him to come into
Gods presence: but these dare do it, with eyes, ears, lips, feet, hands,
heart; and all polluted: their eyes polluted, with careless looking at all
vanities: their ears with hearing: and their lips with speaking, wanton and
wicked talk: their feet, with running into wicked company: their hands, with
practizing and their hearts, with devising and consenting Such men's labors are
fruitless.
to all wickedness.

This is the cause, why the labors of such men are almost unprofitable:
because they dare come into Gods presence in their sins. In many places of
our land, there is by Gods blessing much teaching, yet there is little
reformation, in the lives of the most: but contrariwise, some fall to Atheism:
some to Papisme: some into foul sins, not to be named amongst Ghristians.

Where is the cause? surely not in the And their leosenesse does more hurt;
then their Doctrine good.
Gospel: nor in our doctrine, nor in the teaching of it; but one very
principal cause is, many Ministers come into Gods presence, unsanctified, and
in their sins: not caring how loosely they live, in the face of their people:
and therefore God in justice, though he instantly smite not them, with visible
vengeance for their presumption: yet he smites the By Gods seacret judgment.
people, with spiritual blindness, that they regard not their Doctrine, but
look at their lives, and do rather follow the profaneness of the one, then
the holiness of the other. Ministers are such, in whom God will be
sanctified, therefore because they do not so, but dishonor him, by coming
into his presence in their sins: therefore he cannot abide them, nor give
any blessing to their labors.

All ministers therefore, as they would see any fruit of their Ministry, let
them first sanctify themselves, and cleanse their hearts by repentance, before
they presume, to stand up to rebuke sin in others: else let them not think,
that Good words are vain, where there is no good life.
their golden words shall do so much good, as their leaden lives shall do
hurt: and they may hap to confirm men, that already are converted, but
hardly shall any such men, convert any souls from Popery or profaneness. And
it is a vain conceit for men to imagine, there is any force in eloquence, or
humane learning, to overthrow that sin in others, which rules and reigns in
themselves. Our Church, and all reformed churches, may make use of this
doctrine: for it is the glory of a Church to have their doctrine powerful, and
effectual for the winning of souls, therefore it concerns them, to take
order, as well that their ministers be godly men, as good Scholars, and their
lives inoffensiue, as well as their doctrine sound: or else they will find in
woeful experience, that they pull down as much with the one hand, as they build
up with the other.

But most nearly this doctrine touches ministers themselves: who must know,
their case is most fearful of all men's, if they come into Gods presence, in
their profaneness: for as no man is more honorable, then a learned and holy
Minister: so none more contemptible in this world, none more miserable for that
to come, then he that by his loose and lewd life, does scandalize his
doctrine: and let him assure himself, that for his presumption, in rushing
into Gods presence in his sins, he shall in this world, be cast out as
unsavory salt Math. 5. 13.
and trodden down of men, with the foot of contempt: and in the world to come,
he shall above all men cry out, in most extreme torment of conscience, W^ is
me, that my eyes must see the King and Lord of hosts and so because he would
not in this world, come into Gods presence in sanctification and holiness: he
shall therefore in fear and horror, be haled into the presence of Gods glory,
at the last day: there to receive the just sentence of his condemnation.

Lastly, all painful and godly Ministers may receive comfort, not to be The
fourth use for Ministers: Ergo Good ministers must not fly from Gods presence
because of their sins, but repent: and so approach to his duty.
discouraged or driven from Gods presence, because of their corruptions or
infirmities, for we see it was the Prophets, case: but let them still approach
in fear and reverence, and be so far from being driven from their duty,
because they being sinful men, dare not come into Gods presence without much
fear: as let them contrariwise be assured, that the more they tremble at Gods
presence here, the less shall they fear it at the last day: and when profane
and ungodly men, who in this world feared not to stand in Gods presence in
their horrible sins, shall cry to the Mountains, fall upon us, and hills
cover us, and hide us from the presence of God: then such ministers as in this
world in fear and trembling, and always in repentance, did approach into Gods
presence: shall then look up, and lift up their heads, and shall say to the
holy Angels, and all the powers of heaven, help us, and hasten us to come into
the glorious presence of our God and Savior.

And thus we see the manisold use of this doctrine to our Church and
ministry. The second use against the Papists.


Secondly, In as much as here the prophet in a conscience of his corruptions,
fears and cries out at the least apparition of Gods glory.

The vanity and false dealing of the Ergo, The apparitions of God, and christ,
which they make so ordinary, are but collusions.
Church of Rome, is here discoured, in whose Lege^ds and stories of their
Saints, nothing is more common then apparitions from heaven, of Saints
depa^ted: of glorious Angels, of the virgin Mary, (and that so familiarly, as
sometime she sang with the^ in their Cell, kissed some of them, and let them
suck her breasts). Nay, of God himself: and especially of our Savior Christ
Jesus: who they say, appeared (I know not how often) to one man: namely, to
Saint Francis: and appeared as he was crucified with his wounds, and imprinted
those wounds of his, in Francis his body, which they say he bare all his life,
and that they bled whenever he would suffer them, which he always did on
Good Friday, that he might be like to Christ. Thus, etc many more such, may
yousee in that fabulous and blasphemous book, of the conformities of S. Francis.

But for the matter: Are apparitions from heaven so ordinary in the popish
Church? how then came it to pass, that the greatest and holiest men in the
old Testament, were so amezed at the very apparition but of an Angel: as we
may see in the whole course of the Story? Some ran away, and hid
themselves: some covered their faces, some fell flat on the ground: and the
Prophets here cried out; Woe is me, I am undone: my eyes have seen the King
and Lord of Hosts. But in the Church of Rome, look the stories, that Saint
or Monk is no body that has not had some apparition: either of the Virgin
Marie, or some of the Apostles, or an Angel, or Christ Jesus appearing and
talking with them: and yet alas, Peter, lames, Gala. 2. 9. Mat. 17. 6. and Luke
9. 33.
and John, those three great pillars, they were as good as beside themselves at
the appearing of a little part of the glory of Christ in his transfiguration.

Either therefore must it follow that these men have no sin in them, which
dare and can behold Gods glory so easily, and so ordinarily, (which is
impossible): or rather which indeed is truth, it appears that these are but
deceitful fancies and forgeries of their own devise, to deceive the world,
and to magnify themselves before the eyes Reasons i^ 1. Apparitions of God
cannot be mores dommon in the new, then they were in the old Testament.
of the common people: for it is first of all most false, that apparitions are
so common as they make them, for if they were, then are they more ordinary in
the new Testament then in the Old. For whereas the Scripture has one, their
Legions have twenty: and whereas one, namely, Saint Paul, was once rapt into
heaven, they have 20. that were rapt thither: And as that is false, so is it 2.
Cor. 12. 2. No man in his flesh can endure gods glory.
impossible that any man clothed with flesh can endure an extraordinary
apparition of Gods glory, without extreme amazement, as is plain herd in the
Prophet: who I hope was as holy a man, as the holiest monk that ever was. I
have noted this, that young Divines may be occasioned to look a little into
their fabulous legends, that so they may discover the false tricks, and
iugling castes of that religion: which evil shifts it needed not, if it were
of God.

Thirdly, the people may here learn; 3. Use, to the people: they may see Gods
merey to them, in teaching them by men like themselves, and not by apparitions
from heaven.
First, in that Gods presence is so glorious and fearful to man's nature, how
mercifully God has dealt with them, in teaching them not by himself, or by his
Angels from heaven, which they could never endure; but by men, who are like
themselves: and how vain and fond these men are, who would be taught from
heaven, and not by men, who are so full of wants. In the old Testament, when
the people received the law from Deuteronomy. 5. 25 26, 27. 28.
Gods own mouth, it is said, they ran away, and cried out, Why should we die?
if we hear the voice of God any more we shall dye: for what flesh ever heard
the voice of the living God and lived therefore they said to Moses: Go thou
near and hear, all that the Lord shall say, and declare thou unto us* what God
says to thee, and we wilheare it, and do it. And then says the text, ye Lord
said I heard the words of this people, they have said well in all that they have
spoken. And so, from that day forward, God ordinarily taught his church by men
like themselves: and we see, yt the beginning of it was not in judgment, but
in mercy unto them. It is therefore the duty of all men, both to acknowledge
this mercy of God, in due thankfulness, and withal to remember, when they see
infirmities in Ministers, that they are but men, and that if they had not the
Ministry of men, how hard it would, go with them: considering, that the
least measure of Gods own presence, cannot be endured by any man.

2. Inasmuch as gods presence, is so glorious 2. Use. Ergo, they must prepare
the^. selves before they come to the word or Sacraments.
in it self, and fearful to our nature, al men are taught to prepare
themselves by holy prayer, by humisiation, and confession of their sins and
unworthiness, before they come to Gods word or sacraments: for they come at
that time into Gods presence: they therefore are not to come in their
security, nor in their ordinary sins unrepented of, least God strike their
consciences, with a sense of his fearful displeasure: and make them cry out,
upon far greater cause, then here the Propet did.

Thirdly and lastly, we learn here the different natures and properties of 3.
Use see the different natures of sin, and holiness. Sin draws a man from
Gods presence.
sin and holiness: Sin, even the least sin: nay, a very sinfulnes of
nature makes a man afraid of Gods presence: That sin unrepented of does so,
appears in Adam, who as in his integrity, he spoke and conuersed even in a
familiar sort with God: so no sooner had he finned, but he ran from God, and
hid himself: and that even the least sins not repented of, do so also,
appears in this Prophet, who being a holy man, yet his conscience being
privy to it self of some small omissions or neglige^ces in his calling, he
cries out, he is undone, because he sees the Lord of hosts. But contrariwise,
the state of perfect Holiness inuites a man into Gods presence.
holiness, and the want of all sin, makes a man bold in Gods presence, and
rather desirous then afraid to behold Gods glory, which shall be most apparent
at the last day: for when the wicked shall desire rather to be covered Reave. 6.
16. Luke 21. 28. Job. 19. 25 26, 27.
with the hills, and ground to dust by the mountains, then to appear before
the face of God: then shall the godly whose holiness shall then be perfect,
look up and lift up their heads, because their redemption is so nigh. And Job
testifies of himself, that he knows his redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand before him, and look upon him with his eyes. Thus as guiltiness
drives a man from the kings presence, but innocence makes him bold before him:
So sinfulness makes a man avoid Gods presence, but holiness makes him draw
near unto God, and to rejoice in his presence.

Then for a conclusion of this point, Use. Ergo, if a man would have boldness
with God, he must be a holy man.
let all men hear learn the way to true courage and boldness before GOD:
namely, to repent daily of their sins, and labor to grow in true holiness:
wealth nor wit, learning nor authority can do this for thee, but only a good
conscience, which must be made good by grace and by repentance, then shall
thou rejoice in Gods presence in this world, and delight, to think of God, to
speak of God, to pray unto him, to meet him in his word and sacraments, and
at the last day shall thou stand with confidence before the throne of his glory.

Hitherto of the fear and astonishment of the Prophet, and of the causes
thereof. Now follows his consolation.

Then flewe one of the Seraphims, etc.

In these two verses is laid down the 2. General points: His consolation,
second general point: namely, the consolation of the Prophet: concerning
which, there are two points in the text: wherein are 2. points. 1.
Circumstances of it. 2. The ground of of it.
1. the ground and matter of his consolation, that is the forgiveness of his
sins. 2 Diverse circumstances of that consolation. 1 The time. Then. 2 The
minister by whom it was done: Circumstances are many.
an Angel, one of the Seraphims. 3 The manner how he did it, speedily, He
flewe. 4 The instrument or outward sign a Coal from the altar. 5 The outward
action or application of it: He touched his lips.



The matter of the consolation is last in order. Let us therefore first speak
of the Circumstances.

The first circumstance, is the time 1. Circumstance, the time that is after
his fear.
when this Prophet was comforted and raised from his fear. Then says the
text: that is, after his fear and astonishment, but not before. Thus dealt God
always with all his Saints, he bestows no graces on the^ pertaining to
salvation, but after he has by some means or other brought the^ to true
humiliation in themselves, Doct. No consolation but after humiliation.
and to sorrow for their sins: Humiliation is the preparatiue for grace: for
when by sight and sense of their sins, and their own misery by sin, he
has even driven them quite out of themselves, finding nothing in themselves,
but cause of fear and astonishment, then powers he the oil of grace, and of
sweet comfort into their hearts, and refreshes their weary souls with the
deawe of his mercy: this point needs no further proof, for look into the
Scriptures, and we shall find, God never called any man to the state of grace,
or to any notable work or function in his Church, but he first humbled them,
and then brought them out of al conceit with themselves, and then wrought in
them, and by them, his wonderful works.

The use of this doctrine, is first of all to teach all men, to esteem aright
of the Use 1. To al men: Ergo, esteem of afflictions, namely, as
afflictions that God lays upon them in this world: commonly men take them
impatiently, and our nature grudgrudgeth against them: but let a Christian man
consider with himself, how God has always dealt with his children, and he
has cause not to think so: for does God lay some great affliction on thee? it
may be he has some mighty work of his grace to work in thee, or some great
work of mercy to bewroght by thee in his church, and hereby prepares thee for
the same. Say therefore Psalm: 39. 9.
with the holy Prophet; I held my tongue o Lord, and spoke nothing, because it
was thy doing: and what God may intend in his so doing to thee, thou can not
tell: and therefore in silence, and patience possess thy soul.

Again, here is a comfort to all such 2 To men distressed in conscience, that
their state is not desperate as they Imagine but most comfortable
as are distressed in mind, in sense of their finnes, and sight of Gods wrath:
their state is not miserable, much less desperate, for they are in the high
way to grace and favor. God justifies not, but him that repents: God exalts
not, but him that is humbled: God comforts not, but him that is distressed: God
has mercy on none, but such as both known and feel they want it: and know
also, that they know not where to have it, but at his hands. Happy therefore
is that soul, that feels the weight and burden of sin, for to him will Christ
bring most ease and comfort. Gods Ministers therefore are hereby to comfort
distressed consciences, to assure them, that if with this Prophet they be so
deeply touched with sight of their sins, and Gods justice, as that they cry,
Woe is me, I am undone. Then, eue^ Then, are they most capable of comfort, and
best prepared to receive it, as here it sell out to the holy Prophet. Thirdly,
here is the Use 3. The way to get excellent graces at Cods band, is to labor
to feel the wan. of them.
way taught us how to attain to any excellent graces of God, either for our
own salvation, or the good of the Church, namely to labor for a sencible
feeling of the want of them in our selves: for God uses to bestow no gifts on
any man, but such as do in humility and low-linesse, confess to God, and
acknowledge in themselves, the want of them. So the blessed Virgin sings, God
fills the Luke. 1. 53. 2 Psalm. 107. 9.
hungry with good things, but the rich he sendes empty away: And so the
Psalmist, God satisfies the hungry soul, and fills the empty soul with
goodness. So then if thou be rich in thy conceits, God has not for thee: but
if thou be hungry, he is ready to fill thee with good things: and do thou
acknowledge thy soul empty, then behold treasures of goodness, to feed and
fill thee: and art thou cast down with the Prophet, and is thy soul empty of
hope, and fraught with fear, then behold, even then, God and his Angels ready
to raise thee up, and to fill thee with consolation. Thus much for the time of
his consolation: the minister, by whom was,

One of the Seraphims.

The 2. circumstance of his consolation 2. Circumstance of the Minister An
Angel, a Seraphim.
is the Minister by whom it was done: An angel. One of the Seraphims: that is,
an Angel of that order so called: out of which we learn; Doct 1. Ergo there
are several degrees of Angels, that we know not.


First, that there are diverse degrees and several orders of Angels, though we
know not the true distinction thereof: nor think it lawful to imagine them to
be 9. nor to set them down particularly, as the Church of Rome does, who make
many of their own devises, which they call traditions, of equal authority with
the scriptures. Secondly, that these holy Angels are the glorious guard of God,
and Doct. 2. That they are Gods guard.
do continually stand about the throne of his glory, and attend his holy will,
both in heaven and in earth.

Thirdly, that they are also by the Psalm. 34. Heb. 1. Doct. 3. that they are
the guard of Gods children.
merciful appointment of God, the guard of Gods children, and ministering
spirits sent out, as it were with a commission, for the good of the elect. All
these points, because they are plain in the scripture, and do less concern
our general scope, which is touching the Ministry, I pass them over.

Fourthly, here it is apparent, that as the Ange's are sent out for the help
and service Doct. That they have special charge and care of godly ministers.
of the elect: so especially of Gods ministers, as is plain in this place,
where the Prophet being afrighted, a holy Angel is ready to give him comfort:
and so over the whole course of the Prophets: and at this day, their
protection, and comfortable assistance, is no less present to the godly
Ministers of the new Testament, though not in such sensible signs, and such
visible manner, as in the old: for if they be ministering spirits, sent out
for the good of them which shall be saved, how much more for their good,
which shall be both saved themselves, and save others also.

A doctrine of great comfort, and Use to Gods ministers. I let them be content
with their calling though it be full of crosses and contempts for it is
honored of the Augels above others.
much good use to all Ministers: who first of all may here learn contentment
intheir calling: for howsoever no calling has more crosses, so none again
has more comfort: and howsoever none be more disgraced by euillmen, yet none
is more honored by the holy Angels: and howsoever in this world they above any
calling, are servants to all men, yet none has the service and attendance of
Angels so much as they: for though we have them not to help us to do the
outward actions of our ministry with us, or for us, (as some popish Doctors
teach, that in their Mass, A men is not said to one collect, because the
Angels say A men to it) yet doubtless they are present always, as at all holy
exercises and lawful actions, so especially at the public service of God,
performed by the Ministers: and beside that, they are witnesses thereto, and of
the pains, and diligence, and faithfulness of a good Minister, they also do
Minister unto them oftentimes, bodily strength, and assistance, and many
comforts: in their troublesome travels, which they know not how by any natural
means they come unto them. And as this Doctrine does thus yield them 2 Ergo,
Let them have courage, for though men be against them, Angels are with them.
contentment against the contempt, so also courage against the danger of this
calling. For what though thou have mighty men of this world against thee, when
thou have angels for thee? and what though thou fightest against principalities
and powers, when thou have Cherubins, and Seraphims on thy side? Godly
Ministers have many enemies, but if by the eye of faith, they can see as well
who are with them, as with the eye of reason who are against them, they will
confess with Elisha, there are more with us, then against us. The stories of
all ages do affirm, and the comfortable experience of these days of ours
does verify the truth hereof. Ministers that live in places very profane, or
very popish, it is admirable to see how many dangers they have escaped, and
plottes they have avoided, which by their enemies, (or rather the enemies of
their Doctrine) have bone laid for their lives: which their deliverance, and
many other comforts in their Ministries, whence are they but from Gods
protection, by the ministry of his 2 Questions
Angels. 1. Ergo, Whence is it that Angels attend ministers more then other
men. Ans. 2. reasons.


Before we leave this point, two questions may be asked, not amiss briefly to
be resolved.

First if any ask, whence comes it that Angels perform more service to good
Mlnisters then to other men: I answer, the reason is partly from God, 1 From
God' he will have it so, because they work his work more then other callings.
partly from the Angels: first God has a principal care of them above other
men, because they work his work above all other callings: for their labors
immediately concern the good of men's souls: whereas others do first concern
the body, and consequently the soul: therefore, whereas he has given his
Angels charge over all his elect, to keep them Psalm. 91. 11. 12.
in all their good ways, they have a special charge doubtless over al godly
and faithful Ministers, whose ways are Gods in a special manner.

Again, Angels themselves as they 2 From the Angels themselves.
willingly perform any service to the Church, or to any part thereof, so most
willingly of all are they employed for the good of godly Ministers, and that
for two causes.

First, because they are their fellow laborers, both for that yt Angels and
good Because they are fellowlabourers. 1 Cor. 4. 2. Heb. 1. 1^* Mal. 27. Reave.
2. and. 3, Chap.
Ministers are both called Gods ambassadors, and Gods own servants or officers,
in a more peculiar manner then any other calling: and for that their service is
so like, that their names are common, one to the other. Angels being called
Ministers, and Ministers Angels, as though they were almost all one.

Secondly, because the Ministers duty is, to convert and save souls, being a
Because they convert souls, which delights the Angels above any in this
world. Heb. 1. 14. Luke 15. 10.
work which (next to the glorifying of God, and doings his will) the Angels do
take most delight in above any other: for if they be sent out for the good of
them which shall be saved, how much more willingly for their good, by whom they
are saved, which shall be saved? and if the Angels rejoice at the conversion of
a sinner* surely they much love him, and desire to do him good, by whom the
sinner is converted: and in these respects, that Angels and Ministers have the
same names: and are both employed in the same great work; namely, doing good
to the elect.

Therefore is it, that the Angel calls himself S. John the Evangelists fellow
in the Revelation: If then they be fellows, Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 9.
eue^ fellow-seruants, and fellow-laborers, in a more special manner then any
other, what marvel though the angels be most willingly employed, in doing any
service of help or comfort to godly Ministers.

In the second place, If any ask, if it be so, then what duties are Ministers
to perform to angels, for this their so 2. Question: what duties then are good
Ministers to perform to Angels. Not worship them so as the Papists do.
careful service, and especial attendance upon them, above other men?

A Papast would answer; Ministers must therefore worship them, and keep
their fasting, and Holy Days, and say their service, and pray unto them, as to
their keepers and Mediators. But alas, cannot the Kings Messenger or Officer be
honored, unless he be set upon the Kings throne? will nothing serve him, but
the Crown and Scepter? so cannot Angels be honored, unless they be made
Gods, or Saviors, or mediators? But I answer therefore, we dare not go so
far, least we remember the servant so much, that we forget the master: but
rather we answer thus: seeing angels are thus serviceable to Gods ministers,
As all men should therefore honor that calling.
it should first of all, teach al men to honor that calling, with all due
reverence: For they cannot but please the angels, in honoring good Ministers,
whom they esteem their fellows. 1. So Ministers should labor to be faithful
in their calling.


Secondly, it should teach all Ministers, not to content themselves with the
name and title, but to labor to be good and faithful. For so doing, they are
fellows to the Angels, and it is a disgrace to the Angels, when those that are
their fellows are unfaithful.

And it should further teach them, 2. To adorn it with a holy life.
to adorn their Calling with a holy life, for as sin is that, that grieves
the angels, and drives them away, so it is grace and holiness, which makes
them delight in the fellowship of men.

And it may also encourage any man, 3. To be painful in their calling.
to take pains in that holy Calling, wherein he is sure to have Gods angels,
in a special manner to attend him, to assist him, to protect him, and to be
a witness of his faithfulness: and who would not work cheerfully in that
labor, wherein he has the Angels to be in a sort fellow-workers with him?

To do these three duties, is to honor good angels: and that Minister Thus to
do, is to honor them.
that conscionably performs them, the angels will take themselves
sufficiently honored of that man.

And if beside this honor, we would And if a Minister would rejoice the^, let
him labor seriously, so to preach as he may win souls.
rejoice Gods angels, and minister matter of joy unto them, then in the fourth
place, let all Ministers propounde to themselves above al things, the
conversion of souls, rather then their own praise, or living, or pleasing of
men, and so endeavor it both in teaching, and all their other courses, that the
angels may see it, and be witness of it: for if they rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, (as Christ says they do, then those men make them
oftest rejoice, which do most seriously aim at the conversion of sinners.

And thus we see, both the service of angels to Gods Ministers, and the duties
they are to perform to them in that regard. The due consideration of this
point, may raise the world to a better conceit of this Calling, and persuade
fathers to dedicate their sons to it, and stir up young students to
consecrate themseluest hereto, and turn their studies to that end: for no man
in no calling has so special attendance, and assistance of Gods angels, as
godly Ministers have: At least, if it work not this in the world, yet it may
yield comfort and contentment to all faithful Ministers in their painful
calling.

But let us see how the angel performed his service to the Prophet: not
unwillingly, not lingeringly, but speedily: so says the Text.

He flewe.

Which is not so to be understood, 3. Circumstance, the manner: He flewe.
as though the angels had wings: for they have no corporal nor sensible
bodies, but spiritual and insensible substances, the actions whereof are
performed with such nimblenesse and agilitie, as That is readily, speedily,
willingly.
can not fall within the compass of outward sense. But the Phrase is used for
our capacities, to show how readily and speedily the angel went about to
minister comfort to the Prophet. For as nothing moves so quickly to our sense,
as does the creature that flies: and as we say, that man does fly about his
business, which does it quickly and diligently: so here the holy Ghost sets
down the willingness and quickness of the angel, to comfort this holy
Prophet, and to do the will of God. Where we learn;

First, what excellent servants of God Doct. 1. So what excellent servants of
God, Angels are.
the holy angels be, which so readily, willingly, and speedily execute the
will of their Lord. This must teach all gods servants to do the like, and to
imitate the^ in this excellent obedience: And the rather, because we pray
daily to God; Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. In earth of us, as
it is in heaven The fourth petition.
of the holy angels: But they do it most cheerfully, and without all lingering,
therefore so ought we. Magistrates in their places, and Ministers in Use, we
must so serve Cod in our places.
theirs, and every man in his function, is to apply this to himself, and to
be stirred up thereby to a cheerfulness and quickness in their duties: for
therein they resemble the blessed angels, and then their deodes accord wity
their prayer: but contrariwise, he that does his duty unwillingly, and
vnreadly, is like the Devil; which indeed does Gods will, and yet against his
will. and surely unto such obedience there belongs no reward. But as God
loves a cheerful giver, so doubtless loves he a cheerful worker. 2. Corinthians. 9. 7. Doct. 2.


Secondly, we see here how great love angels bear unto Gods children,
especially unto godly Ministers, how willingly What good friends they are to
good men, especially to good Ministers.
they are employed to do them good. Willingness and readiness to do good to
any man, must needs come from love: and yet alas all men, even the best, and
all Ministers, even the best, are creatures far inferior to the angels.

Here Magistrates and Ministers, must 1. Use. Ergo, superiors love their
inferiors, and contemn them not.
learn to be far from contempt of their inferiors: and to do their duties
of ruling and teaching carefully, though the people be far their infriors:
it is the nature of love, to make any man do service most willingly, to him
that he loves, though he be far meaner then himself.

If therefore Princes love their subjects, they will not spare any care, cost,
And show it by doing them good.
nor pains, nay they will rejoice to do them good, and they will labor to
be like the angels, who are far greater then men, as they are then their
subjects.

And if Ministers love their people, they will forget their own dignity,
which oft-times they might stand upon, and will make themselves even servants
to all, that they may win some.

And seeing angels do fly so fast to 2. Use. Ergo, Ministers must.
give help and comfort to good Ministers: this must teach them further. 1. Corinthians. 9. 19. 1. Be faithful.


First, every one to labor to be a good Minister, for then are they sure of
the love of angels, and then most willingly do the angels any service to them.
Again, let it teach them to fly as fast to the discharge of their duties to
Gods 2. Painful.
Church, as the angels fly to do them service, so shall God angels think
their diligence and careful service well bestowed upon them.

Lastly, this diligence of the angels, and their willingness, proceeding from
love, must stir up al Christians, to perform all duties of godliness to
God, 3. Use. Ergo, al men serve God cheerfully: If we be like Angels, therein
we shall even be like them in glory.
and of love unto his Church, with alacrity and cheerfulness. So do Gods
angels; we look to be like the angels in glory, in the world to come: then be
like the angels in diligence, love and faithfulness in this world. The Wise man
says, He that is slothful in his business is good for nothing: but the
diligent man shall stand Pro. 22 29.
before the King. And surely, he that is willing and diligent in the duties of
Christianity, shall stand before the King of kings in heaven. And let this
suffice for the Angels service, and his diligence in his service. Now let us
see what instrument the Angel used.

A coal from the Altar.

The fourth Circumstance of this 4. Circumstance: the Instrument a Coal of
fire.
consolation, is the Instrument which it pleased God, the angel should use to
minister comfort to the Prophet, a strange instrument for so great a work: A
strange and wonderful means.
A coal of fire. Here let humane reason hide it self, and wordly wisdom be
confounded, to see the wonderful works of the Lord: God could have healed the
Prophets infirmities, and given him comfort against his fear and courage in
his calling, without means, but he will And which seems contrary to reason.
use means: and what? a weak means: nay, a means that seems contrary: A
coal of fire must touch his lips: that which in all reason would have made
him speak worse, by Gods appointment and the power of his word, shall make him
speak better. Out of which practice of God, we learn many points.

First, see how GOD magnifieth Doct. r. see God commends the use of means.
means: he can work without them, and so he did in the Creation, giving
light to the world, diverse days before there was Sun: but since the order
of Genesis 1. from 4. to 17.
nature was established, he generally uses means, not only in his ordinary,
but even in his miraculous actions: and Seeing himself always uses them.
though he use not always the ordinary and direct means: yet means he
generally uses, though they seem contrary: as here in this place; and the
same will be found true in almost all the miracles, both of the Old and New
Testament.

This therefore commends unto all Use Ergo, we are to use the means appointed
in all our purposes.
men, the use of such good means, as Gods providence has ordained of any
duties, or effecting of any thing, that does belong unto us to do: and not to
depend upon immediate helps from Heaven, as many fond and fantastical men
do, who are therefore oftentimes justly forsaken of God, and left destitute of
all help; and so exposed to shame and reproach.

Secondly, see here the mighty power of Gods ordinance, how it appears Doct
2. see how Gods power does show it self in weakness.
in weakness: such are all his great works. In the Creation, he brought
light out of darkness. In our Redemption, he brought us life out of death. In
our conuersions, he works upon us by his word, and by it he draws us to him,
which in all reason would drive us from him: and by it confounds the wisdom of
the world, which is stark foolishness to the wisdom of the world.

And so here, he cleanses the Prophet by a Coal of fire: which would rather
defile him, and seasoneth his mouth with it, which in reason should have burned
him: so great, so admirable, and so powerful are the ordinances of God, though
they seem so contrary, or so weak in themselves, or in their means.

Let this teach all men not to contemn the Sacraments, though the outward Use.
Ergo, God can work by his word, and sacraments, and man's Ministry, though
never so base.
Elements, Bread, Wine, and Water, be weak and common, and dead creatures in
themselves: nor the Ministry of the Word, though it be exercised by a weak
man, mortal and miserable as others are: for that God, which can season the
Prophets mouth, and cleanse his heart by a coal of fire, no marvel though he
work upon the consciences of men, by his word and Sacraments.

And again, when we see Grace and Holiness conveyed into men's hearts by the
Word and Sacraments; let us learn, not to ascribe it to the dignity, either
of the Minister, or the Elements, but to the supreme power of the mighty God,
who can purge the Prophet, by a coal from the altar.

Neither is it altogether without Mystery, Doct. 2. The ap^ teacher must have
a fiery tongue.
that God here sanctifies the prophet, by touching his lips with a fiery
coal: for it signifies, that the apt and sufficient teacher, must have a
fiery tongue, and to that same purpose, the holy Ghost came down upon the
Apostles in fiery toongs, and it may be that the one is a tipe of the other.
Certain it is, that they Acts 2. That is a powerful tongue, to reprove and
burn up sin.
both teach us thus much, that all true and able Ministers, must pray and
endeavor to have a tongue full of power and force, even like fire, to eat up
the sins and corruptions of the world. For though it be a worthy gift of God
to speak mildly, and moderately, so that his speech shall fall like deawe upon
the grass: yet it is the firerie tongue that beats down sin, and works
sound grace in the heart: It may be there are some, which need the fiery
tongue.

This shows apparently, that those Ministers never had their lips touched with
a coal from Gods altar: that is, their souls with a coal from Gods altar:
that is, their Ergo, such Ministe^s are fauitie, who reprove not sin.
consciences never touched, nor their souls seasoned with the sanctifying
grace of Gods spirit, which sit still and see great and grievous stains in a
Church, and corruptions in a State, and can be content never to reprove them,
as though Ministers were perswaders only, and not reprouers.

But when this comes to be wayed in the balance of a good conscience, it will
be found, that not the pleasing tongue, but the fiery tongue, is the
principal grace of a good Minister.

But to go further: whence came this Coal? Whence came this Coal? from the
Alter; which fire came from heaven.


Taken from the Altar.

This coal of fire was taken by the angel from the altar of God, where was a
fire which never went out, and this fire was that, that came from heaven: sent
down by God at the dedication of the Temple by Solomon. And this fire kindled
by God never went out: for no man could kindle the like, but all other was
counted strange fire; As Nadab and Abihu, tried in woeful experience, when they
would needs offer with in.

Now the Prophet must be cleansed with the fire which came from Heaven: Leuit.
10. 1. 2.
teaching us, that the Minister must Doct. The fire and zeal of the Minister
must come from Gods spirit.
have his fiery tongue from the holy Ghost. As the Apostles were said to be
baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire: A fiery tongue, is a special
ornament of a Minister, but that fire must come from heaven: that is, his zeal
must be a godly Acts. 1. 5. Math. 3. 11.
and heavenly zeal; but he that has a railing, lying, a slanderous, a
malicious, or a contentious tongue, he has a Not from carnal affections.
fiery tongue indeed. But this is kindled of the sire of hell, as S. James
says; The unbridled tongue is a world of wickedness, James 3. 6
and defiles the whole body, sets on fire the whole course of nature, and
is set on fire in hell.

So then, a spiteful and malicious tongue we see, is a fiery tongue, but For
that is from hell, not from heaven.
that fire is taken from hell, and not from Gods altar.

And he that stands up to preach with this tongue, God will never suffer any
great work to be done by him in his Church, though his tongue be never so
fiery, and his speech never so powerful.

As therefore Ministers must abhor the flattering and pleasing tongue, and
must have a fiery tongue: so on the other side, this fire must be from Gods
altar: that is, the fire of their zeal must be kindled by Gods spirit, and
not by the spirit of discord and dissension. Ambitious humors, turbulent and
proud humors, new opinions, private quarrels, all these, nor none of these,
are for the pulpit.

These may make a man fiery tongued, but this fire, was never taken from Gods
altar, as the Prophets was: this fiery tongue never came from heaven, as the
Apostles did. It follows.

And touched my lips.

This fifth and last circumstance, is the Application of the remedy. The coal
which is the medicine, is applied by Circumstance, the Application of the
remedy to his lips which were polluted.
this Angel to his lips, that is, to that part which was polluted: and as he
formerly complained of the pollution of his lips, so the medicine is applied to
his lips: Here the Angel, which in this case is made GODS minister, does
teach all Gods Ministers, a great point of wisdom, Doct Ergo, ministers must
apply their doctrine fitly.
in heavenly Divinity, namely, to apply their Doctrine to their audience, in
such manner, as the circumstances of place, times, or persons do require: some
Ministers come to an ignorant and vnhumbled people, and teach them the Gospel,
which never knew the law: here the fiery coal is used, but the lips are not
touched, that is, good doctrine taught, but not well applied: for that the law
should first be laid to their consciences, others beat all upon the Law, when
it may be their hearers are a people sufficiently cast down, and have more
need to be raised up with the sweet comforts of the Gospel: others use to lay
open the nakedness of the Court in the country, and to reprove the faults of
Princes and great magistrates before the common people, who have more need of
the Catechism: others bring the Catechism or points of ordinary instruction
into the Court, where the duties of Kings and counselors should be taught in
all plainness and sincerity: others bring their new opinions or controuersall
points unto popular audiences, which indeed are fit for the schools: other
busy themselves about ceremonies, when the substance is in danger to be lost:
All these (have it may be) the Coal of fire, but it is misapplyed, and not
applied to the polluted lips. Let all ministers therefore learn this point of
wisdom of the Angel, to apply the medicines of their doctrine to the times,
persons, and places, which are infected, so shall they be sure not to take
pains in vain.

And thus much of the circumstances of his consolation.

It follows in the text.

Lo thy iniquity shall be taken away, and 2 Point, the ground of his
consolation: which is the forgiveness of his sins.
thy sins shall be purged.

After the Circumstances, follows the ground and matter of his consolation,
and that is the forgiveness of his sins; where first let us mark how it and
the instrument are annexed together: Lo Doct 1. Forgiveness and the means,
are annexed together.
says the Angel, this Coal ha^h touched tay lips, and thy Iniquities shall
be forgiven, and thy sins purged: as though he had been cleansed by the
Coal: where we may note, how greatly God magnifieth the means which himself
ordains, even true remission and salvation to the right and holy using of
them, though it come not from them, but from his own mercy, and power of his
ordinance. It is therefore no marvel though God sanctifies the child by the
Ministry of water in Baptism, and feed our souls Use. Ergo, Use the meaues,
with reverence and despise then not.
in the Lords Supper, by feeding our bodies with bread and wine: and no marvel
though the careless neglect of either of them, be damnation to him that
despises them: seeing they are Gods instruments, ordained by him to convey his
grace unto us: And yet for all this, we are to know, that remission or
salvation, is no more tied to the very elements, or the actions, then here the
Prophets forgiveness is to the Coal of fire.

But the maine point is, that for the Prophets consolation, the Angel tells
him his iniquities shall be taken away, and his sins purged, as thereby he
had said thy sins were the cause of thy fear, therefore that thy fear may be
taken away, thy sins shall be forgiven.

Where we learn, that as few comes by sin, so all true comfort comes from
Doct 2. Here comfort is from forgiveness of our sins.
the forgiveness of sins: this is that, that only pacifieth the conscience,
and satisfies the soul: when David had sinned against the Lord in his two
great True in David.
sins, and thereby provoked Gods wrath against him, and wounded his own
conscience, if the Prophet had told him he had made him King of 10 kingdoms
more, he had not so rejoiced his 2. Sam 11.
heart, as when he told him, after his repentance, thy sins are forgiven
thee, thou shall not dye: So when this Prophet was And in this Prophet.
extremely affrighted at Gods presence, because of some sins and negligences
in his calling it had been no comfort to his poor soul, to have been told,
thou shall have a more eloquent tongue, and a more powerful speech, thou shall
have better access to the Court and audience before the King: all these, and
all such like, would have been no better then guided poison unto him, being in
this case: but the happy answer that refreshes his weary soul more then all
the world, was this, Lo thy iniquities are forgiven and thy sins purged.

All faithful Ministers must here Use. Here is the true way to comfort
distressed consciences.
learn the true way of comforting troubled and distressed consciences, namely,
first to draw him unto a sight of some particular sins, then to summon him
into Gods presence, and there to arraigne him for those sins, until the view
of the foulness of his sins, and the glory of Gods justice, have
sufficiently humbled him, and then to labor to persuade his conscience upon
good grounds of the pardon of those sins by Christ Jesus, this is the way
that God used and devised, this is the sure way, that cannot fail.

Some think that all trouble of mind is nothing but melancholy and therefore
Physic and outward comforts will not serve. Psalm. 3. 3. 6. 7. Psalm. 32. 3. 4.
Psalm. 51 the whole Psalm
think nothing needs but Physic and outward comforts: but he that considers
in what case the Prophet here was, or David when he made the 6. the 32. or
the 51. Psalms, will be of another mind, and will find that nothing can
properly trouble the mind but sin: therefore as the wise Physician in his
cure first searches out the cause, and then endeavors to take it away: so the
good Physician of the soul, must first of all search into the cause of his
sickness, that is his sins, and must take them away: which if they do not,
then al their labor is lost: for all the company, music, recreation, wine,
diet, nay all worldly comforts and delights, if it were the advancement to a
kingdom, cannot so much comfort the distressed soul of a sinner, as this voice
of a minister spoken from God upon good grounds; Thy sins are forgiven thee.
Now to lay down what be those true and good grounds, whereupon a Minister
may This is done by the Author in his Cases of conscience.
safely and comfortably pronounce pardon of sins to a sinner, belongs properly
to another place.

In the next place; Let us here observe Doct. 5. True qualification of a
Minister, is to be humbled, and to repent.
how the Lord before he renewed the Prophets commission, or send him to preach to
the people, first humbles him for his sins, and then upon his repentance,
gives him pardon: teaching us, that no Minister is well qualified to the holy
duties of the Ministry, unless he have truly repented of his sins, and have
obtained pardon and mercy in the Messiah.

Ministers labor for qualifications, but the true Minister of God will labor
for this qualification above all other: for doubtless he shall pronounce most
powerfully the pardon of sins to others, to whose conscience God has
pronounced pardon of his own.

In the last place, let us observe how the Prophet being to be comforted before
Doct. 4. True Prophets and ministers shall have help and comfort in their
labors, else Angels shall to comfort them.
he go this new embassage, the Lord is so careful for him, that rather then
he be not comforted (if there be no man to do it), An Angel shall be sent to be
his comforter, and (if there be not another Prophet to do it) An Angel shall
pronounce unto him the pardon of his sins.

Let this be an encouragement for all Pastors and Ministers of Gods Church, to
labor painfully and faithfully in their places, for the goodness of the Lord
will never fail them, nor shall they want comfort, when ever they stand in
need thereof. Yea rather shall Angels from heaven be their helps and
comforters, then faithful Ministers shall be left destitute.

Hitherto of the second general points: namely, of the Prophets consolation.

The third and last general point is, the renouatiou of the Prophets
commission, Geoerall points, the renewing of his commission: which cositaineth 3
points.
in the eight, and part of the ninth verses, and it contains 3. parts, 1. A
question or inquiry made by God; When shall I send, and who shall go for us?

2 The answer of the Prophet: Here am I, send me.

3 The commission renewed unto him: The Lord said, Go and speak unto this
people.

The first part, is a question made by 1 Gods question.
God, by way of proclamation, wherein he enquireth who shall go preach unto
Whom shall I send.
this people.

Also, I heard the voice of the Lord saying, whom shall I send? and who shall
gae for us?

In which Proclamation, and inquiry Not as though God had none to se^d or knew
not whom.
of the Lord, we are not to imagine that the Lord, was either unprovided of
such as should execute his will, or knew not who were able, or who were
willing to go preach his word: For as the Apostle says, in the matter of
Election; 2. Tim. 2. 19.
The Lord knows whr are his: so much more in particular vocations. The Lord
knows who are his, and need not to ask whom shall I send, or who shall go?
But then it may be demanded, why the But to our conceits and for our sake, to
teach us many good doctrines.
Lord says so? I answer, not for his own sake, but for ours: whom hereby he
would instruct, in diverse points of holy doctrine.

First, hereby he would give us to understand, how hard a thing it is, to find
an able and godly Minister, for if Doct. ^. How hard to find a good Minister.
there were not a great scarcity of such men, the Lord needed not ask this
question. But some will object against this, that there are in many Christian
Ob. There are too many ministers, for some go up and down.
Churches so many Ministers, as they cannot all be maintained, but some go up
and down undisposed, and unprovided for. I answer, this is too true in all
ages: there were Wandering Ans. 1. Then it is a disorder in a Church.
Leuits in the Old Testament, which went up and down and offered their
service, and served for 10. shekels of silver, and a suit of apparel, and
meat and drink: but this calamity was upon the Judges. 19. 18. and 17. 8. 6.
Church of the Jews, (never but then,) when there was no King in Israel, and
every one did that which was good in his own eyes. If therefore there be any
in our Church, and in christian nations, which go up and down, and offer
their service at such rates, it is much more miserable, Judge. 17. 6.
seeing now there are kings in Israel: and therefore it is no reason that
every man rob the Church, as it shall please his covetous mind. But ceasing to
enquire whether this be so or no: and if it be so, leaving the reformation
thereof to those Churches and States Ans. 2. He seek not for any.
whom it may concern: I answer, for the matter in hand, that this may be so,
and yet the Lord may complain as here he does; Whom shall I send? for the
Lord meane^h not such as bear the name of Leuits or Priests in the old, or
of Ministers in the new Testament (for there were always inow of them: who,
some for preferment sake, some for their ease, and some for a refuge how to
live; are willing to enter that function, and accordingly in that calling, seee
not the Lord, but themselves, and their own ends).

But here the Lord enquireth for But for good ministers.
such men, as first, purely do seek and undertake that function, therein to
honor God, and to gather his Church, and then in all their labors and
ministerial duties, truly and faithfully endeavor to the same ends; Preaching
Gods word, and as Gods word, diligently reproving, exhorting, and admonishing,
and shining before their people in good works: for such men, it is no marvel
though the Lord light a Candle at No one day, and make open Proclamation Job.
33. 23. 2. Corinthians. 2. 16.
to seek for them, saying; Whom shall I send? for, such a man is as Job says,
One of a thousand: for some wat ability to discharge their duties, as S. Paul
says, Who are sufficient for those things? And some want willingness to
undertake the labor, as God here complains; Who shall go for us? Now to
make use of this doctrine to our Church.

It were to be wished, that in these days, and for our christian Churches, the
Lord Good ministers scarce, even in these days.
had not as great cause to cry out in the want of able, faithful, and godly
Ministers, Whom shall I send, and who shall go for us? But alas, this want is
too apparent, and this blemish is too notorious, and it is a work worthy the
labor of kings and princes to reform it: and is a kings evil; not to be
healed but by the power of a King: for as long as there are so few and mean
preferments for painful Ministers, there will never want abundance of such
Ministers as do want either conscience or ability to discharge their duties.

In the mean time, till God put into Use. 1. To Ministers. 1 They in the
universities frame themselves to the ministry.
the hearts of Parliaments, and Princes, to lock to this great and needful
work; let us Ministers learn our duties: and first, we who are in the
Universities, are here admonished to look to our selves. By Gods blessing we
are many, and daily grow more and more: let us therefore so furnish our
selves, as that when God or his Church shall say, Who shall go for us, and
whom shall I send? then he may find many amongst us, who^ he may send to that
great work of the Minisierie: and let us fear to be such, as thar God may
affirm of us, as in the days of Job, that he cannot find one of a thousand.

Secondly, all Ministers learn here, 2. Labor to be worthy Ministers.
not to content themselves with the name and title of Ministers, but labor for
the substantial ornaments thereof, nor to be willing to take the honor and
livings, and to refuse the burden and duties of the Ministry.

For else let them know, God has For God has use of them, but none of
vnco^scionable or idle Ministers.
no need of them: for had the Lord pleased or contented himself with such
kind of men, as seek to be Ministers for themselves, and not for his sake:
or being Ministers, do feed themselves, and not their flock: or Preach
themselves, and not Christ: then had he not needed to have made this
Proclamation, for Ages have yielded store of such. But contrariwise, he that
is painful and faithful in this function, let him know, that God and his
Church has 2. Use. To the Clergy of Rome. A shame to them, that being so
many, there are so few of them fit for God to send.
need of him.

Lastly, here the Romish Clergy are justly to be taxed, whose number is
infinite: but it is lamentable to see how few among them be such as the Lord
here seeks for. Their Orders of Regulars are exceeding many, beside all
their Secular Priests, and it is almost incredible, how many thousands there
be of Dominicans or Franciscans, or in some one of their orders: and yet
amongst the many millions of their Monks, there is scarce to be found one of
many, who for his learning and other gifts, is fit to be sent to the work of
God: nay, their ignorance was palpable and ridiculous to the world, until Most
of all their Priests and Monks are ignorant drones.
of late being by Luther, and others of our Church, made ashamed thereof, they
have labored (especially the Jesuits) to become learned. How foul a thing is
it that amongst so many, the Lord should have cause to complain; Whom shall
we send? The Jesuits indeed, The Jesuits have learning but no conscience: and
are rather Statesmen, then Divines.
many of them are learned, but for other qualities, they are fitter to be
plotters, and practisers in Statematters, Spies or Intelligencers, reconcilers,
seducers, and subuerters, then Ministers: and fitter to be instruments of
policy to evil kings, then Ministers of the Gospel unto God. But take away
them, and some few selected Monks (and those but few out of many thousands)
and then even for learning also God may cry, and call and proclaim in their
Monasteries; whom shall I send? And if it be a shame and misery to a Church to
want such as God may send, or to have but a few, then the Romish Church is
shameless, which shames not to have so many, and yet amongst them all, whom
God may send, almost none.

In the next place. By this inquiry, and question made by God, whom shall
Doct. 2. No man is to go until God send him.
I send, and who shall go for us? The Lord would teach us, that no man is to
undertake this function, unless God call and send him: therefore here are
condemned, the profane fancies of the Anabaptists, and all like them, who
think that any man upon a private motion, may step forth and undertake And
not to run upon private motions,
the duties of a Prophet, to preach and expound, etc. Oh, but say they, these
motions are from Gods spirit: surely they can say little for themselves, who
cannot say so much: but that cannot serve their turn: for if we say,
contrariwise nay, but they are from the devil, or at the least from your own
vanity and pride, how can they disprove it? Again, might not the Prophet have
alleged that with a better pretense and color then they? yet he stays till
God here call him: even so all good Ministers are to stay Gods calling.

If any ask, how he shall know when Ob, How shall I know when God calls me?
Ans. If Gods Church allow thy calling.
Gods calls him? I answer, God calls ordinarily by his Church, her voice is
his: therefore whenever the Church of God, says unto thee, thou shall be
sent, and ^^ou shall go for us, even then does the Lord call us out to this
holy function. Doct. 3. out of the repetition of holy 3. times. Here is no
sufficient proof of the Trinity, as some think.


Thirdly, let us observe how the Lord says: Who shall (I) send? and who shall
go for (us)? Some Interpreters gather out of this Chapter, an Argument for the
trinity of persons; as namely, out of the 3. Verse, where the Angels sing;
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God, etc. But it is not sound enough to overthrow our
stubborn enemies the Jews and therefore it seems those Divines are of a
sounder and wiser judgment: who seeing we have other places pregnant and
plain enough, therefore think it no good discretion to urge this or any such
place which may probably admit another Interpretation, least that the Jews
finding the weakness of the Argument, do judge al our proofs to be as weak,
and so take occasion to persist the rather in their blindness, by that which
we brought to have converted them. And as for that song of the angels in the
third Verse, where they ascribe holiness to For the repetition made by the
Angel, shows only how he cannot content himself in praising God.
the Lord 3. times: that their repetition signifies nothing else, but the
continual joy and delight which the holy Angels take in praising of God, who
cannot satisfy themselves in honoring his name: teaching us in their example,
never to be weary of praising God by prayers and holy hymns, and of honoring
him in our lives and callings.

But to prove out of the words; Holy, Holy, Holy, the three Persons in
Trinity, seems to be no fit nor sound collection. Rather in my opinion, we
But he may be proved a plurality of persons.
may safely collect and conclude out of these words (I and us) that there are
more persons in the Trinity then one: for first, God the Father, or the whole
Deity says: Whom shall I send? and then changing the number, he says: Who
shall go for v^? For howsoever God may employ in the word Us, that he that is
sent to preach, is sent as well for the good of the Church, as for his own
glory, yet can it not be denied, but that the plural number here, and else
where, ascribed to the Deity, must needs argue a certain plurality of
persons in that Deity: as in Genesis it is written, that God said, Let us make
man: and here, Who shall go for us? Genesis 1. 16.


Out of the evidence of which places, seeing the enemies of this Doctrine must
needs grant a plurality, namely, that there are more then one: then we shall
sufficiently prove out of other places, and by other argnments, that there are
three.

In the last place, let us mark what God says: Whom shall I send, and who
Doct. 4. Ministers are Gods servants, they go for God.
shall go for us? God sends a minister to preach and he goes for God. Then
behold here, what is the trade and profession of a minister, he is the
servant of God. So says God here, he goes for me: and so says the Apostle
of himself and al other good ministers, that they are Gods Laborers.

And in another place, the Angel of 1. Corinthians. 3. 9. Acts 27. 23.
God appeared, Whose I am, and whom I serve. But if any man think that either
God speaks too favorably of them, or S. Paul too partially of themselves,
then let the Devil himself be Confessed even by the devil himself. Acts 16.
16. 17. q. What place is it they hold? R. His Ambassadors. Job. 33. 23.
judge in this case, who plainly and freely confesses) though he did it not in
love to the truth or them). These men are the servants of the most high God,
which teach unto us the way of salvation. Let therefore either God be believed,
who is for them, or the devil who is against them. But what kind of servants
are they? what place or office have they? They are his Messengers or
Ambassadors, this is their profession, and their place.

Now then for the use hereof,

If they be Gods servants, then are they Use. 1. Then they must seek to please
God their master, not themselves.
not their own Masters, they have a Master, even God, whose they are, and
for whom, and from whom they come: they may not therefore please themselves,
nor serve their own pleasures, nor seek the satisfying of their own carnal
lusts, either in matter of pleasure, credit, or profit: if they do, then
will he call the^ to a heavy account, whose servants they are.

Again, if they be Gods servants, Use 2. then let them do their service
diligently, and expect their reward assuredly.
then let them do their service to God, and expect their reward from God: some
Ministers will expect the reward, and honor of Gods servants, but will do no
service: that beseemes not servants: let such men remember for whom they come,
even from that God, who as he can give reward, so he will expect service.

And as for such men as painfully do Though the world do not, yet God will,
for they are his Ambassadors.
their service, but are not regarded, nor rewarded of men as they deserve, let
them be content and continue in their faithfulness, for they are Gods
Ambassadors: and we know Ambassadors may have gifts given them, of those to
whom they are sent: but they expect their maintenance from the kings their own
Masters: So the maintenance which the world should give Ministers, is like
gifts given to Ambassadors: if it come, it is no more then they deserve. If it
come not, yet will faithful Ministers do their duty, and expect their
payment from their king and Master God, whose they are, and whom they serve.

Thirdly, if they be Gods Ambassadors, 3. Use. Let no man therefore wrong them
for God will not suffer his Ambassadors to be abused.
sent by him, and come from and for him, then let all such as either condemn,
or any way injury them, be assured, that as God is mighty and powerful, so he
will mightily revenge it.

There was never King so poor or weak, but thought himself strong enough to
revenge any wrong offered No king so poor that suffered it.
to his Ambassador. And shall God suffer so foul a wickedness to lie
unpunished? Nay, they and their posterities shall smart for it: let Ahab, and
Iezabel, 1. King. 22. 26. 27. 28. 34. etc.
and Julian, say it be not so: and all ages 2. King. 9. 33. etc. Act. 12. 1. 2.
and 23.
or stories, show the contrary if they can, that ever any contemner and abuser
of godly Ministers, escaped the visible vengeance of Gods revenging hands 4.
Use. Ergo, they must not be servants of men: that is, men pleasers: but his
that sent them.
on him or his.

Fourthly, seeing they are Gods Messengers and servants, they must not be the
servants of men, to please, or flatter, or satisfy humors, this is not for
them that are Gods servants: they therefore that will be slaves to the
persons, and pleasures, and humors of men, they forget that they are Gods
servants, and came for him: yea, they must not endeavor the pleasing of
themselves, nor the bringing of their own purposes to pass, but in every
motion, either made to them by others, or suggested from their own hearts,
they must forthwith call to mind, Who sent me hither, and for whom am I come?
Even from and for God: therefore they are to yield to nothing, nor aim at any
thing, but which may be both to the will, and for the glory of him that sent
them.

And if the great men of this world, Great men must not think to have Gods
servant at their command.
do think it wrong that any man should command their servant against their
will, or expect any service from them against their own honor: then let them
think it reason that Gods Ministers should not be commanded any thing
contrary to Gods will, or against his honor.

And further, if Ministers be Gods servants, then let them regard their
masters 5. Use. Ergo, they must for the glory of God their Master, both in
life and doctrine.
glory, and be ashamed to do any thing, either in their doctrine or lives,
which may dishonor him: that servant is unworthy of a good master, who seeks
not his masters credit in all his courses.

Lastly, if they be Gods ambassadors, 6. Use. Etgo, they must deliver Gods
embassage not their own, and as they received it.
then must they not deliver their own fancies, or inventions, but that message
they received: And as they received it, so must they deliver it. And if they do
their duties faithfully, this doctrine is comfortable to them, they may take
pains, with joy they have a master will reward them: they may speak freely,
(so it be with discretion) they have a master will make it good: they may stand
boldly in the face of their enemies, they have a master will defend them. And
every faithful Minister may say to himself, I will do my duty, and deliver
my Embassage. He whom I serve* and whose I am He who sent me and for whom I
come, will bear me out. And thus much of the inquiry which God makes, and the
manner of it.

Now let us see the answer which the Prophet makes, in these words. 2. Point:
The Prophets answer here am, I send me.


Then I said, Here am I: send me.

The Prophet after he was comforted by God, and had his sins forgiven, then
answers; Here am I, send me. First, mark here, what a great Doct. 1. He
whose sins are forgiven comes boldly to God: and to his duty.
change is wrought on the sudden: he who a little before, feared and shrunk
at the least appearance of Gods glory: now stands forth boldly, as soon as he
is called, and answers: Here am I, send me. So great a matter is it for a
minister to have his sins forgiven, and to feel the favor of God to his
soul and conscience. Here therefore we have an answer to two great
Questions, Use. 1. Here is the true way to peace of conscience, and quietness of
mind.
often moved in the world.

First, many would have quietness of mind, and peace of conscience, and
cannot attain unto it; If they ask how they might, to them I answer; Here is
the way, seek it not in wordly wealth, carnal pleasures, nor humane learning,
in company nor recreations: but seek it in the favor of God, and pardon of
thy sins, and thou shall not miss of it. Thus shall thou have comfort in thy
own conscience, courage before men, and boldness toward God.

Secondly, many Students in Divinity, would gladly be Ministers and do Use.
2. To students. 1. If they would be Ministers, repent and get pardon of their
sins.
much honor to the Calling: but they find a fear and shrinking in
themselves, and thereby an unwillingness to venture upon it. If they ask, how
they may amend this: I answer, or rather the example of his Prophet answers
for me); Let that man set himself in Gods presence, enter into himself,
search his conscience, find out his sins, confess and bewail them to God,
crave pardon in Christ's blood, and grace to leave them, and cease not till he
hear the voice of Gods spirit sounding in his conscience: Thy sins are
forgiven thee. Then when God shall ask whom shall I send, thou will answer
readily, and with joy, Here am I, send me.

And again, many are driven from 2. If they would be encouraged against the
contempts and wrongs of the world be assured of Gods favor in the Pardon of
thy sins.
this calling, to behold the contempt and reproach, and dangers which belong
unto it. But let those men mark here the phrase of this holy Prophet, when
God asked, Whom shall I send? He might have answered: Lord, I would go, but
such disgraces and discouragements do accompany this Function, as I desire to
be excused: but he casting aside all such conceits, answers peremptorily,
Here am I, send me. How came this to pass, for certainly the Prophet was as
sensible of these wrongs as any of us all, for he was nobly borne and brought
up, and was of the blood royal: surely, because he saw he was in Gods favor,
he had him and his Commission on his side, and he held this for a sure ground:
If God be on my side, who can be against me?

Therefore doubtless, those men who are driven back by these discouragements,
were never settled in assurance that their sins were forgiven: nor satisfied
sufficiently, that God is on the side of all good Ministers, and that their
Calling as it has his authority from God, so likewise, allowance, blessing,
assisstance, and defense of God above any other calling: for if they were, they
would scorn the scorn, and contemn the contempt of the profane world, and
with much courage and comfort set their hand to Gods Plough, and say with the
Prophet; Here I am, send me. Doct. 2. We mu^t not set others to the labor of
the Ministry, but our selves also.


Secondly, let us observe, how the Prophet when God asks the question, sends
him not to others, nor commends others to that service, as is to be thought he
might have done many in the Churches of the Jews, but offers himself, Here am
I.

It controlles the carnal courses of many amongst us in the Universities, who
think it sufficient to live there, and send out other men, and give
testimonies and Letters of commendations University men must not be always
sending out others, but must also send out themselves.
to other men, but themselves stir not, when question is made; Who shall go
to such a place? or who shall be sent to such a parish? they say not, Here am
I, but either it is too little a living, or too great a charge, or ill seated,
or some fault it has, that they will not be sent to it: but will answer God
and his Church, there is such a man, and give him Letters of testimony, or
commendation, and so all is well: but for themslues, they live too sweet and
easy lives, willingly to undertake the contempt and burden of the Ministry.

Let such men therefore learn, when God and his Church give them a calling, to
answer with the Prophet: Here am I, send me.

And let all such as are Students of And Students must not defer too long,
but haste^ to the Ministry.
Divinity in the Universities, mark here the Prophets answer, not, I will
be ready, but here I am: why takes he no longer time? because he was now
sufficiently qualified. Where let them learn, not to linger and lie rotting
too long in their specidatiue courses: but when they are competently furnished
with learning, and other qualities befitting that calling: let them show
themselves willing and ready to yield their service to the Church, when they
shall be called. For as an Apple may as well For some too long, as some go too
soon.
hang too long on the tree, as be pulled too soon, and both make it unfit for
use: so many men as well stay too long, as go out too soon: and both ways
are made unprofitable, or at least less profitable in the Church.

And to conclude this second point; It is not unworthy to be noted, that the
Prophet says not, Here I am: and I Doct. 3. The Prophet will not go till he be
sent.
run on my own head, but, Send me.

He wills the Lord to send him: then where are they who dare brag of their
private motions, and will run when they are not sent?

The Prophet might have said: Oh, And that not by private motion only, but in
express words.
now I feel a motion from the Spirit, therefore I will go and preach: but he
stays til he be sent in express terms: Let no man therefore presume to
press into this function, till he be fully resolved in his conscience, that
God and his Church has said unto him, Go.

And though a man be never so well qualified with all manner of sufficiency, Men
therefore are to offer themselves, but not to go till they be sent.
yet let him sit still and stay Gods leisure, and let him say, Here I am, send
me: and so rest contented until he be sent. If any man say it is unfit that
a man should say so of himself, I answer, let him not say so in words, but in
deeds: let him therefore make proof of himself, and give the Church trial of
his gifts. Upon which experience of his gifts, if he be found sufficient, that
practice of his is all one, and much more then if he had said, Here I am,
send me.

Thus we see the Prophet would not stir til he were sent, and therefore in
the next word he is bid to go.

And he said, Go and speak unto this people.

Here is the third and last point, 3 The Commission received.
Namely, the essential words of his Commission. Wherein, (after God had sought
for one to go, and the Prophet had presented himself, and offered his
service) God both gives him leave to go, and further does furnish him with
authority, both to go and speak. Doct ^. No man is to preach without a
Commission.


Wherein the principal point is, that the authority of the Prophets calling,
is (...) from God him^else, in plain and e^ide at words; Go and speak: and
Matthew. 28. 19. Acts 9. 6. etc.
till then the Prophet went not. So in the new Testament, the Apostles went not
into the world to preach, till they had their Commission: Go and teach all
Nations* And after them Saint Paul (...) hot till it was said unto him, Ar^se
and go.

In all which is discovered and condemned the pride and presumption of those
who dare run on their own heads, and will not stay till the Lord say unto them:
Go, and speak. These men are bolder, then either the extraordinary Prophets
of the old Testament, or the Apostles, which are the extraordinary This is so,
for these causes.
Ministers of the new: who always had their warrant with the when they went.
And if any man ask why is it necessary they should have so; I answer, the
reasons are many.

First, all Prophets and Ministers, are Gods Deputies and Commissioners, it
Rea. 1. Commissioners have no power but from the King.
is therefore reason that they have authority from their Lord and Master.

Secondly, their words nor deeds bear no credit, nor have any power in them,
unless they be spoken by virtue Real. 2 Else what they do, is without virtue
or bles^ing. Rea^^^^l^e their persons have no protection.
of a Commission: nor have their labors any blessing, unless God give it.

Thirdly, these persons have no protection, nor safety* unless they be Gods
Ambassadors: and how are they so, unless they be called and sent by God, and
have authority given of God? For these causes, no man is to thrust himself
into the Ministry, without a calling from God, and therefore no marvel,
though those men who will be Chusers, and Callers of themselves, and run when
they are not sent, be in their persons, subject to all dangers: because they
are out of Gods protection, and their labors without profit, because no
blessing, nor promise of God was given unto them: for GOD may justly say unto
them: Let him that sent you, protect your persons: let him that sent you,
bless your labors.

But it will then be demanded, how may I know if God bid me go? for God Ob.
how may I know if God bid me go?
speaks not now from heaven as in old time, and as to this Prophet: I answer,
It is true, we are to look for no such visiions, nor apparitions from heaven,
for ordinarily Ans. we must not expect Gods voice from heaven.
there are none such, and the Popish Church does but deceive themselves, and
cozen the world, who tell us of so many apparitions that happen to their Monks
and Friars: for now ordinarily, God speaks in another manner to his Church:
for in General duties God speaks to us out of his word and holy Scriptures,
and in particular But he speaks to man two ways, generally in his word.
and personal duties, (where the word in plain terms serves not) he
speaks to a man by his own conscience, and by the voice of his Church.

Out of his word, God shows thee the dignity and excellency of this
calling, 1. Corinthians. 4. 1. Job. 33. 23. Acts. 16. 17. Pro. 29. 18.
to be a Minister of the word: Namely, they are his Messengers and Ambassadors,
etc. that so he may win them to love and affect it. And again, the
necessicitie of it, that it teaches the way to salvation, that without it
ordinarily Gods Church is not gathered, nor men's souls saved, that this may
stir thee 2. Particularly God speaks. 1. by the voice of his conscience for
his inclination. 2. By the voice of ^is Church for thy gifts.
up to undertake the burden: this is general. But now particularly for thy
self, would thou know whether GOD would have thee to go or no, then thou
must ask thy own conscience, and ask the Church, for if thou be heartily
willing, and be fully and worthity qualified, then God bids thee go. Now thy
conscience must judge of thy willingness, and the Church of thy ability: and
as thou mai^^ not trust other men, to judge of thy inclination or affection, so
thou may not trust thy own judgment, to judge of thy worthiness or
sufficience. If therefore thy own conscience tell thee upon true examination,
that thou do not love and affect this calling above any other, then God
sends thee not: and if thou enter with such a testimony, not God, but some
worldly and sinister respect does send thee, and put thee forward: for though
thou do desire it, yet if the Church of God give not allowance of thy
sufficie^cie, God does not send thee: But if contrariwise, thy conscience do
truly testify unto thee, that thou desire to do service to God and his
Church, in this calling above any other: And if withal, upon signification
hereof to the Church, and upon trial made of thy gifts and learning, the Church
(that is, maly Where these 2. voices call a man, there God bids him go.
learned, wise, and godly, and such as the Church has publicly appointed for
that purpose) do approve of that thy desire, and of thy sufficiency to do
God service in his Ministry, and thereupon by a public Calling, bid thee
go, then assuredly God himself has bid thee go. And it is as effectual a
calling, as if thou heardst the voice of God from heaven: for as in Repentance,
If thy conscience tell thee thou have truly repented, and if thou can make
that known to the Church by so good evidence, as thereupon a Minister of God
pronounces the pardon of thy sins unto thee: If thou rest herein, and know
it to be as effectual, as if God from heaven had told thee thy sins are
pardoned. So is it here, if thou have the testimony, first of thy conscience,
and then of the Church, thou art to rest therein, as in the voice of God: Use.
1. Against the^ that run, cry they be sent.
And this is the calling that we are to look for in these days.

By which doctrine, as those are justly condemned of foul presumption, who
dare run upon private motions, and carnal respects, and are justly left 2.
Against such as are called by both voices and yet will not go.
without blessing or protection: so they on the other side, do offer great
wrong to God and to his Church, who when they cannot deny, but they affest the
Ministry above any calling, and have approbation of their gifts from the
Church of God, yet will not believe the Testimony of the Church herein, but
their own private Judgments, which in this case is no way a competent Judge,
either for, or against. Let such men know, that they oppose themselves even
against God himself: it being certain, that where the inward calling of the
conscience, and the outward calling of the Church do concur, there God
himselse calls and bids that man, Go, and speak.

Now then (to draw to an end) let us observe in the last place, with what
Doct 2. See the authority of a true, mioister immediate from God himself
authority a Minister of God comes unto us, and executes his Function: even
with an immediate authority and Commission from God: whereby he is bid, Go,
and speak. If it be so, let it persuade the world, to fear to do any wrong,
either to that calling, or to those persons who come with so fair a commission
from Use. 1. Ergo, Let no man wrong them
from God himself. But if it do not persuade the profane world, at Use. 2.
Ergo, Let Ministers be comforted in doing their duty, for if God send them, he
will never fail them.
least let this be a comfort and encouragement to all true Ministers, for if
God bid them go, he will go with them himself: If he send them; he will
not forsake them, but assist them, and bless them, and open their mouths, and
enlarge their hearts, and harden their foreheads, and give power unto their
words to conuer this children, and to confound and astonish the hearts of his
enemies. If he send them, he will defend and protect them, so that one hair of
their heads shall not fall to the earth, without his providence. If he send
them, he will provide for them, and sufficiently reward them: and will honor
them in the hearts of his own people, and magnify them in the faces of their
enemies. And lastly, if he send them, he will pay them their wages, even an
eternal weight of comfort here, and of glory in heaven. And as they are here
bid go, so once they shul be bid Come: and that not only with the general
Math. 25. 34 Math. 25, 21
call of all the Elect; Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you. But even with that particular Call, which especially belongs
to them that are faithful in this service: Come thou good and faithful
servant, enter into thy Masters joy.

Psalm, 118. 16. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

W. P.


Daniel 12. 3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever.

W. C.


1. Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so think of us as of the ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God.


The second time newly perused and published with Marginall notes. Briefly
laying down the matter and method.

FINIS.

