THE HEAVENLY ADVOCATE: OR A short direction for the speedy understanding of
the New Testament, of the years and days of Christ's age here on Earth, times
and places of his Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension: Together with a
brief Catechism, for the instruction of Christian Families. And also a
Spiritual Combat, between man's frailty and faith, in time of sickness.

1. JOHN 2. VERSE 1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are
to be sold at his shop, near Fleet Conduit. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir James Fullerton Knight, Gentleman of His HIGHNESS
Bedchamber, etc.
THE due regard which good men have of you, for the special gifts with which
it has pleased God to grace you, the long experience of your Christian favor;
your willingness to read, and wisdom to judge and discern of all that you
read: has made me bold to offer unto your Worship, this testimony of my
unfeigned thankfulness, and to crave your favorable patronage for the same.
For I ever esteemed an unprofitable life, to be a kind of uncomfortable
death. For the matter and manner, I recommend it to the censure of the
conscionable and judicious Readers; which will be so much the more beneuolent,
because it shelters it self under your name. And thus beseeching Almighty
God, to bless your faithful endeavors in that high calling, and daily more
and more to multiply his gracious mercies upon your self, and your godly and
virtuous Lady, I humbly take my leave,

Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded. Barthol Robertson,
Minister of Gods Word.

THE HEAVENLY ADVOCATE.
In a short direction, for the speedy understanding of the New Testament, of
the years and days of Christ's age here on earth, times, places of his
Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension: In Augustus Caesar's reign, 42.
who reigned 57. and in Herod, 34. who reigned 37. Christ was borne.

CHAP. 1. Of the nativity of John the Baptist, and Christ's birth and actions,
until he is about 30. years.
THE year of the World, 4183. when Elizabeth, spouse to Zacherie, the father
of John the Baptist was with child (six months gone) Gabriel was sent to Mary
unto Galile to Nazereth to intunate her conception, Luke 1. 26 and an Angel to
Joseph, Matthew. 1. 20. Marie with Christ in her womb went into the hill Country
in have, unto a City of Judah to Zacharies his house, Lu. 1. 39. Marie went up
again being great with child, from Galile out of the City of Nazareth unto
Judea, with Joseph unto Bethleem, where Christ was borne, Luke 2. 4. 7. and
laid in a Manger.

The first day after his birth, the Shepherds came at the voice of the Angel
to Iosoph and Mary, Luke 2. 11. and to the babe v. 16. who were the first
publishers, v. 17.

After this time, the Wisemen came from the East to worship him, Matthew. 2. 1.

The 8. day Christ was circumcised. Lu. 2. 21.

The 33. day was the purification of Marie, and then Jesus was carried to the
Temple of Jerusalem, to be presented before the Lord, Luke 2. 22. Simion
received him in his arms, Luke 2. 28. and Anna likewise (who had lived seven
years with her husband from her virginity, and had been widow fourscore and
four years) gave thanks for him, Luke 2. 36. 37. 38.

The 2. year Christ was carried into Egypt, and tarried there two years,
Matthew. 2. 13.

The 6. year Christ came out of Egypt, and fearing for Archelaus to go to
Judea, turned aside into the parts of Galile, and dwelt in Nazareth, Matthew. 2.
23.

The 12. year he to past Jerusalem with Joseph and Mary, at the feast of the
Passover, and disputed with the doctors: from thence he returned down with
them to Nazareth, and was subject unto them, and he increased in wisdom and
stature, and in favor with God and man, Luke 2. 42. 52.

In the 15. year of Tiberius, Luke 2. 23. Pontius Pilate his 4. year being
Lieutenant of Judea, Herod Tetrach of Galile, his brother Philip Tetrach of
Itrurea, and Trachonites, Lizanias Tetrach of Abilene, Christ came from Galile,
Matthew. 3. 13. and was baptized by John in Jordan, Mar. 9. 1. being about 30
years of age.

CHAP. 11.
Of Christ's first years, public function in preaching and working of miracles,
being the 31. of his age.

FRom Jordan he returned, and was immediately led into the wilderness, where
he was with the wild beasts, Mark 1. 13.

John having disputed with the Pharisees at Bethabora, next the day pointed at
Jesus coming to him: saying, Behold the Lamb of God, Io. 1. 29.

The next day John stood again, and two of his Disciples and said, Behold the
Lamb. v. 35. 36.

The same day, about the tenth hour, Andrew and Peter followed him, John 1. 39.

Christ on the morrow going to Galile, found Philip, v. 43.

The third day after, he came to Cana in Galile, and wrought the first miracle,
John 2. 2. 11.

After that he went down to Capernamn, with his mother, brethren, and
disciples; but they continued not many days there, John 2, 12.

The Jews Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and drove the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, John 2. 13.

At night Nicodemus came unto him, Io. 3. 2.

After he came unto the land parts of Judea, John 3. 22. When John was
baptizing in Enon, beside Salim, v. 23. Jesus left Judea, and departed again
into Galilie through Samaria to Sychar, and converted the Samaritan woman, at
the Well, John 4. 5. where he abode two days, John 4. 40. and two days after
he departed thence and went into Galilie, v. 43.

Again, Jesus came to Cana in Galilie, v. 46. and wrought the second miracle,
that same day, at the seventh hour; healing the Rulers son, verse 52.

When Jesus had manifested himself in Galilie, Luke 4. 14. having fled thither
because of John's imprisonment, Matthew. 4. 12. called Andrew and Peter at the sea
of Galilie, Mat. 4. 18. and James and John, v. 21. passing round about Galilie,
v. 23. his fame spread abroad through all Syria, v. 24. there followed him great
multitudes out of Galilie and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and from
beyond Jordan, verse 25.

From Galilie he went to Nazareth, and leaving Nazareth went and dwelt in
Capernaum: which is near the sea in the borders of Zabulon and Nepthalim,
verse 13. and there on the Sabbath day went into the Synagogue and preached,
Luke 4. 16. and cured one possessed, Mark 1. 21. In the same City also with
the four Disciples, he healed the same day Simons mother in law of a fever,
Mar. 1. 29. and when eeuen was come and the sun down, he healed many, verse
32.

And in the morning very early before day, he arose and went out into a
solitary place to pray, verse 35. and when he saw great multitudes about him,
he commanded them to depart to the other side of the water, Matthew. 8. 18.
there in the way to the sea, he refused three which offered to follow him, v.
19. Luke 9. 57. Then he came over to the other side of the sea, to the Country
of Gadarens, Mark 5. 1. who because their devils possessed their swine,
besought him to depart: and he gate him up into the ship and returned back
again, Luke 8. 37. where the people were waiting for him v. 40. to whom he
taught out of the ship, Luke 5. 3. from thence he entered into his own City,
Matthew 9. 1. then to Capernaum again, Mark 2. 1. where he cured the sick
of the palsy, and after he had called Matthew, he dined with him, Matthew. 9.
9. where there was a great company of Publicans, and other that sat at table
with them, Luke 5. 29. where he disputed of John and the Pharisees fasting,
Mar. 2. 18. In the mean time while he spoke with them, he arose and followed
Iairus the Ruler of the Synagogue, to cure his daughter, Mat. 9. 18.

And upon the way, a woman of the bloody issue was healed in the prease, Mat.
9. 20. when he came to the house he healed two blind men, Matt. 9. 28. and one
possessed of a devil, v. 32.

After this, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem:
this is the second Passover mentioned, and there at Bethesda a Cripple is
healed on the Sabbath day, John 5. 9.

And he went with his Disciples through the corn on the Sabbath, Mark 2. 23.
upon the second Sabbath after the first: they plucked and and rubbed the corn,
Luke 6. 1. The Pharisees were confounded in their quarrelling thereof, Mat. 12.
3. and on another Sabbath he entered into the Synagogue and taught, Luke 6. 6.
where he healed the withered hand, for the which the Scribes were filled with
madness.

From Jerusalem he went forth unto the mountain, and spent the whole night in
prayer, Luke 6. 22. and when it was day he chose his Disciples, verse 13. and
taught that excellent Sermon in the Mount, Matthew. 5. 1. when he came down from
the mountain he healed the Leper, Matthew. 8. 2. then entered he into Capernaum,
and went with the Centurion to cure his servant Luke 7. 2. 6.

The day after he went to Naim, and there raised the widows son, Luke 7.
11. John sent his Disciples to Christ, Matthew. 11. 2.

Then one of the Pharisees named Simion, Luke 7. 36. 40. desired Christ to eat
with him, where Mary Magdalen is commended and one possessed with a devil,
blind, and dumb, is cured, Mat. 12. 22. while he was refuting the Pharisees,
^. 25. his mother could not come to him for the ^reafe, Luke 8. 19. Christ
preferred spiritual affinity, Mark 3. 35.

The same day, when Jesus was gone out of Iairus house, Mat. 13. 1. he began to
teach by the sea side, and entered into a ship and sat in the sea, and all the
people was by the sea side, on the land, Mark 4. 1.

The parable of the sower, and tares, Matthew. 13. 24. The seed growing while men
sleep, Mark 4. 26. The grain of mustard seed, ver. 31. The leaven, Matthew.
13. 33. a treasure hid in the field, verse 44. a precious stone, verse. 45. a
net, verse 47.

CHAP. III. Of Christ's more clear and lively manifestation, in walking through
Judea, and showing himself to all sorts of people.
AFter he had finished these Parables, he departed thence, Matthew 13. 53. and
came into his own Country, Mark 6. ^ to Nazareth where he was nursed, and
(as his custom was) he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath, and stood up to
read, Luke 4. 16. and prayed, verse 27. But they thrust him out, and led him
to the top of the hill, whereon the City was built, to cast him down headlong,
Luke 4. 29. There he did not many mighty works Mark 6. 5. Because of their
vncredulitie. Mat 13. 58. but went through all towns and villages, teaching,
and iourneying toward Jerusalem, Luke 13. 22.

Now began he to send the twelve, two and two, Mark 6. 7. John being
beheaded, Matt^* 14. 10. and Christ hearing of it, departed thence into a ship
into a desert place, near unto Bethsaida, Luke 9. 10. yet the people saw them
when they departed, and ran a foot thither out of all Cities, and came
thither before them. Mar. 6. 33. and when the day was now far spent, verse
35. and evening come, Matthew. 14. 15. he fed five thousand with five loaves,
John 6. 3. 4*

Now the Passover, a feast of the Jews was near, Christ compelled his
Disciples to go over the sea toward Bethsaida, while he sen^ away the
people, Mark 6. 45. but when night was come, he was there in the mountain
praying, Matthew 14. 23. his disciples went over the sea toward Capernaum, and
it was dark and a great wind, Ioh. 6. 17. 18. and contrary, Matt. 14. 24. at
the fourth watch, Christ came walking on the sea, Mark 6. 48. so they came ^o
the land of Genazereth, and drew up into he haven, verse 53.

The day following he came to Capernaum, and there reasons of the true bread
and Manna, John 6. 22. and therefore the whole Country came thither, Mar. 6.
55. amongst others that came from Jerusalem, were certain Scribes, Mar. 7. 1.
whose traditions confounded, Matt. 15. 3. From thence he departed into the
coasts of Tyrus and Sydon, where he cured the Syrophinissians daughter, Mark
8. 24. and when he came from the coasts of Sydon, he went to the sea of
Galilie through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis: there cured a man deaf
and dumb, Mark 7. 31. where he went up to a mountain and fed four
thousand, besides women and children, Matthew. 15 29, and when he had sent away
the people, he took ship, and came into the parts of Magdala, or Dalmannutha,
ver. 39. where Sadduces seek a sign, and are rejected, Matt. 16. 4.

When he had left them, he entered into the ship again, and departed over
the water, and because they had but one loaf, reproved their dullness in not
understanding what the leaven was, Mark 8. Then he came to Bethsaida, where
he took a blind man out of the town and healed him, verse 23. from thence to
the coasts of Cesaria, Philippi, and asked his Disciples who he was, Matthew. 16.
13. six days afte^ was the transfiguration, Mark 9. 2. The nex^ day when they
came down from mount Tabor, he cast out an unclean spirit of a child, Luk^ 9.
37. and after they departed thence they took their journey through Galile, and
he would no^ that any should know, Mark 9. 30. They bid him go out of Galilie,
for Herod sought to slay him, Luke 13. 21. There he said, he was to be
delivered into the hands of men, Matt. 17. 22. Now when the time was, that he
should be received up, he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, sent
unto a village of the Samaritans, which did not receive him, Luke 9. 52. but
came to Capernaum and paid tribute, Matt. 17, 22. and having taught, and
prepared his Disciples against ambition, and envy, Matthew. 8. Luke 9. Mark 9.
departed from Galilie, and went into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan, Mat.
19. 1. In the way answered to a question of adultery, and eternal life, Mar.
10. 17.

And as they were going up to Jerusalem, Jesus warned them of his death, verse
32. and as he went thither, he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galile,
he cleansed ten Lepers, Luke 17. 11. and while he went about in Galilie, the
Jews feast of the Tabernacles was at hand, and he sent his Disciples to the
feast, Ioh. 7. 8. and followed up, although he told his brethren he would not,
ver. 10. In the midst of the feast, he taught in the Temple, verse 14. In the
last day and great day of the feast, he stood and cried, If any man thirst,
etc. verse 37.

Jesus went that night from Jerusalem, to Mount Oliuet, and early in the
morning came back to the Temple, John 8. 1. 2. where he caught; and after
that he taught in the treasury, verse 20. and they would have stoned him,
verse, 59. but he went out and passed by, John 9. 1. healed one borne blind,
on the Sabbath day, verse 14. Christ communed the second time with him, verse
35, and the Pharisees that stood by, ver. 40. and of a good shepherd, Ioh. 10.
1.

After these things* the Lord appointed other seventy Disciples, Lu. 10. 1. and
taught a Lawyer charity, by the Samaritan and wounded man, verse 25. 30, from
Jerusalem he past and entered into Mary's and Marthaes village, v. 38. where he
was entertained, he instructed his Disciples to pray, and the force thereof
Luke 11. 1. a woman in the company called him blessed, v. 27. then a Pharisie
desired him to dinner, v. 37. where he went in, and sat down at the Table,
and pronounced many woes against the Pharisees, and at the answer of an
expou^der of the Law, said the like unto him, ver. 46. but taught his Disciples
many Christian virtues, Luke 12, to the end. There were certain present at the
same season, whom he taught to repent, Luke 13, 2, by a similitude of the
figtree, ver. 6. After he taught in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath day,
verse. 10, where he healed a woman which had a spirit of infirmity, and bowed
together, v. 13, he dined again with the chief of the Pharisees on the
Sabbath day, Luke 14 he cured the dropsy, he spoke to the guests, v. 7. then
to him that invited him, v. 12. and to one that sat at table with him, v. 15,
the Parable of the great Supper, v. 16.

CHAP. IIII. Of Christ's doctrine, the third year of his public revealing
himself to the world, and disposing himself to death.
ANd it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter, and
Jesus walked in the Temple, in Salomons Porch, Ioh. 10. 23. The Jews would
have stoned him, ver. 31. but he went away again beyond Jordan, unto the place
where John was first baptizing, and there he abode, ver. 40. preached the
Parable of the lost sheep, The groat, and prodigal son Luke 15. of the
unjust Steward, Luke 16. 1, of indissolubilitie of marriage, Mar. 10. 1. for
beyond Jordan the people resorted unto him afresh, and as he was wont, he
taught them, of Dives and Lazarue, Luke 16. 19. To beware of scandal, Luke 17.
1. the force of faith, v. 6. o^ the Pharisie and Publican that went to pray*
Luke 18. 9. They bring infants to him, whom he blessed, Mar. 10. 13. taught a
young rich man how to become perfect, Mat. 29. 21. The Parable of the workmen
hired unto the vineyard, Mat. 20. 1. from beyond Jordan he came to Judea again,
where they would have stoned him before. John 11. 7


CHAP. V. While Christ is 33. years of age, and 3. weeks, he is ever more and
more earnest, to consumate his ministry and man's redemption.
THE tenth of March, Christ came over Jordan to Bethabora, and hearing of the
decease of Lazarus, the eleventh day, he continued there two days, Ioh. 11. 6,
the 13. day Lazarus dyed, and Jesus took his journey to go to raise him, v.
14. to them he foretells his death, Mark 10. 33, when he had taken them out
of the way, Matt. 20. 17. and denied the suit of Zebedeus two sons, Matt. 20.
20. as he drew near to Jericho, he cured a blind man. The 14. day, Lu. 18.
35. In Jericho he is entertained by Zacheus, Luke 19. 5. and spoke the Parable
of ten pieces given to ten servants, Lu. ^9. 12. as he departed from Jericho
he healed ^ blind men, Mat. 20. 29. The 15. day is spent on the way. the 16.
day Christ came to Bethania near unto Jerusalem, about 15. furlongs, John 11.
18. where he raised Lazarus now 4. days dead. v. 17. The 17. day, he goes to
the desert, ^o Ephraim, and walked no more openly among the Jews, v. 54. The
18. day, he continued in the desert with his Disciples. The 19. day, being 6.
days before the Passover, he came to Bethania and supped with Lazarus, whom
he had raised from death, Ioh. 12. 2. The 20. day, which is Palme-Sunday, when
they drew near to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the Mount of
Olives, Jesus sent two Disciples for an Ass, and came riding to Jerusalem,
Mat. 21. 1. and past to the Temple and healed the blind and halt, v. 14. The
Gentiles desired Philip to show Jesus unto them, Io. 12. 21. he casts the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Mat. 21. 12. The children cry Hosanna, v.
15. Christ left them and went out of Jerusalem in the evening, unto Bethania,
and lodged there, Mat. 21. 17. The 21. day (coming out of Bethania) in the
morning he hungered, and cursed the fig tree, Mar. 11. 12. the same day at
evening Jesus went out of the City. The 22. day, he passed by the fig tree,
which was dried up, Mat. 19. 20 so he came to Jerusalem, and as he walked in
the Temple, avouches his authority, v. 27. foretells there their reprobation
to their face by sundry Parables, the one of the two sons, Mat. 21. 28. the
other of the vineyard let to husbandmen, Lu. 20. 9. the third of the king who
made a marriage to his Son, Mat. 22. 1. They perceived the similitude to be
spoken against them, therefore they would take hold of his words, to deliver
him unto the deputy, and sent spies which should feign themselves righteous
men, to take him in his talk, Lu. 20. 20. First their disciples with the
Herodians, Mat. 21. 16. concerning giving of tribute. The 2. the Sadduces
touching the resurrection, Mar. 12. 18. The 3. a Lawyer concerning the greatest
commandment, Mat. 22. 36. The 4. the Pharisees gathered together, are demanded
how Christ should be David's son, Mat. 22. 41. whereupon he inferred an
exhortation to the multitude, and disciples, that they should observe whatsoever
they commanded, but not to do as they did, Mat. 23. 3. But to beware of them,
Mar. 12. 38.

Then Jesus sat down over against the treasury, and preferred the widows
mite, v. 41. Now Jesus went from the Temple, the disciples show him the goodly
building thereof, Mat. 24. 1. he foretells the destruction of it, and
progress of the Gospel, Mar. 13. 10. and of Antichrist, v. 14. 22. of the
last day, Lu. 21. 27. For in the day time he was teaching in the Temple, and at
night he went out, and abode ^n the mount that is called Oliuet, and all the
people came to the Temple early in the morning to hear him, Lu. 21. 37. So he
continued in Parables of the ^en Virgins, Mat. 25. 1 and ten talents, ver. 14.
he ^pake also without Parables, v. 31. and that night Christ supped in
Bethania, in the house of Simon the Leper, even as he sat at meat, Mary
brought a box of spikenard, and powered the ointment on his head, Mar. 14. 3.
Now two days after was the feast of ^he Passover, the Jews counsel held how
to kill him, Matthew. 26. 5. The 23. day, Judas went to the Jews, and agreed
with them, Mat. 26. 15. The 24. day, the first day of the unleavened bread,
when they kill the Passover, Mar. 13. 12. for of necessity the Passover must
be killed, Luke 22. 7. Peter and John were sent to prepare it, v. 8. who went
forth, and came into the City, and made it ready, and when it is now euentide,
Christ came with the 12. Mark* 14. 16. 17. and as they sat at table, ver. 18.
he foretells the treason of Judas, Mat. 26. 25. declares his desire he had
to eat it, Luke 22, 15, and when they were eating, he took bread, v. 19.
Likewise after supper he took the cup, Luke 22. 20. he appeased the strife
concerning superiority, ver. 24. washed his disciples feet, John 13. 4. Then
went they out to the Mount of Olives, Mar. 14. 26. But Judas had received the
sop, with which Satan entered into him John 13. 27. and as soon as he had
received the sop he went out immediately, and it was night, ver. 30 Then Jesus
began to preach and pray, the Sermon is written from the 32. v. of the 13.
Chapter, unto the 31. v. of the 14. Chapter of John. Then did he rise and went
away, and continued the Sermon from John 15. to the 10. Chapter, ver 33. and
concluded with a prediction of their denial, v. 32. Peter was also forewarned,
Mar. 14. 30. Now his prayer* first in all their presence, John 17. the whole
Chapter.

Then came Jesus to a place called Gethsemane, and took Peter and the two
sons of Zebedeus, and prayed, Mat. 26. 36. Then he arose, v. 46. and went
forth with his disciples, over the brook Cedro^^ where was a garden into the
which he entered, and his disciples, Judas also knew the place, for Jesus often
times resorted thither with his disciples, Ioh. 18. v. 1. 2. Judas came, and
the band with him, and led Christ to Annas, v. 12. 13. Peter had first smote
Malchus ear, v. 10. which Christ healed even then, Luke 22, 51. all Christ
Disciples forsook him and ran away, Mar. 14. 50. yet 2. follow to Annas house,
the one entered into the Palace of the high Priest, Peter stood at the door
without, then went out the other disciple which was known to the high Priest,
and spoke to her that kept the door, and brought in Peter, and there at his
entry he denied to be christ's disciple, Ioh. 18. 15. 16. 17. Then after a
little while another saw him and he denied, Luke 22. 58. and about the space of
an hour after, the servants and officers stood there, and his cousin (whose
ear Peter had smote off,) who had made a fire of coals, for it was cold, and
Peter warmed him, Ioh. 18. 18. and Peter denied, Luke 22. 60. Annas sent Jesus
to Caiphas, his son in law, Ioh. 18. 24. Christ is accused before the
Priests, and false witness brought, Mar. 14. 55. and smote with rods, v. 65.
They led him rom Caiphas, to the judgment hal in the morning; but they went
not into the hall, that they might eat the Passover, which is the 25. day of
March: therefore Pilate came out to them, Ioh. 18. 28. and from thence entered
into the common hall again, v. 33. Then sent he Christ unto Herod, Euke 23. 7.
Herod despised him, and sent him again to Pilate, v. 11, who after long
disputation with the Priests, v. 13. and the 2. time, v. 20. and the 3. time,
v. 22. and with the people requiring Barabas, Mat. 28. 25. and with Christ,
Ioh. 18. 36. with his own wife, Mat. 27. 19. and with Christ again, v. 19,
10, (when Judas had hanged himself, Mat. 28. 5.) then Pilate sat down in
Gabbatha, about the sixth hour, which was the preparation of the Passover,
John 19. 13. gave sentence it should be as they required, Luke 24. 24. Then the
soldiers led him to the hall, called Protorium, and crowned him with thorns,
Mark. 15, 16. and as they led him away, they caught, one Simon of Sirene,
coming out of the field, and on him laid they the Cross, that he might bear
it after Jesus, Luke 23. 26. until he came to Golgotha, Ioh. 19. 17. In the way
he comforted the women, and the people that followed him, Lu. 23. 28. Then they
crucified him betwixt 2. thieves, Mar. 15. 27. they that passed by railed on
him, verse. 29. and one of the thieves also, which was hanged with him on the
left hand, Lu. 23. 39. Christ recommended his mother to John, Ioh. 19. 26. And
it was about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over all the Land, until
the ninth hour, Luke 23. 44. Then he gave up the ghost: and when he was dead,
one thrust him through with a spear, Job. 19. 34. when he was crucified, they
partod his garments, v. 23, and the Centurion seeing the miracles of the son,
earthquake, cleaving of the rocks, renting of the veil of the Temple, Matthew.
28. 51. confessed Jesus to be the Son of God, ver. 54.

Now in the evening, because it was the day of preparation that goes before
the Sabbath, Pilate gave the body to Joseph of Arimath^a, and Nicodemus brought
spices and buried him, John 19. 38. 39. in a new sepulcher where never man was
laid, in a garden, for that sepulcher was near, v. 41. 42.

The next day that followed, which was the 26. of March, the Priests desired
Pilate that the sepulcher should be made sure, until the third day, Matthew.
27. 62. In the end of the Sabbath, when the first day of the week began to
dawne, which is the twenty seven of March, came Mary Magdalen, and the other
Mary, after a great earthquake, and the Angel of the Lord descended from
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it,
and made the keepers afraid, and in the 28. of Matthew v. 1. 2. 3. 4 he said
to her and Iohanna and to Mary, Iacobi, that Christ was risen, Luke. 24. 10.
Christ showed himself first to Mary Magdalen, John 20. 16. and the same day to
the other women also, Matthew 28. 9. The same day, at night (which was the first
of the Sabbath) when the doors were shut, came he to the eleven, where he eat
with them, John 20 19. Luke 24. 41. Then he appeared to Peter, Luke 24. 34.
Then to Cleophas and another disciple, going to Emaus, verse 18. That same day,
when it drew toward night, he uttered himself to them, verse 31. 10. and
eight days after he showed himself to Thomas, and the rest of the Disciples,
John 20, 26. which day is the third of April. Upon the twenty eight day of
March, he appeared at the sea of Tiberius, in the morning to seven of his
Disciples, at fishing, John 21. 2. which is the third time he appeared to his
Disciples after he was risen from the dead, v. 14.

After appeared to the eleven Disciples, which went into Galile, to a
mountain, where Jesus had appointed them, Matthew. 28. 16. And when he had
gathered them together, he commanded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, Luke* 24. 49. Afterward he led them out into Bethania, and lifted
up his hands and blessed them, and was carried up into heaven, v. 50. 51. After
that he had been seen of them by the space of forty days, which makes the
fifth day of May when he ascended, Acts 1. 2.

CHAP. VI. After Christ Ascension, the gifts of the Spirit, are communicated to
the twelve Apostles.
ANd on the fifteenth day of May, which is the Pentecost, (according to his
promise in Jerusalem) they were endued with power from on high, which is the
Holy Ghost: To the which place of Jerusalem, immediately after the Ascension,
the Discples returned from Bethania, or Mount of Olives, for the election of
one Matthias, to succeed in Judas place, Acts 1. 12. 25. 26. and Act. 21. 1.

FINIS.
A BREIFE CATECHISM, FOR THE instruction of Christian FAMILIES. Together with
a Spiritual Combat, between Man's Frailty and Faith, in time of Sickness.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop,
near Fleet Conduit. 1617.

A Brief Catechism, for the instruction of Christian Families.
Question.
Do you desire to come to the Lords Mat. 5 6 John 6. 27
Supper?

Answ. Yes, I hunger and thirst after it. 1 Cor. 12. 27 Ephe. 5. 30 Col. 2. 19


Q. Wherefore do you so?

A. To have and to be ever joined with the communion of Christ, and so with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, and all Saints, which communion I lost in Adam.
Genesis 1. 26 1 Cor. 5. 7


Q. How were you made in Adam?

A. In the image and similitude of God, in knowledge, holiness, righteousness
and truth, even to be the son of God. Ephe. 4. 14 Col. 3. 10 Ephesians. ^ 1. 2. 3


Q. How fell you in Adam?

A. By transgression I was made like unto the beast that perishes; even a
servant of sin, the world, and the Devil. Romans 6. 16 Gen: 15. 18


Q. How may you return to this image of God and communion with him?

A. By keeping his covenants that he will be my God, and I shall be his child.
Heb. 8 7. 8. 9.


Q. How comes God to make this covenant with you?

A. Only by Jesus Christ eternal God, and heir of all things, made man to
bring He. 1. 2
me among many children to glory.

Q. What are the branches of this covenant?

A. Two: Gods promises in Christ to Genesis ^7. 2* 22
me, and my duty again to him.

Q. Which are the promises of God in Christ?

A. They are comprehended in the Articles of my Creed: I believe in God, etc.
To. 8 32. 35
Which contain the promise of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to give unto
mes with all Saints eternal life.

Q. What is your duty?

A. To believe in him by that faith, that 1 Pet. 1. 6. 10 Phil. 1. 11. Ga. 5 6
works in me love to keep his commandments.

Q. What is faith?

A. Faith is a gift of God whereby I have a substantial evidence and assurance,
by the faithfulness of him that promised, that the 1 Pet. 1. 8
riches of the glorious inheritance of Christ are mine.

Q. Is faith in the promises so contained?

A. Far more then the sight, or hearing, Mat. 1^ 26. 28
or feeling.

Q. What are the commandments that faith teaches you to work?

A. The same which God spoke, Thou shall E^. 20 To. 13 9. 10 1 John 3. 24
have no other Gods before me, etc. which commandments require to love God
above all, and my neighbor as my self.

Q. Can you keep this covenant by coming to the Lords Supper?

A. I am much helped by joining the Sacrament, to the hearing of the Word and
Mark 16. 15
Prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A seal of the righteousness of faith, whereby all my other senses
persuade my Romans 4. 11
heart of Gods favor to me in Christ, as mine ear does by the Word of God.

Q. How many Sacraments of this covenant be there?

A. Two: one of entrance which is baptism, Mark 1. 4. 5 1. Pet. 3. 21
in which by the washing of water through the Word, I am borne again, made
partaker of Christ to the washing away of my sins, and fulfilling of the Law
by his righteousness, who is made to me righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 20
sanctification and redemption. Matt. 26. 26


Q. The other Sacrament is the Supper of the Lord, what is the use of that?

A. It is the Sacrament of my continuance 1 Cor. 11. 24
and growth in Christ, as eating and drinking causes a newborn child to
grow John 6. 56
to a perfect man.

Q. Do you grow in Christ only by eating and drinking the bread and wine in
the Lords Supper?

A. No: but by applying to my heart by faith, the graces signified in the Lords
Supper 1 co. 10 1. 3. 4 Ephe. 3. 17
while I eat and drink.

Q. Show what graces you discern in the Lords Supper?

A. 1. By Gods minister, providing and disposing bread and wine; I discern the
John 3. 16 To. 12 13. 20
eternal love of the Father, that provided his Son for my salvation.

2. In my self I discern the body of the Elect, of which I am a member.

3. In bread, the chiefest food, I discern Ioh. 6 47. 48.
Christ the only food of my soul.

Q. You mean the body of Christ: for so are the words, This is my body?

A. I do so: but together with the body I understand the whole person of
Christ, Luke 1 31. 32 Col. 2. 17
God and man, and all things which (as a Mediator) he did for me.

I say that sanctiffed humane nature which was conceived borne, lived, suffered
for me.

Q. Show the rest of the graces?

A. The taking of the bread by the minister, signifies the separation of
Christ, begotten Gal. 4 4. 5
of the Father before al worlds, and in time borne of a Virgin for me.

Gining of thanks, the joy conceived in Luke 2. 14
heaven and earth for Christ's coming: To the glory of God, and peace on earth,
and good will toward men.

The breaking of the whole humility of Luke 2. 24
Christ, from his incarnation, to his resurrection; his suffering in body and
soul for me*

The giving of the bread, that Christ is Tit. 3 7
freely given of grace, not for our works*

Q. What is meant by giving it to his Disciples?

A. To show that though Christ be sufficient 2 Cor. 3. 5
for all, he is effectual given only to the Elect, that learn and practice
Christ.

Q. Proceed. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15. 16 Act. 5


A. In that it is said, Take* eat, I discern that the sum of the Gospel is
to me the saupur of life, making me bold to lay hold on the throne of grace,
and possess my self Matt. 1. 21
fully of my Lords joy.

Q. Why would he express those benefits by eating?

A. To assure me that in Christ I am restored Revel. 2. 7
to the true tree of life, and bread that came down from heaven, from which I
Genesis 3 ^^. 23
was once banished; but now may take and eat, and live for ever.

Q. Speak in like manner of the Cup?

A. The taking of the cup, giving thanks, Heb. ^. 1^.
and giving it: signifies this gift of Christ's blood, to pacify both God and
my conscience.

Q. How comes that?

A. My salvation is not hy my merit, but by Gods Testament in Christ: this cup
testifies unto me that the Testator is dead, Heb. ^. 17
and I possess the legacy of salvation, and receive the spirit and life of
Christ to be the child of God.

Q. What is your duty to do in this covenant?

A. Before I come I must examine my self to know my estate, in faith and
repentance, to purify my self from infidelity and 1* Cor. 11. 2^
sin, and to approve myself in my general and particular calling to live a
christian life.

In the receiving I must by faith assure myself possessed of Gods promises, and
therefore ^ Cor. 1. 3. 4
praise him.

After the receiving, I must ever show the Lords death, that is, profess my
self a true 1 Cor. 11. ^5
Christian, by showing my faith, by the works of communion with the Saints:
sanctification of my life, and love of all men as much as is possible.

Q. Are you sufficient of your self to make this use of the Lords Supper?

A. No, for all sufficiency is of God, of 2 Cor. 3. 5
whom I crave this grace in prayer; the form whereof is the Lords prayer, Our
father which art, etc.

Q. What is the sum of that, and so of all other lawful prayers?

A. That God would be my God, and John 20. 17 1 Cor. 15. 49 Ephe. 4. 23 Col.
3. 10
Father, and that I may be his child, and so be received to that image of
God, in which I was first made in Adam.

A Spiritual Conflict betwixt Man's frailty and faith, in time of Sickness.
FRAILTY. SWeet and comfortable is this life and I must leave it.


Faith. It is written (O frailty) and earnestly think of it; Is there not (Job
7. verse. 1.) an appointed time to man upon earth, and are not his days as the
days of an hireling, as a servant longs for the Sabbath, and an hireling
looks for an end of his work: so have I had as an inheritance, the months
of vanity, and painful nights have been appointed unto me: If I laid me
down, I said, when shall I arise? and measuring the evening, I am full with
lossing to and fro until the dawning of the day again. 2 Cor. 15. 19. In this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable,
again, Heb. 11. 13. and 13. 14. We are strangers and pilgrims upon earth, we
have no continuing City here, but we seek one to come, Job 14. 1. A man
that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance and full of trouble: he
shoots forth as a flower and is cut down, he vanishes also as a shadow and
continues not.


Frailty. Much wealth and a shining estate shall I forgo and leave behind me?


Faith. It is written, Eccles. 1. verse. 1. Vanity of vanities, and all is but
vanity, I have made me great works, I have built me houses, I have planted me
vineyards, I have made me gardens and orchards, and planted in them trees of
all fruits, I have gathered unto me silver and gold, and the choice treasure
of kings and provinces, I have provided me men-singers, and women-singers, and
the delights of the sons of men: And I was great and increased above all that
were before me: whatsoever my eyes desired I withheld it not from them, I
withdrew not my heart from any joy: But then I looked of all my works that my
hands had wrought, and on the travel that I had labored to do, and behold
all is vanity, and vexation of the spirit, and there is no profit under the
sun: Therefore I hated life for the work that is wrought under the sun is
grievous unto me, for all is vanity and vexation of spirit, I hated all my
labor wherein I had traveled, I went about to make my heart abhor it, for
what has man of his travel, grief of his heart, wherein he has traveled
under the sun, all his days are sorrows, and his travels grief: his heart
takes not rest in the night, which also is vanity.


Frailty. O but wife and children, and friends, lie near my heart and minister
thoughts of heavy woe unto me, when I think of leaving them.


Faith. Remember (Frailty) what is written, He that loves father and mother
more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves son or daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me: He is the Father of the fatherless, and the
widows Judge, even God in his holy habitation.


Frailty. O but God is angry with me, and what shall I do?


Faith. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he ^lead my cause and execute judgment for me: Then will he bring me
forth to the light; and I shall see his righteousness, I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for God my Savior, my God will hear me: Rejoice not
against me (O my enemy) for though I fall I shall rise, when I shall sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a ^ight unto me.


Frailty. Sickness and sufferings are tokens of Gods anger toward man or woman.


Faith. God forbid: clean contrary does the Lord speaks for our comfort, as
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: Be zealous therefore Revel. 3. 19
and amend: Again, have you forgotten the consolation that speaks unto you
as unto children: My son despise not the chastning of the Prou. 3. 11
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every sonnc that he receives: Heb. 12. 11
If ye endure chastning, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons, for
what son is there, whom the father chasteneth not: If therefore ye be without
correction (whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastards and not sons: The
righteous cry and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their
troubles: The Lord is near unto all them that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be afflicted in spirit. Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all ^ He keeps all his bones,
so that none of them is broken.


Frailty. But death is dreadful, and what a misery of man is it to die?


Faith. I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord, I should
utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living: Christ is to mce both in life and death
advantage; I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is the best of
all: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: Even so says the spirit, for
they rest from their labors and their works follow them.


Frailty. But I shall perish and be as though I never had been?


Faith. Unto my sheep that here my voice, I give eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand: My Father
which gave them me, is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of
my fathers hands, I and my father are one.


Frailty. Yet dust I am, and to dust I must return?


Faith. We shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last Trumpet, for the Trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up
incorruptible, and we shall be changed, for this corruptible, must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, etc. But we know this,
if our earth^y house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we ^aue a building given
of God, that is, a house ^ot made with hands, but eternal in the hea^ens:
Therefore we sigh desiring to be clothed ^ith our house which is from heaven.


Frailty. When I am gone, I am gone, and what hope is there after death?


Faith. I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last upon
the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and no
other for me.


Frailty. Satan frighteth me with my sins, and lays the greatness of them
before me?


Faith. But this is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received: Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief? The blessed
Apostle looked upon himself, as the greatest finner in the world, and yet
despaired not: But says, for this cause he was received to mercy, That Jesus
Christ should first show on him all long suffering unto the ensample of them,
which should in time to come believe on him unto eternal life.


Frailty. Satan suggesteth that my repentance is too late?


Faith. It is never too late that is sincer^ and true: the these upon the
Cross came very late, yet to him was it graciously said, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Not presuming therefore of mercy, and continuing in
sin; but truly lamenting what was past, and leaving any further to offend
wilfully, I also will say in hope, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom.


Frailty. Yet God is just and must needs punish my sin?


Faith. That justice is satisfied in the obedience of Christ, and each penitent
sinner may in comfort say: If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins,
and not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world; For two
titles our Savior Christ has to the kingdom of heaven: the right of
inheritance, and the merit of his Passion: The first belongs to him, the
second he vouchsafes to us in his merit: therefore our merit is not to be
trusted in. For as touching our merit, remember David, Enter not into judgment
with thy servant (O Lord) for in thy sight no flesh living shall be justified.
When ye have done all these things that are commanded, you shall say, we are
unprofitable servants?

We have done that which was once our dues to do: Behold he found no
steadfastness in his scruants, and laid folly upon his Angels; how much more in
them that dwell in houses of clay? whose foundation is in the dust: yea the
heavens are not clear in his sight: how much more is man adhominable and
filthy, which drinks iniquity like water. How may a man be justified before
God, or how can he be clean that is borne of a woman: Behold, he will give no
light to the Moon, and the stars are unclean in his sight: How much more
man, a worm, even the son of man which is but a worm. The Apostle again,
When the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not
by the works of righteousness which we had done: but according to his mercy
he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost,
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we being
justified by his grace, should be heirs according to the hope of eternal life.


Thus will faith ever find comfort in the Word, to answer frailty in any
point whatsoever of fear and fright, if it be sought out by careful reading.

A Protestation in Sickness.
I Wrotched and woeful sinner, yet redeemed with the precions blood of Jesus
Christ, through his great love, not my merit, protest before the all-seeing
God, that I do heartily desire to die in the faith, wherein it becomes a
true member of the true Church to end this life. I believe and confess all and
every part of the Christian Faith, either expressly mentioned, or truly
comprised in the twelve Articles: and generally, I believe whatsoever a
Christian man or woman ought to believe.

This immovable and firm faith (God assisting me with his grace) I shall
hold, as a strong and invincible hold, against all the suggestions and assaults
of Satan: Wherefore, if either by his oppugning tyranny, or my sickness
raging fury, I shall either speak, do, or think any thing repugnant and
contrary to this. Now in this my better strength both of body and mind, I
disclaim it, renounce it, abhor it, and pray that it may not be imputed
unto me, as any word, work, or thought of mine, but of Satan's malice and my
sickness strength. To my uttermost power I remit and forgive unto all persons,
all injuries whatsoever at any time, or in any sort done unto me: and
earnestly entreating them the like again from them to me in any faults, or
errors of mine unto them: and I humbly acknowledge, with true woe of a grieved
heart, that to my God I have not carried my self as I should: my faults and
offenses, my faults and transgressions are bitter unto me: yet do I not
despair, but laying hold by the hand of my faith. upon my all powerful and
sweet Savior, I humbly crave mercy, with bowed knees of heart and soul before
him: I acknowledge his infinite goodness to me many and infinite ways, and
with heart and soul and all that is within me praise his holy Name: I commend
into his hands my spirit, and though weak in body, yet strong in him, I say
and cry, Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus receive me to thee, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, Amen, Amen.

A Prayer in Sickness.
O Lord, just art thou, and just and true are all thy judgments, thy ways are
mercy and truth, and there never was or shall be any end of thy goodness: I
humbly beseech thee to have mercy upon me, and do not reward me according to
mine iniquities: I have sinned, I have sinned, and woe is me for it; O thou
preserver of men, thine I am, and in thee is my trust: in thy fear let me
live, in thy favor let me die; Sweet God of my comfort, Blessed for ever and
ever, Amen.

Another Prayer.
MEercy Lord, mercy most holy and comfortable God, to all truly sorrowing
sinners; look upon thy wretch that ioyeth to be thine, although most unworthy
to be respected of thee: unjust things have I done and my heart bleedeth for
them; just things do I suffer in regard of thee my gracious God. I humbly
acknowledge, if I look what I have done what I suffer is not answerable: but
less^ do I suffer then I have deserved: Dear Father, I acknowledge thy
justice so mixed with mercy, as never I can sufficiently thank thee for it.
Comfortable God, give strength to my weakness, that more and more I may be
able to do that, which such great goodness of thine binds me unto: where
sin abounds, thy mercy super-aboundeth, and shall not I feel it? Let not
thy prayer depart out of my mouth whilst I live and breath; if outwardly I
must suffer, yet inwardly comfort and indue me with patience according to the
multitude of thy mercies.

Thou know all, and thou can do all and ever blessed be thy name, Amen,
Amen.

Another Prayer.
MOst gracious redeemer, which ever art merciful, ever comfortable and kind
to them that trust in thee, ever a Savior whether thou sendest unto us well or
woe: since it is thy will that through many tribulations we must enter into
the kingdom of God: grant me strength ever to continue and steadfastly abide,
in all Christian fortitude and perseverance against hell, death, and Satan,
and all these terrors they can inflict either upon my soul, conscience, or
body: that being assisted by thee, I may rest in thee, and receive the crown
of life promised in thy goodness to all thine elect, for the which I shall
sing praises to thee in the heavens, with thee for evermore.

A Poem to that effect.
OH what strange sudden news
unto the world is come:
What haste the post does use,
To summon all and sum.
A debt is to be paid,
A certain day is set:
And every man afraid
How he should pay his debt.
No surety will suffice,
No hoping of delay:
No clamors nor no cries,
But either die, or pay.
The band is by the soul,
The substance faith and troth,
And who are in the world,
Must look unto their oath.
The Judge is wise and just,
His Law is pure and clear;
And at his presence must,
All flesh and blood appear.
The place shall be so great,
That none but shall have room*
But none that shall entreat,
To have a partial doom.
All flesh shall be indicted,
Of conscience accusation,
Shall let none be acquitted,
That sin sends to damnation.
But such as mercy craves,
That are for mercy crying:
And such as mercy saues,
From the eternal dying.
Time shall yield up his flowers,
And faith subscribe to grace:
Nature yields up her power,
Corruption has no place.
And in an instant all,
A sudden change shall see,
Then all the world shall fall,
Where shall no being be.
Rich, poor, both young and old,
Fair, full and strong and weak;
Wise, fond, both hot and cold,
The hearts of all shall break.
The spirits shall all assemble,
And horrors hold the heart:
The iustest soul shall tremble,
For fear of their desert.
All are in sin contained,
But who for sins are sorry:
Shall be from death detained,
(...) of mercies glory.
The rich must leave his wealth,
And to the grave must hye:
The youth must leave his health,
And learn the way (...).
The fair must leave to paint,
And tak^d earthly hue:
The poor must leave to faint,
And bid the world adue.
The wise must leave his wit,
And make the worms a feast:
The fool must leave his fit,
and make the grave his rest.
No bribe shall buy an hour,
No gift procure a grace:
To sweet the smallest sower,
in the infernal place.
Since then the news are such,
The Day of Doom so nigh:
And mercy does so much,
With highest majesty.
So none shall mercy crave,
With humble faithful love:
But shall in mercy have,
The joys in heaven above.
And escape the pains of hell,
That does to sin belong:
And with the Angels dwell,
To sing a heavenly song.
Let us to mercy fly,
From sin and death to save us:
And unto mercy cry,
That hell may never have us, Amen.

