A Message, termed Mark the truth of the word of God, in these.xiii. Bloes,
at the Popes Bull.

And the same to be done to the Popes Champian, that set up his Bull, on the
Gate of the Bishop of London.

1570.

Acts. 17, chap. 11. and 12. verse. These were also more noble men, Keep this
old custom commended of the apostle when ther^ is strife in Religion.
then they which were at Thessalonica, which received the word with all
readiness, and serched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so
(now mark the cause wherefore Preachers and Writers should be believed by
these words that follow in the verse) Therefore many of them believed and of
honest women which were Grecyans, and men not a few.

Mark the truth of the word of God, in these xiij. Blows, at the Popes Bull.
WRITE or speak to him that set up the Popes Bull on the gate of the Bishop of
London, that he may require his master ye Pope, E The first blovv at the Popes
Bull.
E to bless with the word of God, and to curse with the word of God. For
otherwise, England and other Countries will not pass a straw for his
Blessing, either else for his Curssyng.

The Popes champion brings us in words, the Popes Curssyng. But we can and
will show him in acts and deeds, God his blessing.

The Pope with his cha^pian may be thought wilfully to lack memory.
The Popes Champion, with his master, wilfully forgets how that of late
years in ye raygne of Queen Mary, his Master sent in words into England, his
Blessing.

And how that (notwithstanding) it plainly appears that England found clean
contrary in Acts and deeds God his Curssing. For where almighte GOD
threatened in his word, that for the wickedness of the people, he would send a
foren Prince to reign over them: E 2. Blovv.


E And had not the subjects of England, in the same time a foren Prince
reigning over them, according to the thretnyng: notwithstanding the Pope his
masters Blessyng?

Again, God thretned also in AMOS the Prophet, that for the sins of the
Princes and People, he would take away from the^ his holy word. E 3. Blovv. O
ye papists remember Nightingale, the Parson of Crondel in Kent, who fell down
dead out of the Pulpet as he was co^mendinge to the people the Popes Blessyng.


E And was not the Bible then burned in England according to the thretnynge.

* And his masters Ceremonies, being Coddes and Draffe placed,
notwithstanding the Pope his Masters Blessing?

Again, GOD thretned also in his holy word, that for the sins of the
People, he would send Famine and Derth of Material Bread. E 4. Blovv.
E And was there not according to the thretnynge such a Famine and Derth of
Material Bread, that the Subjects of England were forced to make their
Bread of Acornes, of which many died, notwithstanding ye Pope his masters
blessing? E 5. and. 6. blovv.


These and many other plagues of E war in which Calis was lost, and of
sickness. etc. Had England at that time, with his Masters blessing.

But ever from that time his masters blessing was turned to cursyng. E 7.
Blovv.


E Have we not had a most gracious English born prince blessed be GOD
this.xii. years raygnyng over us, and so we hope long time Foles make but a
sport of sin. But O England if thou desire the long life of our most
gracious Queen she from sin and proceed one neighbor to do good to another.
(if our sins let it not) shall continue, where Queen Mary raygned not.vi.
years, notwithstanding the Pope his masters blessing?

And again, ever from that time his Masters blessing was turned into
curssynge.

E 8. Blovv.
E Have we not had great plenty of Corn, and in those Cities most plenty,
where those strangers remain, that be under the Pope his masters Curse?
Again, require the Popes Champion to And tell the Popes Cha^pion consider what
benefit, Northumberland. and Westmerla^d with the northern Rebels received with
the Popes blessyng, and then give sentence whether is better the Popes
Blessyng, or the Popes Cursing.
consider how the Queens majesty, our Sovereign Lady, had and has the Pope
his Masters Curse: But King Henry of France with his Children, had and
has, the Pope his masters blessing.

E Let him consider both states, and then set up another Bull, E 9. Blovv.
and declare in the Bull by the acts and deeds, who has in acts and deeds
God his blessyng, and who has in acts and deeds the Curse of God and he
shall find that truly fulfilled in the holy Scripture upon the Pope his
Master, written in the.2. Ca. of Malachi the Prophet. E The. 10. dead blovv
E I will even send a Curse upon you, and will curse your blessings. The
Queens Majesty our Soueraygne, Lady has the Popes curse, and the King of
Spain has ye Pope his masters blessing. E 11. Blovv.


E Let him consider both states and then set up another Bull and declare in
the Bull by the acts and deeds, who has in acts and deeds God his blessing
and who has in acts and deeds God his curse, and he shall find the words
of the Prophet Malachi most truly fulfilled upon the Pope his master. The
Queens majesty our Soureaigne Lady has the Popes curse, and the Queen of
Scotts has the Pope his masters blessing.

12. Blovv.
E Let him consider both states and then set up another Bull, and declare in
the Bull, etc. and he shall find the words of the Prophet Malachi most truly
fulfilled upon the Pope his master. The Queens Majesty, our Sovereign Lady
has the Popes curse, and the the Pope blesses him self. E 13. Blovv.

To this.xiii. blow might be put many other, as Smith a ge^tilman of the
Temple, who for refusinge the Popes curse, and taking the Popes blessed Agnus
dei, hanged himself, with many other which for tediousness is to be passed
over.

To keep an odd number in the which the Papists take a great mystery to be
hidden and therefore I keep their order, because they should the better view this
Message in which Message they may see we have greater cause to fear the
having of his blessing, then there is any cause given to fear the having of
his cursyng.




E Let him consider both states and then set up another Bull and declare in
the Bull. etc. and he shall find the words of the Prophet Malachi most truly
fulfilled upon the Pope his master, wherefore England with other countries
which takes blessing of the word of God, is truly blessed. And other Countries
which take their blessing from the Pope, is truly cursed with the Pope him
self, and therefore we have cause to desire of God to keep us far from the
Popes blessing, of whose blessing having had to much experience, we find
such pitiful shedinge of English blood, that his murdering fires
destroyed.xiii. in one fire, and stayed not, but proceeded to the mother and to
the loving Infant in the mothers womb: wherefore our hearty desire unto God,
shall be yt we may have still the Popes cursing until he become obedient to the
word of God, and bless with the word of God, and curse with the word of God.
Also require him to let his master further understand that the Princes and
people know it is ye nature of a Bull to beget a Calf, and the nature of the
Calfe, to fear the Bull: and therefore all those that be the Popes Calves, let
them fear the Popes Bull, for those that be no Calves fear it not, but will
do him to give knowledge to the Pope and to his clergy, that they Take away
the material sword from the Popes religion and from Mahometes religion to kill
other only for religion and both their religions will faule. But contrary of
the religion of Jesus Christ mentioned in his word.
neither can not, nor dare not confute, and answer this Lay man's Legacy,
ioygned to this Message, termed, etc. and suffer it to go abroad in Rome and
other places, where the Popes Bull has begotten Calves. And thus ye Bull being
truly answered, he may again secretly convey it, and tell his master ye Pope,
that this answer requires secret keepinge, for the more this Answer is
manifested in Rome, in France etc. the more shame will it be for his Master
the Pope, to ride on four men's shoulders, and to make Emperors and Kings,
with the people, to kiss his shows, and with impudent lying make the Princes
and people to believe their sins be forgeuen with kissyng his show, This lie
and the lie of the Angel that appeared in the battle in Ireland with a Chalice
in his hand which was preached printed, and Bells rong for it etc in Spain, is
good ware to keep up their Pope to ride on four men's shoulders.
which thing he never learned of Christ Jesus, by commandment nor by
example, neither of S. Paul nor of S. Peter nor of any other true Prophet
either by commandment or by example, wherefore let him leave of his pride and
liyng for in time he shall be forced to do it, and for that his Champion set up
the Bull secretly without showing his name, so here he may receive his Answer,
like wise without any name, and for a conclusyon I pray God grant him and his
master obedyent hearts to the word of God, otherwise I pray god send them
utter confusion.

Amen.

Of the Devil and the Popes manhood.
Mighty to make other men lose their goods.
Mighty to hurt many other men's bodies,
To do good to a man's own body,
Is the Deuell and the Popes manhood:
Of true Christian manhood.
Mighty to suffer loss of a man's own goods
Mighty to suffer hurt in a man's own body
To do good unto many,
Is like to the Manhood of Christ Jesus,
Esaias. 40. Chapter. The word of GOD endures for ever, But the Popes Bull was
not from the beginning, neither shall endure for ever. Amen.
18. Deutronomie. 22. verse. The Popes Bull is like to an old wives tale which
has voice without action But only that it has contrary actions, as in the.
13 blows at his Bull.
When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not nor
come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the
Prophet has spoken it presumpteously, thou shall not therefore be afraid of him.

He that yeldeth fear and obedience to the Popes Bull, etc. before the fear
and obedience dew to the word of God, makes flesh his arm, and is trewly
cursed by the words of the Prophet Iheremy in the.17. Cha. 5. vearse who
pronounces a true curse in these words.

Cursed be the man that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord. Amen.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by William How: for John Arenolde, and are there to be
sold at the North door of Paul's Church.


