To the Right Hon: the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of the Higher House of
Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Drapers of the Town of Shrewsbury.
WHereas there is a Bill passed in the Lower House of Parliament, for the free
Trade and Traffic of Welsh Clothes in and through the Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales, by which the Inhabitants of Wales are enabled freely to
sell by way of Barter or otherwise, all their welsh Clothes at their wills and
pleasures, to any persons who may lawfully buy the same; And that any persons
who by the Laws of this Realm may lawfully buy any such Clothes, may freely
buy the same of any persons inhabiting within the said Dominion of Wales; Any
Charter, Grant, Act, Order, or any thing else heretofore made or hereafter to
be made to the contrary notwithstanding; And further gives certain liberty
to any persons using the Trade of Merchandise, to transport the said Clothes
into the parts beyond the Seas, out of any Ports or Havens of Wales, etc. vt in
billa: which Bill if it shall also pass this Honorable House: these
inconveniences would ensue.

1. To the Town of Shrewsbury. Shrewsbury, contrary to an ancient Charter of
Corporation granted to the Drapers by Edward the 4.th, and confirmed by the
Kings Majesty that now is, and others his Ancestors: And so for this Commodity
it does take away their Privilege, and the Privilege of all other
Corporations of England.

The Drapers are prohibited by the French Patent to transport the said Clothes
into France as formerly they used to do; and so if this Act pass, will be
deprived of their Trade both abroad and at home; Which home-Trade for Welsh
Clothes, they have founded, continued and maintained, even time out of mind.

Many poor Sheermen and their Families, to the number of 800. persons, that
live there by Dressing the said Clothes, will be undone or forced to seek them
new dwellings in the farthest parts of Wales, where dwellings are scarce.

The Town in general wanting its accustomed Trade, will be impouerished and
made unfit to do his Majesty service, as heretofore it has done.

2. To the Country of Wales. Oswestrey; Without the which the poor Clothier
cannot live, at which Market the Drapers of Shrewsbury, Oswestrey, and
Whitchurch, did bestow 2000. pounds or thereabouts, every week.

3. To the King.

4. To the Kingdom.

Under color of transporting Cottons out of those creekes, the Merchant will
transport Raw hydes, Wool, Tallow, and other prohibited goods.

THe Lords of the Privy Counsel as well in the late Queens time, as in his
Majesty's time that now is, have, upon grave and mature deliberations and
refferences, to diverse Honorable personages and grave Judges, both of England
and Wales (who heard the allegations on all parts) made several Orders for
the settling of this Trade; which by this Act will be overthrown.

It may therefore please your Honor to have consideration of these precedent
Reasons, and to lend your Honorable Assistance for the rectifying of the said
Bill; for the good of the said Town and Commonweal.


