Soli gloria Deo. CERTAIN RARE AND NEW INVENTIONS for the Manuring and
Improving of all sorts of Ground.

PVBLISHED BY THE AVTHOR, FOR the help and Instruction of all those that
having any barraine Land or other, and that are desirous to use the same unto
their best Profit and the public Good.

AT LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. Fawcet, and are to be sold by H. SEYLE,
dwelling at the Tygres-head in Fleet Street. 1636.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, I have here laid open unto thy view certain Instructions in
points of Husbandry that as yet has not been Practiced by any, such as are in
use already I will not undertake to teach nor yet to treat of; Although I
think it were not a labor superfluous, by reason that Husbandry is not a
needless thing, but a principal supporter and maine Pillar both in Church and
Commonwealth; yea it is that, that our GOD has ordained to be the
sustentation of our natural Lives.

The prosperity of this Science presageth Plenty, it presageth Health, it
presageth Wealth, it presageth Life, and makes glad the Heart of man; but the
contrary presageth Penury, Famine, and woe: For, if this Science thriveth, the
whole Land thriveth, but if it fails, who is it that feels not some smart
thereof; and therefore, if all or the greatest part in some kind or other
partake of the Calamities that ensues through the unskilfulnesse of the
Husbandman, I hope there is none either so foolish, or wicked, as to be
offended at any that shall endeavor in a lawful sort to discover any thing,
that may be helpful to the Husbandman, and that may further his skill in
Husbandry.

The Husbandman perhaps may think, it only belongs unto him to discourse of
Husbandry; but I must tell him, and all others of the like mind, That it is
the duty of every one (so far as they are bound to procure the Public good)
to produce some thing or other, if they can possibly, that may further the good
of Husbandry: Indeed, look how much the Soul in excellency exceeds the Body,
and Celestial things exceeds Terrestrial; so far does the science of
Divinity exceed all other Sciences; but excepting the Science of Divinity, no
Science is of that antiquity, worth, and excellency (in my judgment) as is
this Science of Husbandry. And although many other sciences are of more esteem
in the world then this, yet innumerable are there that have passed their whole
lives, some others the greatest part of their lives without the help of diverse
of them; yet never any passed through any one part of their lives without being
beholding unto this Science; and therefore I cannot but marvel to think how
many great wits have been employed to illustrate, and set forth other
Sciences, and how few have bent their minds to perfect this Science, when as
there is both matter superabundant, and reason sufficient to induce men
thereunto.

In Martial affairs the skill and direction of some great man, as of the
General oftentimes, does profit more in the battle, then the skill and
courage of the Soldiers; And the prescription of the Physician is a direction
unto the Apothecary: And the skill of the Pilate is of more worth for the
preservation of the Ship, then the toil and labor of the Mariner: And shall
we think it would not profit Husbandry, if such as are of a deep judgment
should but bend their minds and frame their studies, for the discovery of such
points of Husbandry, as may serve for use and direction unto the Husbandman,
whom the continual toil and daily care they undergo will never suffer them
to become so truly ingenious, as to discry in this Science any more then what
they may discern with their bodily eyes, nor yet all that. Some may think
perhaps meanly of a subject of this nature; and yet I doubt not, but that
moderate men may be exercised in such Points of Husbandry as I shall here
discover, with as great delight and profit, as they shall desire:

I shall not at this Impression, publish all the skill I have attained unto in
this Science, neither shall I describe all the several Instruments and
Inventions to be used in those points of Husbandry, as I shall here now treat
of, because I shall want words that may express the particulars of the same,
for new Inventions must have new nominations, both of the things themselves,
and also of the particulars thereof; And when both the thing it self the
Names, and the Particulars, are all unknown unto the Reader, the description
thereof would but puzzle him, and so tire his affection, before he would
attain unto the true knowledge and use of the same; therefore at the end of
this little Treatise, shall all such as are desirous to receive further
instructions concerning the same, be directed where they may both see the
several Engines and Inventions, and also receive further information therein if
they please.

I will not stand much to entreat for acceptance, for I know men will accept
of it according as they find it, only this I must say, I hope there is none of
so evil a nature, as to take it in evil part; and if that I find it to be
well taken, I shall with the greater alacrity discover other Points of the like
nature more freely and fully hereafter, and unto all those that shall find or
discern any good by any thing herein declared, my desire is, that they would
give the Lord the glory thereof, whom I take to be the revealer of all true
and lawful Mysteries; and therefore, the glory of the same to be due unto him
only, if any thing herein seem imperfect, that attribute to my insufficiency.

As for the Subject, it is of such a nature that it will not admit of an high
style, nor Rhetorical phrases, neither is it necessary in such a subject, to
speak above the capacity of Husbandmen, who most commonly are illiterate;
therefore in this work, I have rather endeavored plainly and briefly to
deliver the several Directions and Instructions herein contained, then Amply
or Elegantly to write of the same: And howsoever I may be censured by any; yet
my comfort is, the Lord knows that in undertaking this task, my aim is, and
ever shall be the glory of God, and the public good of my native Country, in
which mind, I hope ever to subsist and rest,

Always studying and endeavoring the same: I. S.

The Contents of this little Treatise.
THe first Chapter. Shows certain Causes of Barrenness. The II. Teaches
the use of a new Invention, called a Seed-barrow. The III. Contains
Instructions concerning the Manuring-Plow. The IIII. Contains Instructions
concerning the Manuring-Waggen. The V. Shows how to prepare your Ground for
the Manuring Waggen, or the Seed-barrow. The VI. Shows how to prepare Dung,
Chalk, Lime, Marle, or any other manure, to use in your Manuring-Plow,
manuring-Waggen, or in your Seed-barrow. The VII. Declares the several
Benefits arising through the use of the Manuring-Plow, the Manuring-Waggen, or
of the Seed-barrow. The VIII. Contains certain Notes and Observations in
Sowing. The IX. Teaches the use of the Manuring-Barrow. The X. Shows the
several benefits arising through the use of the Manuring-Barrow. The XI.
Shows the use of the Manuring-Stone, Corroding-Harrowes, or Corroding-Rakes.
The XII. Teaches the use of the Horse-Rake. The XIII. Teaches how to find out
the nature of Grounds. The XIIII. Shows how to produce good store of Manure,
and Dung. The XV. Shows how to Manure your ground without Dung. The XVI.
Shows how to destroy Heath, Brakes, or any other Shrubs. The XVII. Concerns
the making of some certain Barren ground, although not worth yearly, 12. d.
the Acre, to become worth 30. or 40. s. an Acre yearly.
Certain Rare and new Inventions, for the Manuring and Improving of Ground of
all sorts.
PART. 1.
CHAP. I. Certain causes of Barrenness.
IF I should treat of all the causes of Barrenness, my discourse would be too
tedious for so short a Treatise as now I intend; therefore I will omit to
speak of some causes, until I shall more Copiously write of this subject, and
yet being it is the property of a good Physician to discover first the Malady
before he prescribe the Remedy, so will I first show some of the causes of
Sterrilitie and Barrenness, that do most concern us, and that therefore we
have most reason to take notice of, before I discover those several points,
and directions in Husbandry, that hereafter I shall lay open.

The first Cause the which I shall but now name, and indeed which is the maine
cause, is the curse of God upon the Earth for Sin: For the other, they are
but subordinate unto this; As the Prophetical King declares; The Lord makes
a Fruitful Land barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; and
this we may observe to be effected daily, as it were by diverse and several
means, for sometimes by excessive showers the fatness of the Earth is washed
away, and sometimes the purest of the Earth by boisterous Winds is driven
away, whereby Barrenness by degrees does ensue daily, as daily experience may
testify, if we do but consider how Hills and high grounds that lie most
subject to the wind and weather, are ever of all other the most Barren, and
although by these and other means, the Lord does produce Barrenness, yet he
has so ordained, that in the sweat of our brows we may get our Bread out of
the same; and therefore we are to endeavor, as much as lies in us, both to
pacify the wrath of God by our repentance and new obedience through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and also to use the best means we can attain unto
to procure the Fertility of the same; therefore let no man think or once
imagine, that the more skill and means he does attain unto, that the less
need he has of Gods help, and so become the less religious, for the more
skill and means we attain unto, the more in duty do we become bound unto
GOD for imparting his blessings unto us, and also the more our endeavors are,
the greater will our damage be, if the blessing of God be not upon our
endeavors, and therefore the more that our endeavors are, and the more our
skill and knowledge is, the more careful ought we to be in the service of God,
that so the Lord may be moved thereby still to enlarge his blessings and
favors utno us; For our aptness to forget God when we enjoy his blessings in
great plenty, causes him to deprive us of those blessings oftentim^s;
therefore let every one that would be a profitable member in the Church and
Commonwealth, be both dutiful in the service of God, and diligent in the
labors of his Calling; for although the Lord has as it were left it in the
power of man to Till and Manure the ground, and to make it fertile, yet we
cannot be ignorant how that there is a sovereignty belongs to God, and that
many ways the Lord both can and does oftentimes destroy the Fruits of the
Earth; as sometimes by Blastings, sometimes by Mildeawes, sometimes by
Caterpillars, sometimes by one Creature, sometimes by another, and sometimes by
unseasonable weather, and therefore let our skill and industry be never so
great, yet let us remember ever that we stand in need of Gods blessing: and
that if we are not careful servants unto the Lord, we are neither faithful
servants nor yet profitable subjects, either unto our King or Country.

The other causes of Barrenness, I shall discover at another time, and in the
mean time I shall humbly crave every one in their several callings, to remove
these causes already mentioned; first by their true repentance and new
obedience, and secundarily by their diligent and lawful endeavors, according
to those several directions, as hereafter in order shall follow.

CHAP. II. Instructions concerning the use of a new Invention, called a
Seed-barrow.
THE first things that I will speak of, shall be of those that are of the most
general use, and that first of all of the Seed-barrow, an invention necessary
for every one that Sows any kind of Grain, and is to be used in manner
following; when you are ready to sow, you must bring your Seed, and also your
Manuring-powder made of fine mellow dung, in sacks or other vessels, as you
please, into your Field, and place half your powder and half your seed at the
one side of your Field where you begin to sow, and then place the other half
of your Seed and powder at the other side of your Field, that so you may have
your Seed and powder in a readiness at each lands end to trim your Barrow
therewith, for it is not good to overcharge your Barrow at a time with your
Seed or powder; and therefore at every Lands end you should put about such a
quantity of Seed and powder into your Barrow as will be spent in going once
from the one side or end of your Field unto the other, and not more, because at
every lands end, you may supply the same with case, you also must use more
Powder then Seed; and therefore, you must provide five or 6. bushels of
manuring Powder or more, for every one bushel of Seed you sow. For the more
liberal you are of your powder, the more bountifully shall you reap;
therefore having two or three Funnels in your Barrow, the first and last also
being larger then the middle Funnell which is your Seed-funnell, you may fill
the first and the last Funnell wi^h your powder, and also you may mingle some
powder with your seed, and thus sowing your ground with your Barrow, in this
manner; your seed which does become the root of the Corn will be so inwrapped
in the dung, as that it will grow and fructify abundantly.

CHAP. III. Concerning the use of the Manuring-Plow.
THE Manuring-Plow may be so called; because it will excellently well Manure
any ground, as you Plow and sow the same, and so Improve it very much: You are
to prepare, and bring your seed and Manuring-powder into your Field when you
would sow the same with this Invention, according as is prescribed in the
Instructions for the Seed-Barrow, and so you must place half your Seed and
powder at each lands end, as also is before expressed. This Invention may be
used in the Sowing of any manner of ground, but principally in sowing of such
ground, and of such grain as you use to sow under Furrow.

Also, it is best to Sow some kind of ground that is very stony and barraine,
that will not yield the Husbandman so plentiful an Increase, as may recompense
him his charge and industry without plenty of some kind of manure or other:
For this Invention (where the Husbandman may get any Dung, Marle, fat earth, or
any other kind of good soil) will apply such plenty of the Manure unto the
seed at the Sowing thereof as the Husband man shall desire, and so it will
cause it to multiply, and fructify abundantly, and also yearly Improve the
said ground very much, if it be thus yearly manured and sown.

The use of this Invention will neither be chargeable, nor laborious, nor yet
the Improving of Land with the same, because the Land every year will yield
his Crop, and it will Plow, Manure, and Sow your ground with the same speed,
and facility as any other common Plow does, that does (but only break up the
ground.

And as there be several fashions of the old common Plowes, so likewise may
there be made several fashions of these Manuring-Plowes, according to the
several natures of Soil, and to the several Customs of Countries: Also in
stiff and hard grounds it will be necessary, that the Husbandman do Harrow
his ground over after that it is sown with the Manuring-Plow, if he see cause.

CHAP. IIII. Concerning the use of the Manuring-Waggen.
THE Manuring-Waggen is so called, because it cannot well be used without
wheels or somewhat to bear up the same, by reason the Cattle otherwise could
not well draw it. It being indeed to be well loaded with Dung or such other
Manure that is to be got, because this Invention is to be used in sowing of
Barren ground that of it self will bear nothing.

The same kinds of Manure is to be used in this, as is used in the
Seed-Barrow, but much more in this then in the other; therefore the holes in
the manuring Funnels of your Manuring-Waggen must be of a wider bore then those
of the Seed-Barrow, but the holes of the Seed-funnels much of one size.

This Invention is most fittest to be drawn by Oxen, because Horses will draw
it too swiftly, and the Barrow is to be placed so that the bottom thereof may
go as deep in the earth, as it is possible for the Cattle to draw the same;
for whole loades of some kind of Manuring powder or other is to be put into the
Manuring Funnels thereof at a time, and then this Invention in short time will
Improve any barraine ground, and make the same to become rich, and fertile.

CHAP. V. Instructions showing how to prepare your Ground for the Seed-barrow,
or Manuring-Waggen.
YOu must prepare your ground with your Plow cutting your Furrows very slender
and deep, and break the clods with an heavy Oxe-harrow, or Horse-rakes; and
also, if your ground be of a hard and stiff mould, that in dry weather will
not dissolve, and break, you must moysten the same through such means as
hereafter I shall prescribe, and then break the same with an Oxe-harrow, as
(commonly is used by most Husbandmen,) or by an Horse-rake: also you may leave
a little space at each end of your Close vnplowed, until the last; because of
turning and trimming your Seed-barrow, Manuring Plow, or Manuring-Waggen at
every Lands end, and also because of removing your Seed and your manuring
powder along at the land ends, as you sow: and then at the last you may plow up
your land ends also, and sow the same with your Seed-Barrow, or
Manuring-Waggen, as you did the rest.

CHAP. VI. How to prepare fine Dung, Chalk, Lime, or Marle, for to use in your
Seed-Barrow, Manuring-Plow, or in the Manuring-Waggen.
YOu must make choice of the finest mellow Dung you have, and when the weather
is dry, you must house it, and so keep it dry against Seed-time in some out
house or place, where no wet does come: and when your occasion serves to use
it, you must beat or stamp it small to powder, and sift it over with such a
course siffe as Gardners do use, or else cast it up against such a cleanser as
Bricklayers and others use, when they cleanse their Rubbisn and gravel, thereby
to gather sand out of the same, that so you may free it from all clods, or
rather refuse-stuffe as would stop the holes in the Funnels of your
Seed-Barrow, and the clods or other refuse stuff so separated out of your
powder, will serve to use amongst your other dung, in your Manuring-Barrow.

Marle, Chalk, or any other fat soil would be housed in dry weather, and in
like manner must be beaten or stamped small, and so sifted as the other, but
your lime may be slak't and sifted at any time when you have occasion to use
it, or if you should find it to agree best with your ground unslackt, then you
may stamp it to powder, as you would do the other and so use it, and where
Dung, Marle, or soil is scarce, there in some Lanes or highways in the
Summertime, may a certain dust of a dark color be gathered that will be
very necessary and useful for some kind of Ground, and also some kind of
grain.

CHAP. VII. The several Benefits and Remedies arising through the use of the
Seed-Barrow, Manuring-Plow, and the Manuring-Waggen.
THE remedies and benefits through the use of the Seed-Barrow, Manuring-Plow,
and the Manuring-Waggen, are diverse; As first I may truly say three several
works, yea Four, are done at one instant by them, for they do in a manner
Plow, Manure the ground, Sow the ground, and Harrow the ground, all at one
time, and at one act.

Secondly, they do disperse the Seed very equally alike throughout all your
Cloase, for when men sow with their hands they cannot so equally scatter their
Seed alike with their Hand, as the Seed-Barrow, Manuring Plow, and
Manuring-Waggen will disperse it.

Thirdly, hereby will your Dung be so really applied unto the Seed, that it
will cherish your Seed, and cause it to multiply and fructify abundantly.

Fourthly, hereby also will your Dung, Marle, or other Soil, be so
intermingled with the Earth, as that no sudden shewers or boisterous storms,
may wash or drive away any of the Fatness of the same.

Fifthly, your Seeds-man may hereby either sow his Corn deep or shallow as he
pleases, or as he finds it to be most for his profit and advantage.

Sixthly, your Seed-barrow, Manuring-Plow, and Manuring-Waggen, will so
immediately cover the Seed at the sowing thereof, as that no kind of Foul may
devour any of the same; For always most commonly both Pigeons, and other kind
of Birds give their attendance upon the Husbandman, and devoureth some of the
Seed before it can be covered by the Harrow, or under the Furrow, if they sow
under furrow; and although some may think it is but a little that they
devour, yet the Increase that would proceed from that little, may be so much,
as would help to recompense the Husbandman for his charges and industry.

Seventhly, hereby may the Husbandman manure every Acre of ground that he
sows with any kind of Grain, either with Dung, Marle, or some other fat
mould or other, and so bring his ground into heart, and improve and enrich his
ground by Sowing it, rather then impoverish or dis-inable the same.

Eighthly, by the Manuring-Plew, and the Seed-Barrow, may you plant the Corn
such a depth into the Earth, so as neither the great winter Frosts, nor the
Summer drougth, shall so easily nippe or kill the root of the Corn.

CHAP. VIII. Notes and Observations in Sowing.
THere are diverse several Observations necessary to be learned, and understood
of every Husbandman, or other, that has any inclination unto Husbandry, as to
know how much Seed he must sow upon an Acre, or how much ground his
Seed-Barrow does sow at once or twice tracing from one end of the Field unto
the other; Now therefore, if you know not the length of your Field, you may
measure the length thereof, either by the Pole or Yard, and then put such a
proportion of Seed, and of Powder into your Seed-barrow, as you think will be
spent in one course from the one side or end of your Field unto the other.

Note therefore, that a Yard in breadth, and 1210. yards in length, makes a
quarter of an Acre, and 2420. yards in length, and a yard in breadth, makes
half an Acre; and 4840. yards in length, and a yard in breadth makes an Acre,
according to the Statute.

Or note, that 880. Poles in length, and a yard in breadth makes an Acre, and
440. Poles in length, and a yard in breadth, makes half an Acre; and 220.
Poles in length, and a yard in breadth, makes a quarter of an Acre; from whence
you may note, that your Seed-Barrow being Three foot broad does sow an Acre
being drawn the length of 880. Poles, or being drawn the length of 440.
Poles, it sows half an Acre, or being drawn but 220. Poles in length, it
sows a quarter of an Acre, and look how many times so much is spent, as does
sow 880. Poles in length, so many Acres is contained in your Close; For note,
that if half a bushel of Seed, is spent in sowing 880. Poles in length; then
if you spend 10. bushels of seed in your Close, your Close is about 20. Acres,
if you spend 15. bushels, your Close is then about 30 Acres, and so in like
manner, if you spend less then half a bushel in sowing of an Acre, then you
shall spend less then 10. Bushels in sowing of 20. Acres, and so of the rest.

Note also, you should carry a little spare Seed in a bag upon your Barrow,
Manuring-Plow, or Manuring Waggen, along with you, and so replenish your
Seed-funnell therewith, if your Seed should be almost spent before you come at
your Lands end, and then at the lands end you should replenish your Barrow,
Manuring Plow, or Waggen again both with Powder and Seed, and also if it need
put some spare Seed in your bag, because you should be sure not to draw your
Manuring-Plow, Waggen, or Seed-Barrow, when your Seed-funnell is almost empty;
Now if you find that the Barrow does spend the seed too fast or too slow,
there be two ways to rem^dy it; For either you may mix a little more or less
Powder amongst your Seed, or you may give freer or harder passage to your
Seed-funnels, as you s^e cause; and so also may you order the holes of the
other Funnels, that are for your Powder.

Now if your ground consist of so fat a soil as that it needs no Dung, you
may then trim your Seed-funnell only with Seed, and let the other funnels
remain empty, or otherwise you may make use of a barrow that has but one
funnell.

Note also, that if you have not Dung sufficient to sow all your grain
therewith, you may use a fat Sand when you sow Rye, and with your seed-Wheat
you may use either Lime or Chalk beaten, or slak't to powder, and with Pease,
Oats, and other grain, you may use Marle, or other of the best or fattest
Earth you can get.

Also note, that you may sow your Summer corn, as Pease, Oats, Barley and such
other, three Weeks or a Month sooner then has been usual, or is accustomed,
and that for two reasons. For first, you need not fear that the late frosts
should hurt or prejudice your corn, when as the root is planted more deeply
in the earth then it has been usual. Secondly, because the more deeply that
your Corn is rooted in the ground, as it is the better for your Corn, so will
it require a little more time for the pringing up, and growing of the same.

Note also, in some kind of Ground you must sow a greater quantity of Seed upon
an Acre, then you need for to sow upon other ground; for the richer the soil
is, the less quantity of Seed you may sow, because of the Increase that it
will yield, and therefore one may sow a less quantity of Seed in a fertile
soil then in a barren, lest your fertile soil bring forth your Corn too
rank; Yet as I would not advise any one to be lavish of his Seed, so I would
counsel them not to be too sparing, for he that sows bountifully, shall also
reap bountifully.

Also note, that Horses are the fittest Cattle for to draw your Seed Barrow up
and down your Close when you sow it, because it should be drawn with a
little speed, neither should they be placed one before the other, but one by
the side of another, as in a Coach, that so the Earth may lie equally loose
alike before the Barrow.

CHAP. IX. Instructions teaching the use of the Manuring-Barrow.
WHen you intend to manure a Field, if it be ground that you intend to make
Arable, it is expedient, that first you break up the same with your Plow, and
then bring your Dung, Marle, or other soil, and lay it in great heaps all
along at the one side of your Field, and then bring your Manuring barrow, and
fill the same at one of your heaps, and then draw it up and down from the one
side of your Field unto the other with your Cattle, all against that heap of
Dung where you loaded your Barrow until all that heap be spent, and then fill
your barrow at the next heap, and so draw it in like manner from one side of
the Field unto the other all against that heap, and so in like manner you must
spend one heap after another, until all be spent in your Close, this kind of
Manuring of ground may be used at any time of the year.

Otherwise to gain time, and spare labor, you should have two or three
Manuring-Barrowes, and have a Carre with low wheels made without sides and
well borded in the bottom, whereon you may place your Manuring barrow, and so
load it as you do your Dung-carts, where, and when your occasions serve, and
so draw it unto your Close that you would Manure, and when you are in your
Close, take your Cattle out from your Carre, and set them to your Barrow, and
then draw your barrow off from the carre, and so up and down that place of
your Field that you would manure, and thus while some of your cattle are
drawing of your Barrow to and fro in your Field, others may be exercised in
fetching of another barrow full of Dung upon your carre unto your Field.

You may manure your arrable ground either in dry or wet weather, and when your
ground is either dry or wet, but you may best manure your Pasture ground in the
Winter time when it is wet, or in the Summer when it is dry, after the same
has been eaten bare, least you should hinder the growth of your Grass,
provided always, that you water it well so soon as it has been manured, if
the season be dry. You cannot bestow too much time, or labor in manuring your
arrable ground but you must not manure your Pasture ground too much at a time,
lest you should destroy the grass, or too much hinder the growth of the same,
therefore you may Manure it but a little at a time, and the oftener.

Also, the manure whether it be Dung, Marle, or any other fat mould, that you
use in your Manuring-barrow, must always be good and moist when you use it,
either upon Arrable pasture or Meadow ground.

If you think it a less labor to spread your Dung after the old manner, and
cannot stand long about it in manuring it with your Barrow, then you may spread
some of your Dung, Marle, or soil, all along in rows, and then fill your
Barrow with some of the other that you have reserved, and let your Cattle draw
your Barrow up and down upon the Dung that lies spread abroad in your Close,
and your Barrow will work the same so effectually into the ground, as that it
will increase the fatness of your soil, and improve your ground very much.

This also is to be noted, that you must have a loose cover for your
Manuring-barrow, made of plancke or board, and fitted so to your Barrow, that
it may sink down to the bottom after the Dung or Soil; and when half the
Dung is spent that is in your Barrow, then the driver or some other should
stand upon the cover in the midst of the Barrow, thereby to press down the
Dung that it may work out of your Barrow and into the ground the better.

Further also, if you find that your Dung, or Marle does work too fast out of
your Barrow, then you may temper some wet Litter, or other refuse-stuffe
amongst your Marle, or any other mould that you would use in your
Manuring-Barrow, or otherwise you may lay some small twiggs or spray-wood in
the bottom of the barrow, and it will keep any mould from working through too
fast: as for dressing your ground with Chalk, that may be done after the old
accustomed manner, only this I would advise those that have not observed so
much, that after their Chalk is spread abroad, they should let it so lie upon
the superficies of their ground as long as they can, for the longer that it
lies so before it be plowed in, the better it is for your ground, for indeed it
should lie a whole Winter upon your ground after it is spread abroad, before it
be plowed in, that so the frost may nip and break all the great clods of
chalk.

As for Lyming of ground, that may be done at any time of the year, because a
little wet slakes and dissolves the Lime at any time, but so soon as ever the
Lime or Chalk is dissolved and broken, then it behooves the Husbandman to plow
it into the ground, and to manure it well with his Manuring-barrow before dry
weather come, lest the Wind should drive away the dustie pure matter that
indeed is the Spirit and life of the same.

CHAP. X. The several benefits arising through the use of the Manuring Barrow.
FIrst of all, by the use of this Invention, you may yearly very much Improve
any kind of ground, either Pasture, Arrable, or Meadow ground, with a little
soil, dung, or other fat mould.

Secondly, hereby you may kill, and destroy Moss, Brakes, Heath, or any shrubs
whatsoever that does pesture your ground, and hinder your grass from growing.

Thirdly, you may make any Barren ground, that never yielded any profit, to
become good arrable ground by manuring well the same with such mellow Earth as
is to be got near unto the same.

Fourthly, hereby shall your Dung, Marle, or other soil be so incorporated,
and ingrafted into your ground, so as that the Wind may neither drive away, nor
the excessive Shewers wash away the fatness and purity of the same.

Fifthly, in manuring your Arrable ground with this Barrow, you will so work
and chafe the same, that if your Seed be clean, it will bring forth your Corn
very clean, and free from weeds. For your Dung being wrought out and chafed
by your Barrow upon the ground, it will not be so apt to bring forth Weeds, and
the ground it self also will be so mortified, that it will not be so apt to
bear weeds, as when it is manured otherwise.

Sixthly, the Manuring-Barrow will level your ground and make all even,
dispeircing abroad such heaps of Earth as the Moles cast up, and level the
little Molehils that through long continuance are grown hard and rough.

Seventhly, also by the Manuring-barrow, you may spread such heaps of
Horse-dung or other, that would hinder your Grass from growing by lying on
heaps, and help the growing thereof by being dispierced abroad, for ever if
you can intend it you should a little manure your Pasture ground with this
Barrow, so soon as it is eaten bare if you desire to Improve the same, and
also if the weather be dry, you should a little water the same ever after when
you have manured it.

Eighthly, by Manuring your loose or dry ground with this Barrow, you may make
it to become firm and good ground that will reteyne any moisture, that shall
fall upon it, the longer, thereby to fatten, and mollify the same; For ground
that consists of a light and loose mould, does let the moisture that falls
thereon so soon pass through the same, that it very little profits. If any
one should think it will harden ground, and make it too stiff, there be ways
enough to mollify and moysten the same again; as hereafter shall be declared.
Otherwise they may forbear Manuring ground of such a nature with this
Invention, and use other ways and Inventions that they shall find to be more
commodious for the same.

CHAP. XI. This shows the use of the Manuring-stone, Corroding harrow, or
Corroding-rakes.
THese several Inventions are chiefly to kill and destroy Heath, Brakes,
Furzes, Moss, or any other shrubs, that keeps the Ground barren, or makes
it unusefull, first, the said ground is to be cleared and then Plowed up, and
either in dry or wet weather when your leisure best serves, these Inventions
are to be drawn by your Cattle, up and down upon the same, but in wet
weather, and when the ground is moist, is the best time, and your labor will
be most effectual upon the same. The Manuring-stone is to be drawn alone if
it be a great one, if they are little ones, they may be coupled together;
Corroding-harrowes are not to be made too bigg^, because in places where the
groun^ is hollow, rising, or falling, they cannot then in so pliable ^ manner
glide upon the earth, and chafe the same so eff^ctually, as when they are less
and coupled together, the Corroding rakes, are to be used by such as have but
few, or li^t^e Cattle, and in the same manner, and for the ^ame purp^s^s as is
the Corroding harrow, or Manuring stone, and they are to be coupled together at
the head ends, and the tail ends of each are to be fastened in the tugges of
the Horses-coller, and so one horse will draw two of them at once.

CHAP. XII. It shows the use of the Horse Rakes.
THese Rakes are for the same ends and purposes as those that Gardeners use,
although they are to be much more large, and stronger, and also they are to
cleanse any Heathie, Broomie, or other Brakie ground after the same has been
broken up by the Plow of all Roots, and other refuse-stuffe, that might hinder
the use and Improving of the said Ground, before the same be dressed with the
Manuring barrow, and also they will serve to dress, or prepare any Arrable
ground after the same is Plowed for the Seed-barrow or Manuring-Waggen.

CHAP. XIII. Instructions teaching how to find out the Nature of Ground.
Several grounds are of several Natures, for some ground is more improoved by
Chalk, then it is either by Marle or Dung, again other grounds are improved
by Marle or Dung, and not by Chalk, or Lime, some are Improved most by one
kind of manure, some by other kinds of manure, some Grounds do require three
or four several kinds of manure, as Dung, Marle, and Chalk, or Lime to
improove the same; Therefore it behooveth every Husbandman to know the nature
of his Ground, before he be at any great cost, or charge to manure and Improve
the same, because I have observed how diverse Husbandmen have half undone
themselves, and discouraged others, in dressing and manuring their Ground with
such kind of manure as has not been agreeable unto the nature of the same.
Therefore in my judgment the wisest course for one that knows not the nature
of his ground, nor the several effects of several Manures, is to dress some
little several plots of ground with several kinds of manure, and when he
sees what kind of manure does best agree with the nature of his ground, and
that does most improove it, then to dress and manure his ground with the same.
The like trial may Husbandmen make in Sowing of their ground, for some kind of
grain does thrive, and prosper better upon one kind of Ground, then it does
upon another, and likewise some kind of manure does cause one kind of grain
to thrive better then another, and manure that causes one kind of grain to
fructify, will not cause another; therefore when the Husbandman has made his
trial, and has found what manure does best agree with each several kind of
grain, he may trim his Seed barrow, Manuring Wagg^n, or Manuring Plow
accordingly, and so order his season, in committing his grain unto such kinds
of soil, as does most abundantly yield increase of the same, and that he may
have no cause to complain, but reap such plentiful croppes, as may benefit
himself, and all others.

CHAP. XIIII. How to produce good store of Dung to manure your ground withal.
THere is nothing generally better to manure any manner of ground then Dung,
whether it be Arrable, Pasture, or Meddow ground; and therefore every
Husbandman should endeavor to make the greatest quantity thereof he can,
because the more Dung any one has, the more he may improove his ground, or
the more ground he may manure. It is the custom of many Husbandmen to lay
their refuse straw, or other such like stuff in lanes, and other high ways,
there to rot it and make it into Dung, but this custom is neither good for the
travailer, nor yet for the Husbandman, for before it is rotten, or rather
beaten to dirt, there it lies and cumbreth the way, and cloyeth such Cattle,
as travel upon the same, and in the end being beaten to dust, or dirt, either
the best and purest matter thereof in wet weather is dashed away, and in dry
weather is driven away with the wind, the feet of such Cattle raising up the
dust as they travel through the same, whereby the husbandman loses both of
the quantity, and of the quality of the same. The like inconveniences does
ensue when the Husbandman lays his Dung up in great hills and high heaps.
For the wind and Sun does ever quickly dry the out side of the same, and so
does exhaust and drive away much of the fatness, or purity of it, neither can
it rotte, or grow mellow well, it lying so in heaps and hills; and therefore
in so laying it, he rather does diminish, then increase either of the
quantity, or of the goodness of the quality of the same.

Now therefore, the best way both to increase the quantity, and reteyne the
goodness of the quality of your Dung, is to make large and deep pitts near
unto highways, and in low grounds where into muddy water may run, and also
to make the like pits near unto Kitchins, Stables, Gate-roomes or common
shores, whereinto the puddle water may run from such places; the Husbandman
need but once to make these pits, and they will serve for ever, this order
being observed, the highways may be preserved better, and become more
passable in the winter season, and the Husbandman enriched hereby.

Now into these pitts should the Husbandman cast all his refuse straw, and all
other such refuse stuff that he has, or can procure to make Dung thereof, and
ever as he lays in the same, let him shatter some of the best and fattest
earth, that he can get amongst the same, and when he has put in all his
refuse stuff into his pits, let him cover them over with spray Wood, Loggs, or
any other thing that may keep the Sun and the wind from exhausting up, or
driving away any of the same, and so let them remain until such time as it is
thoroughly rotten.

CHAP. XV. How to manure Ground without Dung, or Soil.
IF you have neither Soil nor Dung to manure your ground, then you should make
choice of the best and richest Earth that lies near unto you, and provide
thereof sufficient, to trim your Manuring-Barrow therewith, when you would
manure your ground, for although you have not Dung sufficient to manute all
your ground so plentifully as you desire, vet may you enrich your Barren
ground, and in short time make it equal in fertility and goodness unto the
best ground you have, by well Manuring of the same every year with such Earth
as is to b^e got in your best ground, if you cannot come by Marle, Chalk, or
any other kind of manure to dress and enrich the same. Also, there are
Manuring stones, and Corroding harrowes and Rakes, that in wet weather being
but drawn up and down your Close will manure your ground, and fatten the same
in some sort. Thirdly, your Seed barrow being trimmed only with some fat
earth, and drawn up and down your Field will manure it; but these last are to
be practiced only upon arrable ground, because the ground should always be
plowed up, when you would manure the same, either with the Seed barrow,
Corroding harrowes, or Manuring-stone, or Corroding rakes, if you have strength
enough to draw these Inventions thereon.

Now because some may not conceive this point of Husbandry to be rational, I
will here prove it by one easy, and familiar Example that is common to all: Of
all substances Stone and Iron are of the most obdurate natures that are, and
are the most unlikely to yield soil, yet who is it that can deny, that if one
power Water upon a Stone and whet but a knife or some other Iron thereon, it
begets much soil; and if so small a matter as this will beget a little soil
upon those two obdurate and barraine natures, how much may b^ produced by this
point of Husbandry of such substances, that are of soft and soylie natures: I
could have produced the like familiar Examples to prove diverse other points of
Husbandry herein declared, but that I should have made my discourse too
tedious, neither do I think that there is any of so shallow a capacity, that
may not conceive them to be Rational, because in Nature they differ not from
such points of Husbandry that are daily practiced, and have been so often
approved of in every Country.

CHAP. XVI. How to kill and destroy Furzes, Heath, Brakes, or any other Shrubs,
and to Improve the said Ground.
FIrst, you must cut up all the Furzes, Heath, or any other Shrubs, near unto
the roots, and then plow up the said ground, with a good strong Plow, and then
rake together the said roots with a Raking-harrow, or Horse-rake, or with
Garden-rakes, made for the same purpose, and cleanse the ground of them as
near as you can: Afterward, first manure the said ground well with a
Corroding-harrow, Corroding-rakes, or Manuring stones, until the color of the
Earth begin to alter, and then trim your Manuring-barrow with Marle, Dung, or
any kind of the richest mould you can get, and Manure the said ground as well
as time and means will afford, and then Sow the same with such grain, as is
of least esteem; as first, with Buckwheate, Tares, Oats, or Peason. Also when
you sow the same, you should make use of a large Seed barrow, or
Manuring-Waggen, that has no teeth, and that has large Manuring-funnels, but
chiefly of a Manuring-Plow, that so you may apply good store of manure unto
your Seed: Thus every year Manuring of it well, and sowing of the same in this
manner, you may gather good crops of Corn and make the same become rich
Arrable ground in short time.

But this note always, that when you would Manure or Improove any ground
effectually with any of these Inventions; you must thoroughly moysten the same
in the Morning when you begin if the ground be dry.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning the making of Barren ground that is not worth
Twelue-pence an Acre, to become worth Forty-shillings an Acre.
FOrasmuch, as it is in a manner impossible to Improve any Arrable ground or
other without Cattle; Therefore such as do desire to Improve their Barren
ground, where there is none but barren ground, must plant and provide for the
sustentation and supportation of Cattle; For according to the divine Proverb,
Where no Oxen are the Crib is empty; and much Increase comes through the
strength of the Ox. So where there is not sustenance for Cattle, there cannot
Cattle subsist, and where no Cattle are, there the ground must needs remain
Barren; Therefore, in such places of this Kingdom where there is much Barren
ground, there such as would recover such Barren, Heathie, Brakie or any other
sterrill ground, and make it Fertile, must think of making some of the same
barren ground to become Pasture, and Meddow-ground, that so they may have
sustentation for their Cattle both Winter and Summer. For the effecting
whereof, the Author will discover unto any reasonable person, as shall be
desirous to learn, how both easily and speedily they may make some Barren
ground that is not worth Twelue-pence an Acre, to become good Meddow-ground,
that shall be worth Thirty or forty shillings the Acre yearly, the which in
this Treatise he has omitted to discover; because he desires rather to give
Testimony thereof in deeds then words: And also, for some certain other
Reasons best known unto himself.

Or otherwise, he will help those to money for such Barren land, (that are
not minded to make trial thereof) or deal any other ways, as they shall
please.

VIVAT REX.
royal blazon or coat of arms"

The Conclusion of the Author.
WHEREAS his Majesty has been graciously pleased out of his Royal favor,
to Grant, and Confirm diverse Powers and Privileges by his Majesty's Letters
Pattents, under the Great Seal for the said Inventions, and for diverse other
ways for the Manuring and Improving of Ground, that as yet have not been found
out, nor practiced by any. Therefore desiring, that my self and all others,
that wish well unto the public Good, may proceed in an Employment so laudable
and beneficial for the whole Kingdom; out of a grateful mind, I shall
willingly admit all those freely to use any of the said Inventions, and to
exercise any of the said ways for the Manuring and Improving of Ground, that
shall help either me, my Agents or Assigns, unto any Barren land upon
reasonable Conditions, or that shall be forward in assisting me in the
accomplishing and Exercising thereof.

In Fleet Street at the Sign of the three Flower Deluces, over against St.
Brides* lane and, there may any one see diverse of the said Inventions, or be
further informed if they please.

FINIS.

