SIX SERMONS PREACHED BY MASTER HENRY SMITH AT CLEMENT DANES CHVRCH without
Temple bar.

With two Prayers of the same Author hereunto annexed.



Imprinted at London by R. F. for Robert Dexter, dwelling at the Brazen serpent
in Paul's churchyard. 1592.

The contents.
Two Sermons of the song of Simeon. The third, of the calling of Jonah. The
fourth and fifth, of the rebellion of Jonah. The sixth, of the punishment of
Jonah. Two Prayers.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE LORD, THE LORD EDWARD EARL of Bedford, grace and peace
from the Lord.
AS the little be gathers not honey for her self alone, but for others: so
right Honorable, I am bold to present your good Lordship with my Choice, my
Care, and the Issue. The first your honorable self, and in The Ch^i^e.
this, as you are the hope of the reviving of your undoubted noble grandfather
and father: so my hearty wel-wishings (together with the prayers of all the
godly) is, that what the Almighty here graced them with, in you may be
redoubled. The second is, the fountain The Care.
whence the first had his stream, and being in me (as a member of the Church)
what I wish to the same assured assembly of Gods people, I leave to the alone
determiner of all controversies whatsoever. The last I commend to the only The
Issue.
direction of the Lord. Now as the faithful disposer of Gods truth, was a man
linked unto me in assured friendship whilst he lived: so I having with care
long since collected these his sermons together, do now with singleness of
heart present the same unto your Lordship, and therewith am pressed to perform
all such duties to your Honor, as God shall enable me unto, both in prayer for
your health* and increase of zeal to the maintenance of his poor flock,
which I hope is the only aim and end of all your Honorable purposes. Thus
with all other graces, I most heartily desire that father of light to enrich
you in this life, and after this, to bless you with immortality in that place
of rest for ever.

Your Lordships to command W. S.

THE SVVEETE SONG OF OLD FATHER SIMEON, IN TWO SERMONS.
Luc. 2. verse 29. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared
before the face of all people, a light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the
glory of thy people Israel.
THis is the sweet song of old father Simeon, wherein is set forth the joyful
and peaceable death of the righteous after that they have embraced Christ Jesus
with heart and mind unfeignedly as he did. See^ng their death is to be the
beginning of a better and more joyful and pleasant life the^ the other.

But before we proceed further in it, let us hear a little of that which went
before. The Evangelist says and behold. ver. 25. There was a man in
Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon: this man was just and feared God and
vvaited for the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost was upon him. And a
revelation, etc.



S^meon feared God (says he) Relig^o^ may well be called fear, for there is
no Religion, Pro. 1.
where fear is wanting, for the fear of the Lord, is the beginning of
wisdom, and this privilege has God given, to them that fear him, that they
need to fear nothing else. Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel, until
he had embraced in his arms, him who^ he so long lo^ged for to see, and feel*
how many waiters be there in the world, yet few wait as Simeon did, but some
wait for honors, some for riches, some for pleasures, some for ease, some for
rewards, some for money, some for a dear year, and some for a golden day as
they call it, but Simeon waited and expected with many a long look until he
had seen and embraced Christ Jesus, the light of the Gentiles, the glory of
Israel, and the salvation of all that with a faithful and zealous affection
and love does wait for his coming, to the comfort of the afflicted and to the
terrifying to the wicked, and ungodly, which have not already waited neither
embraced him, as Simeon did. Faith in all afflictions does lift up her head
waiting in assured hope beyond all hope, and seeing the clouds scattered over
her head, yet she is ever comfortable to her self, saying anon it will be
calm, and although all the friends in the world do fail yet it never fails
nor faints, but ever keeps promise in that which by the verity of the
spirit of God it assures until her joy be filled. All are not Israelites that
are borne in Israel. Simeon was an Israelite Romans 9.
indeed, for he waited for the messiah from God with patience, and
expectation: so the spirit of God dwells always with them which always say
thy will be done. The seed Luke (...).
is not cast all on a heap, but it is cast all abroad: therefore where be the
fruits of the spirit that you have brought forth? for the spirit of God is not
like a dead potio^ in the stomach, which works not, neither can we have this
spirit in us and feel it not. For if thou have it, it will lead thee to the
Temple, and when thou art there, it will lead^ thee to Christ, and when thou
have received and embraced him, it will possess thee with godly care to keep
him and to entertain him, and to be obedient unto him. But can we care to
serve God when he comes, and cannot care to hear him when he speaks unto
us there? If Simeon had not waited should he have had this consolation? and ca^
we receive comfort by the coming of Christ when we wayt not nor wish not for
it? If we wayt as he did, the spirit will assure us, that we shall see God
before we die: and they that long in faith to see the joys of heaven, the
spirit assures and promises faithfully unto them that they shall see it. Now
Simeon came into the Temple at this time by the providence of God: the
worldlings will call it chance, but the Evangelist would not Pro. 16. Mat. 10.
chop that in, because it is manifest that all things come to pass by the
providence of God without which there is nothing done. By this providence
Rebecca came forth to Genesis 24.
wayt on her fathers cattle when Abraham's sernant prayed and looked for her
coming, that he might take her for Isaac to marry withal. By this providence
Saul was anointed (...). Sam. 9.
king by Samuel, when he thought he had no such thought in his heart, but went
about seeking for his fathers asses that were lost.

Happy are they and blessed which see the Mat. 13.
things which we see, and the ears that hear the things that we hear says
Christ: but cursed are we, that hearing and seeing do not repent, for we cannot
be blessed by hearing and seeing only, unless we hear and see with profit as
we ought. But we will object that we are Israelites, and are circumcised, and
have received the sacrament of Christ's blood that we might be his people and he
our God, but this will not excuse us nor make us seem any thing the better in
the sight of God, but rather worse if we have not cast away the works of
darkness and put on the Lord Jesus Christ: for it is said, that Christ came
Ephesians. 6. Romans 13. John 1.
amongst his own, and his own received him not but despised him, therefore
his own are accursed, so many of them as re^ect their own salvation, which
being freely offered unto them, would not stretch forth their hands to receive
it.

And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple. etc. Luke 8.


If we would think that his spirit does lead us into the Temple, we would
mark very diligently the motions thereof, when we are there whether it
speaks unto us in our own souls, or by the mouth of the minister of God,
who is the minister not of the 1. Cor. 3. Lu^. 4.
letter, but of the spirit and grace of God. The devil led Christ unto the top
of an high mountain that he might show him the glory of the world, which
deceives unstable minds: so would he do you, if you would be led by such a
guide, but I would not have you to mark the vain motions of such a spirit
which leads to nothing but to vanity and pride: for after he has led you up
to the top, and allured you by carnal pleasures as much as he can, if you then
fall down to worship Mammon and embrace the world, the same spirit will
afterward lead you, nay rather cast you down from the top of all unto hell.
Therefore I beseech you, and heartily entreat you, that you would be the
servants of God, and the servants of the spirit of God, to obey it, and do
nothing contrary to his will that you can refrain, that you would do all
those good things which you would were done by you, and that you would go
thither whither you would come, for all would come to heaven, but all will not
go to heaven. If you will all hear, I will teach you all, yea I will undertake
this: hear, and mark my words, and you shall be converted by the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For I pray unto the Lord that I may never preach to the
condemnation of any among you all, which wishes that every of you were more
zealous and more godly then my self. But to whom shall I compare you? even to
the vacabond Jews, of whom Luke Act. 19. 74.
mentions in the Acts, that they took upon them to abjure evil spirits by
the name of Jesus whom Paul preached, to whom the evil spirits answered saying,
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? and those which had the evil
spirits ran upon them and overcame them, so that they fled out of that house
naked and wounded, and thus the devil prevailed against them at that time,
because they sought to work with another instrument, and prevail with
another weapon. If they would have said in the name of Jesus who^ we preach,
they might have prevailed, but they thought it sufficient that Paul preached
him though they never professed him. And so we lean upon another staff, and
think to be saved because God saves others. We shall be dealt withal as were
those vacabond Jews: wherefore he will answer such I know, and such I know, but
who are ye? Therefore it behooves us every one to pray unto the Lord, that he
would furnish us with weapons to encounter against all the evil motions of the
spirit of Satan, that we may overcome and not be overcome and put to flight
like these vacabond Jews, but that we may have oil always in our lamps
burning, and always armed with watchfulness against our enemies, lest Satan
steal upon us at unawares, and spoil us, and strip us, and give us a fall.

Lord now lett^st* thou thy servant depart ^n peace, etc.

If Samuel had heard the first time that 1. Sam. 3.
God called him, the^ God needed not to call him the second or the third, if
Peter had Luke 22.
marked the crowing of the cock at the first time as he did at the third, the
cock needed not to crow thrice.

Now therefore, when you hear the same sound again which you have heard
before, remember now that the cock croweth the second time: for you know what
discommoditie does come by negligence, and what commodity by attention: for if
you attend and follow, justice shall be swallowed up of mercy. Here is the
example, but where be they that follow it? If nine leapers be cleansed, yet but
one returns to give thanks, Luke. 17.
then one is all. Unthankfulness is the first guest that sits at the table,
for some will not stick to say, that they never said grace since they were
children, but if they had said we never had grace since they were children, I
would rather believe them. Do they not say, Give us this day our daily bread?
If you do, for shame say so no more, beg no more at Gods hands, until you be
more thankful for that you have received. For behold, the heavens Le^it. 26.
frown upon you for your sins, and the earth denies her fruit, and is
become barren because of your unthankfulness.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart, etc.

Here Simeon prayed and praised God, yet but a short prayer, for God delights
not in much babbling, like the Pharisees or like the priests of Bal, but Simeon
prayed with Mat. 6. 1. Kings 18. Exodus 14.
the heart like Moses and was heard. Though you sing all David's Psalms over,
and not have David's spirit, it profits nothing, and though David was heard
when he song the^, yet you can not be heard. Therefore let us pray so, that our
prayers may be heard, and let us hear so, that by hearing we may profit by it.
Let us not hear still so unprofitably as we were wont to do, if we do it shall
be required at our hands: for do you think that you shall never be called to
account of that which I have preached unto you, but as soon as ye are gone out
of this place, all is shut up and all is forgotten, God is exe^pted from your
minds, our Savior Christ says, John 12. 48
the word that I speak unto you shall judge John 12. 48 Luke. 10.
you at the last day. Marie is commended, for that she heard our Savior very
d^ligently, laying up his words in her heart, and Jacob was wiser then all his
children, in that he Genesis 37. 11.
remembered the dream of Joseph until he saw it fulfilled. Those that love the
Lord with an unfeigned love do gladly hear his voice and become obedient. My
sheep hear my voice, says Christ, and they that love the John 10. 27.
Arc as David did, will dance about the Arc as David did, and that with joy
and 2. Sam. 6.
gladness. Isaac was a good man, his name signified laughter, whereby was
showed what joy and laughter there should be about Christ Jesus, for he was the
only figure, eue^ Christ him self. The Virgin song when she knew Luke 1.
that she should bear him, the Angels song joyfully when he was borne, and
Simeon song Luke 2.
when he was brought into the Temple, but as soon as he saw Christ, he desired
of God that he might die and depart out of this earthly prison. So soon as a
man knows God, ever henceforth he cries with the Apostle, I desire to be
dissolved, that he might be with Christ, for Christ is light, and as soon as
they Phil. 1. 23.
see him they see also them selves, his glory, and their shame and
filthiness, which makes them wish for death, that they might live with him,
and this made the martyrs desire death or any other torment, that their days
of iniquity might be ended, and that sin might cease against God by them:
for all sin is blood in their eyes, and all worldly pleasures vanities.

Simeon desired death, for the fervent love of God made life irksome unto him,
which naturally is the most pleasant thing of all unto man, and death pleasant
unto him, which all men hate naturally, and would give all the riches in the
world if they had it, that they might not die, such love they bear to life. So
I conclude, that no man is willing to die till his conscience be quiet in
Christ, for then the love of the world falls away, like the mantell of Elias
when he was rapt into 2* Kings 2.
heaven.

Simeon had seen many things in his days, but when he saw Christ, he was
unwilling to live any longer to see more, but like the heart which pants with
desiring after the Psalm. 42.
water brooks: so he longed so long, till he had seen with his eyes the
Savior of the world, and then he so thirsted for death, that he sought nothing
else. And thus they that hunger after righteousness are satisfied and Mat. 5.
filled.

It is enough for me (says Jacob) that my Genesis 46.
son Joseph lives: so let us be satisfied with Genesis 46.
this, that our savior Christ lives, and where he is thither shall we come. I
would go says one, through heat and cold, through ehalth and sickness, and
through all kind of miseries, that I might hunger after God and after his
righteousness. They that bear the cross of Christ have all the marks of
Christ's Disciples. None are so well fed as they which went with Christ into the
wilderness, and John. 6.
where there was no food, there they all were satisfied and filled with
wholesome food.

Simeon knew Christ as soon as he saw him, and embraced him as soon as he
knew him* and enjoyed him as soon as he embraced him.

Some know the word of God as soon as they hear it, others hear it as though
they heard it not, like deaf adders which stop their ears at the voice of the
charmer. So Pharao would not hear the voice of Moses, nor Baals priests would
not hear the voice Exodus 5. etc 1. Kings 18.
of Elias.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.

Christ brings peace with him, not the peace of the world, but that peace which
passes all understanding, my peace I leave with you: my peace remain with
you, says he. Our peace is laid up in Christ, and all the peace we have by
him, else it is no true peace. Simeon had peace enough, that he departed Psalm.
37. 37
in peace: so mark the end of the just and you shall then depart in peace,
like the lamb upon the cross. Feign would Balaam die the death of the
righteous, but Balaam Number. 23.
must then live the life of the righteous, therefore all men look to this.
Happy are they that depart in peace, when death says fear, and the serpent
says despair: then says the spirit to the flesh, crouch, and bids the
serpent fly while death opens the prison doors.

If the Papists believed that they depart in peace, they would never say, that
those which depart go to Purgatory: and so by their own saying, the worst part
is behind.

Some say, this Purgatory is in the earth near to hell, and other say it is
in the air near to heaven. Some say, they are punished there by fire, and
some say by water, and some say by fire and water, and some say, that if it be
in the earth, it is too far then from heaven to be saved. Others say, that if
it be in the air, it is too far from hell to be damned. Some say, the good
Angels torment, and other say, that the evil spirits do it. But we must
understand, that it is a painted sepulcher, made rather for the living then for
the dead. For the Locust of Rome ^.
does live altogether by such Trentals and by such traditions, and this is the
profitablest dream that ever any of the^ dreamed, but it is manifest by the
word of God, that where the tree falls, there it lies, and shall Eccles. 11.
lie for ever. Dives and Lazarus are dead, and Luke 16.
where they are, thither shall we all go. Satan has many sleightes to deceive
us, of which this is one of the greatest, to bring us from the word of God to
dreams, and traditions, and things invented by the brains of mortal men which
have not the spirit of God in them.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.

In my last lecture I unfolded two questions, the first, whether it be lawful
for a Christian man to wish to die. The second, whether we may pray for the
dead, and say, Lord have mercy upon them. But all the seed is not fallen into
good ground. and therefore some think it but a small matter to say so, or as it
were a venial sin, if it be a sin. But let us take heed how we make trifles
of sins, for there is no dalying with God, who is jealous as a consuming
fire, when his people make such small account of his words. Heb. 12.
Other demand whether it be not better to say God be with them, then the
devil be with them, both which are naught and to be eschued. And herein they
ask this question, like a thief having robbed a man by the high way, and
being taken with it, and demanded why he did such a villainy, he says, is it
not better to rob him then to kill him? as though he must needs do the one of
the^: then what a shameless answer is this, for it is manifest, that of two
evils none is to be chosen.

Some will say, it is a testimony of our good Three bucklers wherewith some do
use to maintain prayer for the dead.
will. To such we must reply saying, so it is a testimony of your ignorance:
and then after a little conference they will grant, that indeed it does not
profit the^. Then we must reply and say, God has made all things to profit
us, and has commanded that nothing be used unprofitably, no not so much as a
vain word speaking, saying, that for every idle word we must give account at
the day of judgment. Then they reply again saying, Mat. 12.
if it do them no good it does them no harm. But we must reply and say, it
were good to beware least it do thy self harm. Another sort will reply and
say, I pray God I never do worse. But to such we must answer, I pray God you
may do better: and you should first know whether you do not harm before you do
it. For in deed it must proceed of harm being spoken, in doubting without
faith, for if you believed that they were laid up in peace whom you pray
for, what need you pray for them at all? But it shows an unbelieving heart,
and we know that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and the Lord will say of
them, who has required those things at your hand? you have wrought vanities.
Now therefore you will not leave it, because you used it: then will you say
also, we will not leave our lying nor our swearing, nor our cursing, because we
have used it. It will grieve me if I hear you use these speeches hereafter,
having no reason nor proof of Scripture to maintain it by, or to be your
warrant in it. Therefore I charge you in the name of God, that you use them
not, but rather when you hear this, or ani^ other sin condemned, to lay
hands upon it, and see that you put it to death without delay, according to the
law of God.

Simeon wished to die, and had good cause so to wish, because God promised,
that he should be delivered from this miserable life when he had scene his
glory, and the light of Gentiles. The wicked wish to die, that thereby they
might have deliverance from their troubles and worldly vexations, as they
suppose, which in deed is rather an increasing and aggravating thereof. But the
faithful when they wish to die, they do it in great zeal and love of God,
using it as the best remedy against sin, that thereby they might cease from
offending their good God, showing thereby, that they are as it were wea^ie of
the service and bondage of Satan and sin. Therefore they desire death, that
therein they may glorify God, as in their lives they have done, and sought to
do. For man was not borne at his own will, neither shall he die at his own
will, therefore they as it were beg leave of God for it.

Sampson was a figure of Christ, in that he Judge. 16.
glorified God at his death more then all his life, in killing so many of Gods
enemies. I showed you that they are guilty that killed themselves with surfets
or drunkenness or intemperat using of them selves, yea although they tender
their lives never so dear, yet they are in the guilt, because they use the
means that dot^ shorten it.

According to thy word.
When Satan has once possessed (...) the^ profits and pleasures bring us to
our possession, and though they do so profess religion and godliness, yet
they can never have any comfort by it all their life. For their own hearts
accuse them for hypocrites, because they wait not for the consolation of God
according to his word, and whatsoever is not done according to that word can
not be acceptable: and this word they care not for, neither set it in any
estimation. When Ada^ sees his nakedness, the subtle serpent can deceive no
longer, but before he saw his nakedness, he is ever deceived, and led away
with the multitude into innumerable errors. Some say they shall be saved by
mercy, and some think by good works, and some by the Popes pardon, others say
by Purgatory, and these will have a Mass song for them as long as the world
stands, and all for one silly soul thinking to be saved by it, and yet see
their blindness, for they seem to think, that their torment shall not cease
as long as the world stands, else why should they find and hire men to say
Mass for the^ so long? But these are the fat morsels of Bells priests, and for
this cause is the Popish Creed made very favorable to the Clergy. Well, say
that ignorance is the mother of their devotion, for when the covetousness of
the priests and the ignorance of the people joined together, then they invented
Purgatory, Masses, prayers for the dead, and then all their trinkets. For if
they had not held our fathers in ignorance, they would never have bin Papists.
But when they cast a mist before the eyes of men, then the blind fell into the
diteh which does contain so many gross corruptions.

I showed upon this word servant, that the godly would not leave this
privilege for all the riches in the world, for that they are the servant of
God, fellows to Angels and princes: for we serve him whom Solomon served who
is blessed for ever* Every seruingman bears the cognizance of his master
upon his sleeue. But what will the Lord say when he comes and finds us
marked with the badge of Satan? surely he will say, give unto Satan that
which is Satan's, for all the houses of Israel are sprinkled with the blood of
the Lamb, and all Exodus 12. Ezech. 9. Revel. 10.
the mourners are marked, and all the chosen are sealed with the seal of the
living God.

Well, was it said the poor receive the Gospel? The young men are more
forward in the truth, and more zealous then the aged. Once the younger brother
stole away the blessing from the elder, therefore the elder hated him even for
his zeal, and when was Jacob hated more then he is now? when was he so hated
and persecuted as he is now by Esau? Yet in the old time men were more zealous
in their age then ever we hear of them to be in their youth, yea they were
zealous in the Lords business. Age hindered not Noah Genesis 6.
from building of the Arc when God commanded him, age hindered not Sim^on
from rejoicing and mirth when he beheld and embraced the Lord Jesus Christ.
Then old Simeon embraced Christ, and he enjoyed him with hearty joy in zeal,
but now where is old Simeon? there are but few of them to be seen coming to
the Temple to receive Christ, but now young men receive, young Dan. 1. 1. Sam. 2.
3. 1. Tim. 4. Philemo^ 10
Simeons, young Daniels, young Samuels, young Timothies, and young Onesimus, and
the young infants begin to speak again. The young have him, they are zealous,
and I hope they will keep him though old men neglect him. Satan thou have too
much for nothing already.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

He which begins to root out some error or superstition, at the first shall
have much a do, for custom and natural corruption are the first causers of
heresy, and shall cry against her in the maintenance thereof, and
withstanders of reformation shall say, great is Diana of Ephesus, and so for a
long time they seem to wash the Ethiopian or the black More, the more they
wash him the more they gall him, and yet he is an Ethiopian still, but in the
end the Arc stands and Dagon falls down, and truth triumphs 1. Sam. 5.
over falsehood, having got the victory, and light chaseth away darkness with
the brightness thereof. To him that asks what scripture have you against it?
it is sufficient to answer, what scripture have you for it? Is not this enough
to overthrow it, that for every idle word you must give account, as our
savior Christ says. And again says God, who has required these things at
your hands? They ask, what, shall we not say God be with them? Why should you?
I pray Esa. 1. 2. Sam. 12.
you what said David of his child? he said no such thing, but thus, he is gone,
and will not return, but I shall follow him. If he be a good man, we say the
Lord be thanked for his deliverance, but if he be not, then we say, God grant
we may do better then he has done, that by his fall we may learn to rise from
sin. Therefore as Jacob said to his wives Genesis 35.
and children, give me your idols that I may bury them: so say I unto you,
give me your superstitions that I may bury the^, that they may remain with
you or in you no longer, to the dishonor of God, offending of your weak
brethren, or to my grief, for I am jealous over you, because seeing you are
mine and I am yours, o that my voice were as the whirlwind, to beat down,
root out, and blow away all your superstitions, that they may no longer reign
among you. Now to my text.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
Because the holy Ghost by inspiration had declared unto him, that he should
not die til he had seen Jesus Christ, therefore the same spirit led him to the
temple, and showed him that which it promised, and having seen the same he
desires and wishes to die, and be released from this earthly prison, that he
might live with God. As idle and evil wishes are vain, because they are not
according to faith, nor grounded upon the word of God: so though we ask as
cunningly as Jacob, and as earnestly as the sons of Zebede, yet if we ask
not in faith according to knowledge, Mar. 10.
we can not obtain, for we must ask so that we may receive, that we may not
return empty.

Then we see that the principal cause that moved Simeon to wish for death, was,
because he had seen his savior, and the true Messiah which was promised by
the father, figured by the law, spoken of by the Prophets, and foretold by the
fathers, and pointed at by John Baptist, he embraced. What desire should he
have of life, when life, and joy, and peace, and the very brightness of the
image of God appeared unto him, for all his life is but a pilgrimage of sorrow
and of grief, yea and a continual combat with sin, therefore what should he
fear death. But he might have said, long have I waited in patience, but what
is all the time that is past, and the life that is to come to an end? My
kingdom is not of this world, and yet I John 18.
have a kingdom, whereof I am certified now I see thy salvation thou have
promised, and now is thy promise fulfilled, therefore blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Mat. 5.
righteousness, for none shall have this food but they that hunger for it. The
murmuring Isrraelites died in the wilderness, and might Number. 11. and 14. and
16. and 21. etc.
not so much as see the land of Canaan, because they murmured against their
God. As Moses died on the mount where he saw the land of Canaan: so the godly
die in the sight Deuteronomy. 34.
of God and in the contemplation of his glory, like Steven, who at the very
instant of Act. 7.
his death saw the heavens open, and Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of
his father, and like Simeon here, which died not till he saw the Lord of life,
and till he embraced him thankfully in his arms. Beloved you are not ignorant
that the great day of the Lord is near at hand, and therefore they that have
not yet seen Christ, they that have not yet embraced him, but still sleep
without oil in their lamps, shall suddenly be overtaken without the wedding
garment, and shall be cast into eternal torment for ever.

Mine eyes have se^ne thy salvation etc.
Then we see that Christ was no spirit, neither was his body a fantastical
body, for if he were a spirit Simeon could not see him, and if his body were
a fantastical body, then could not he have embraced him. Therefore we see that
the words of the Scripture are true, which says, that Christ was perfect man
in all things, sin only excepted. For he sometime wept, as at the death of
Lazarus, and likewise over Jerusalem. Sometime John 11. Luke 19. John 4. Luke.
10. Luke 5.
he thirsted, as at the well where the woman of Samaria disputed with him: and
also sometime eat, as at Marthaes house, as also among Publicans and sinners,
which in every thing showed him self to be perfect man.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation etc.
O Lord says he, I desire now to be dissolved, and free from the bondage of
sin* which so long has inhabited in my mortal body, for now he is come, by
whom thou have promised to free us and set us at liberty, he is come by whom
thou have promised to break the serpents head, and he is come that will heal
our infirmities, and give strength against sin and Satan by faith, and peace
toward God through love. And now says he, I have embraced him, and thankfully
do receive him, I believe and am persuaded that this is the same Messiah whom
the Father promised, and the Prophets ^oretold, all Israel lo^ged and expected
for, who is the light of the Gentiles, the glory of Israel, and the God of the
whole world. Simeon was desirous to live no longer in this mortal life, when
he saw perfect life, but like Adam when he Genesis 3.
came out of Paradise, was desirous to come in again, or like the fish which
is taken in the net out of the sea struggleth to get in again. Seeing now he
is come for whom Simeon longed, therefore what are the troubles that are past,
and the sorrows that are come to an end? So they which love the truth of God,
and wait with desire to be filled with the knowledge thereof, such shall not die
until they have their hearts desire with conte^plation thereof. For as Peter
was sent to Act. 10. Act. 8.
Cornelius, and Philip to the Eunuch: so the Lord will stir up such of his
sernaunts, as may be fit instruments to minister the same unto us.

Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, etc.
Judas died before the time, and lived not to see Christ crucified, but the
Disciples which loved Jesus did see him die like an undefiled and innocent
lamb, and that to their exceeding comfort and joy, when they understood, how
that he suffered death for love of them and for their redemption. Now if Christ
can not hide him from such as hunger after him through love, then what shall we
say of our fathers which lived in the time of ignorance, that longed to see
this light, although they had a mist cast before their eyes? surely such died
not til they saw Christ and embraced him in their hearts. And this is our
judgment concerning them that died in the time of Popery, and likewise as
concerning the rest, which thought to be saved by Purgatory and Masses after
that they are dead, we say that they which sleep without oil in their lamps,
they die ^re they are aware of, and ere they wish for it, like the Philistines
which sent for Sampson to laugh and Iupg. 16.
mock at him, and to sport them selves, upon whom the house fell and destroyed
them all, or like the Egyptians, which thought that Exodus 14.
the waters had made passage for them as well as for the Israelites, both which
died in and for their security, because they were not watchful nor prepared
against the Lord called them.

Have seen etc. There be many sights of Christ, all go not up to the mount,
as Peter James and John, all see not his face with Moses, Mat. 17. Exodus 33.
John 13. 2. ^o^. 12. 2.
all sleep not in his lap with John, all are not taken up into heaven like
Paul, all embrace him not in their arms with Simeon. But as pleases God, so
he shows him self unto us, and all that love him both see him and embrace him.

To some he shows him self as in a glass, to some generally, to some
particularly, some he calls early, and some he calls late, and Mat. 20.
there is no hour in the day wherein he calls not some to go labor in his
vineyard. To some he shows him self by Angels, and to other some by visions.
Abraham saw three Genesis 18. Genesis 19. Iud. 13. John 8.
Angels, Lot saw but two, Manoahs wife saw but one, and yet one was enough. It
is said that Abraham saw Christ his days, but we see him cleerer then Abraham,
and cleerer then John, if we believe in him as we should. Some see Christ and
not his salvation, and some see his salvation, and do not embrace it. We see
Christ when we hear his word, and we embrace his salvation when we believe it,
they see him that hear him, they embrace him that follow him. Here if they had
heard me, I would have searched Jerusalem with lamps, to see who sits in
darkness. But how can they believe the word of God which hear it not? How can
they embrace Christ which know him not, no not though they see him, and all
through ignorance, having not the means to see him, because their leaders are
either blind guides, sleepie watchmen, or hireling shepherds. And surely it
is a woeful case, when shepherds go to task, and let their own sheep alone
summer and winter. They sheare them, but neither summer nor winter do they
feed them. How should those people under their charge see Christ and his
salvation, when they are so neglected of the wholesome food, and even starued
to death many thousands of their souls, because they have not the food which
nourishes the soul unto salvation: and how many be there which are as old as
Simeon, and yet have not embraced Christ Jesus? yea they know him not though
they see him, neither do they wayt for his coming, because they have no desire
to embrace him, and therefore they defer that, and put it off from their
youth to their middle age, from their middle age to their old age, from their
old age to death, and so they can have no leisure in all their life to embrace
him. But to such as do seek him, and wait for him with unfeigned diligence, we
say as the Angel said to the women at the sepulcher, fear not, you seek the
Lord Jesus. How is John. 21.
this world set to deceive us? we can find leisure to do evil at any time,
but we can find no leisure in all our life long to do good.

I have somewhat to say to you of this parish, a dainty was prepared for you,
and you let the strangers take it from you. You were required to a fast, and
you did feast your selves, you were required to come and pray unto the Lord,
and to humble your selves in his sight, that he may turn away his wrath from
you, and you let the temple stand open and empty for your parts, and your
shops were as open, and you were about your merchandise, forsaking God and
seeking to win the unjust Mammon, and the vanities of the world.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation etc.
You may see what deep root sin takes when custom is added unto it,
therefore you had need all of you to take my part, for though I and you fight
against it never so long, yet some of his darts stick in us still. He which
believes him, does that which pleases him, and he that has no will to please
him does that which delites him self, and he that offers him self to be
reformed by the word of God is offered in truth. But what, shall I shake off the
dust of my feet as a witness against you, and say, let them that will perish,
perish? Nay I will rather wash Naaman yet seven times, that I might make him
clean if he will be cleansed. If you have no Scripture for it, then think
from whence you have received it. If you have no reason for it, then think
from whence you have learned it. If you have no example for it, the^ think
whence it first came or sprung unto From popery.
you.

Thy salvation. Thereby to show, that he came not by Angels, or by men, or by
any other means, but only from the alone and eternal God. He calls him
thy salvation, for his name was not given him by Joseph nor by Marie, but by
the Angel of God, Mat. 1. Luke. 1.
signifying that he was come from heaven, the father saw him when he was borne,
the spirit came upon him when he was baptized, the Angels ministered unto him in
the Luke 3. Luke 4. Mat. 27. Mat. 2.
wilderness, his enemies subscribed unto him upon the cross, the Virgin
traveled, the star walked, the wise men came out of far countries to
worship him, then is not this Jehovah the mighty God, whose birth is glorious,
whose life is famous, whose death is m^ritorious. None can take upon him the
authority of God, but he, on whose shoulders the Lord lays it, being sent of
God and from God. Then we see that our Savior is the true Savior sent from
God, for all creatures bear witness unto him, yea the very devils, with all
the evil spirits do obey his voice, at whose name all knees do bow. He Mar. 1.
Phil. 2.
came not to bring health, wealth, pleasures, or profits, for the which if he
had, then multitudes of worldlings would have followed him: but he came to
bring salvation, righteousness, peace, truth and life, therefore few care for
him. He came to save sinners, not all sinners, not every one that says Lord
Lord, Mat. 7. Luke 5.
but he came to save penitent sinners, which turned unto God by their
repentance, therefore he prays in John for those only that John 17.
were given unto him. So soon as the seed is sown, the stones bruise it, the
thorns choke it, and the sun does parch it: and what comfort has the lilly
among thorns? therefore wisdom takes her unto her wings, and whispereth
saying, you shall seek me before I come, you shall seek me but shall not find
Pro. 1.
me, because ye have refused me when I offered my self unto you.

Christ is their salvation that believe in ^im and make much of him, and
thankfully receive him. The godly he delivers from sin, but the wicked he
leaves bound in the chains of their iniquity, to be tormented of him which
had tempted them thereunto, whose will they always endeavored to fulfill and
not the Lords, he shows them a hand upon the wall writing their condemnation,
Dan. 5.
and another catching them by the hairie scalpe, which makes all their joints
to tremble and their heats to despair, and he says unto them, what do thou
here without thy wedding garment? how dare Mat. 20.
thou come to steal away the childre^s bread? The spirit of Saul works in
him in his 1. Sam. 16.
bed and every where, and he calls for the harp of David to comfort his
heart which can not be comforted. And this spirit says to Judas, thou have
betrayed thy Lord and Mat. 27.
crucified him, therefore go and hang thy self, for it sticks within thee
like the mark of Cain. But the godly heart goes home rejoicing Genesis 4.
and chewing the cud like the Apostles, which reioiced in that they were
counted worthy to suffer for his names sake. Act. 5. 41.


O what a good banquet we have had this day* the be goes lode^ to the hiue,
and goes longer in the strength thereof then Elias did. 1. Kings 17.


Thy salvation. The only Savior is here called salvation it self, for if he
were called a bare Savior only, the^ you might likly understand it by some
other savior, but here he is called salvation it self, to show that there is
no other: for there be more saviors but no more saluations, and there is many
ways to death, and yet but one death. The brazen serpent was a figure of
Christ, that Number. 21. John 3.
they which are stong by sin, by fire, and by the serpent which beguiled
Euah, may make speed, because there is no remedy but to come to Christ.

The Papists have found out many saluations, they have found out a salvation by
Saints, a salvation by Angels, a salvation by Masses, a salvation by merits, a
salvation by Idols, as though Christ had least to do in his own office, for
they have other saluations to fly unto. They will have it, but they will buy
it, and what will they give for it? why they will fast so many days, go so
far on pilgrimages, hire priests to say so many Masses, build so many
Abbeys, and give so many sums of money to the Monks and Friars. Therefore this
scripture goes against them, and does dishonor their shamelessness, who like
Nemrod heaping stone upon stone, Genesis 11.
would have built up to heaven: so they heap sin upon sin, and every
hour some one heresy or superstition grows up from this filthy root, for
what Papist dare say that Simeon thought on any of these or put confidence in
any other Savior but only in him who^ he embraced in his arms? for salvation
is by the promise of God, and all promises are in Christ. And though Jacob 2.
Cor. 1.
wanted bread, Joseph wanted not money, Genesis 42.
therefore he gave them back again their money, and likewise he gave them
that corn that they would have bought with it: so I would wish them to say as
Joseph's brethren, that they have their corn for nothing, and had their money
too, so let them be content to say, that they have mercy for nothing and their
works too. For god cares not for their works, because they profit not him but
the^ selves. For there is no water can wash Naaman 2. Kings 5.
but Jordan, no water can wash the leprosy of sin, but the blood of the
Lamb. By this the Israelites were saved when the Exodus 12.
destroyer passed by. By this the Lord knows us to be his people, and by this
the devil knows us to be none of his. As it is proper unto God to be called
goodness, so is it proper unto Jesus Christ to be called salvation He is
called the way, the truth and John 14.
the life, for that life which we have is but a spark and shadow of life, but
he is the true and eternal life. Then seeing Christ is both our
righteousness, salvation, and also the way, the truth and the life, to lead
us thereunto. It is as possible for us without Christ to be righteous or saved,
as it is to be wise without wisdom, righteous without righteousness, or
saved without salvation. Therefore let us not be ashamed to take our water from
the fountain, seeing Christ is the fountain of all wisdom, of all
righteousness, of all truth, of all knowledge, of all salvation, and briefly
of all goodness: therefore there is no other Arc to save us from the flood,
no other ladder to ascend with into heaven, no other Joseph to feed us in the
famine, no other Moses to lead us through the wilderness. But as the river
S^loa runs through all the land of Iudaea, and waters the whole city of
God: so Christ does show him self all in all, and all sufficient in mercy to
save and to bless all his Church with spiritual gifts. If Christ be life,
what shall make us Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
despair? shall Satan? No, for he has overcome Satan. Shall death? No, for
he has overcome death. Shall hell? No, for he has overcome hell. Shall the
Law? No, for he Romans 5.
has fulfilled the Law. Shall wrath? No, for he has trodden the wine press of
his fathers Esa. 63.
wrath. Therefore it was a sweet saying of one at his death, when mine
iniquity is greater then thy mercy o God then will I fear and despair.
Salvation is borne, therefore we w^^e al in the state of condemnation before:
light is come, therefore we sat all in darkness before: glory is come,
therefore we were all laden with shame before: life is come, to show that we
were all dead in sin before. Life is come, and light and salvation: life to
the dead, light to the blind, and salvation to the damned. For Christ is called
salvation, to show that without him we are all damned firebrands of hell,
heirs of condemnation, and forsaken of God. To him that is sick, it is easy
to be thankful when he is whole, but when he is whole it is harder to be
thankful then to be sick. I would feign be disproued, that Nineveh might be
saved though Jonah would not.

Thy salvation. This word salvation is a sweet word, yea the sweetest word in
all the Scripture, and yet many despise this worthy jewel, because they know
not what it is worth, like the dawes which would rather have a barley corn,
then a pearl or a jewel because they know not the value thereof. O Lord what
is man that thou art so mindful Psalm. 8.
of him? O man what is God that thou art so unmindful of him? If a friend had
given us any thing, we would have thanked him heartely for it, but to him that
has given us all things, we will not give so much as thanks. Now therefore
let the rock gush forth water again, and let our stony hearts power forth
streams of tears in unfeigned repentance. We have all called upon you, but
none regards us, as though God were as Baall, and as though Dives felt no
pain, nor Lazarus no joy, but all forgotten. Many times Christ comes into
the Temple and there is scarce a Simeon to embrace him, the babe is here, but
where is Simeon?

If God had not loved us better then we loved our selves, we should have
perished long ere this, and yet we embrace not Christ as Simeon, who has saved
us from temporal and spiritual punishments. We are invited to a banquet, he
who calls us to it is God. What is the banquet? Salvation. Who are the guests?
The Angels and the Saints. What is the fare? Joy, peace, righteousness, this
is the fare, and we inuit you every one: yet who will come at our bidding?
some for want of faith, some for want of love, some for want of knowledge, have
despised this holy banquet, and unto this art thou called o soul unworthy to
be beloved.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE SONG OF OLD FATHER SIMEON.
Thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all the people, a
light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.
THY salvation. This word salvation is a sweet word, and holds me to it like
an Adamant, for when I thought to proceed, this word said unto me, stay here,
teach this and teach all, learn this and learn all, for it is the pith of all
the mercies of God toward his children.

Christ is called salvation, because no man should despair, and because it is
impossibl^ to be saved without him, for salvation is only in him, Christ can
do any thing but this, he cannot save him that will not repent. He is called
the salvation of God, because he came not from men, nor from Angels, nor by
chance, but from God him self, and therefore his name was not given him after
the manner of men, which was, that every father should name his own child, but
so did not Joseph, for the Angel had given him Luke. 1. Luke 1. Mat. 2. Luke 2.
Mat. 2. Luke 3. Mar. 1. Luke 4. 15. John. 11. Mat. 27.
direction for his name. The Virgin, the oracles, the babes, the shepherds,
the star, the wise me^, the voice of the crier, the devils, the leapers, the
sick, the dead, the earthquake, the sun, the moon, and all the cr^atures do
bear witness unto the son of God which is our salvation, he is called the
salvation of God, because he is a salvation according to Gods own mind. He
came not to bring ease and liberty, but he came to bring the spiritual sword,
and condemnation to all obstinate sinners, yet salvation to the penitent.

I showed you how many despised this jewel because they know not what it is
worth* how few Simeons there be in the Temple, how few Nathanaels, how few men
that fear God, these plants grow not on every ground. Who would be
unthankful if he knew what the Lord gives and what he forgiues, he gives the
son for the bastard the Lord for the servant, the righteous for sinners, the
innocent for the wicked, and the almighty Lord for the sinful sons of me^.
Do you not marvel how you can offend this Lord willingly, which has done so
much for you. Here I reprove unthankfulness, security, and negligence,
striving as it were to crucify Christ again, as the wicked Jews did, who
never prospered since the time that they said, his blood be upon us and upon
Mat. 27. 25
our seed. They were not like Simeon, who as soon as he saw him embraced him,
and rejoiced over him. There is no show of grace in the^ which show no liking
of godliness, neither in them selves nor in others: for this is the first part
of our conversion, to love them that love God, and so they are drawn to the
Son. No man will build an Arc until the ^loud come, no man will seek for
Genesis 7.
corn until the famine come, and scarce Lot Genesis 42. Genesis 19^
will be gone out of Sodom before the time of execution of Gods wrath do come
upon them. We preach unto you and call upon you, we have even wearied our
selves among you, we have reproved you for sin, and we must still reprove you
until you amend: now therefore if there be any grace in you, if ye have any
knowledge, any fear of God in you, if you have any goodness in you, if you
have any leisure to be saved, turn back now from doing evil, come out of
hell, and pluck your limbs out of the clouches of the serpent, for verily we
have not done so well in this city as the Niniuits did for all the preaching
and teaching we have had. For who has determined in his heart to amend his
life? who has left his pride? who has restored that which he has taken by
extortion, usury, and wrong? surely they that have done thus are monsters, I
can not see him, he walks invisible and can not be found. The heavens
trembled at the death of Christ, the sun did hide his face, the earth quaked,
the veil of the Temple Mat. 27. 45 51. 52. 53.
rent in sunder, the dead bodies rose out of their graves, and all this was to
show, that the Prince of the world suffered violence, and that the Lord of life
suffered death for the ra^some of us, and all whatsoever throughout the world
that do believe the Gospel, and live in obedience, and that he suffering for
sinful and wretched man, was a conqueror over hell and all evil, and had
overcome death. The Scribes are against him, the Pharisees were against him,
the rulers band themselves against him, the atheists against him, and all the
spiteful and envious Jews against him, whose birth was glorious, whose life
was famous, and whose death was meritorious, but God was with him and in him,
by which power he has overcome them all.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people. etc.

I thought when first I began this song to end it in four or five sermons, and
I know not what keeps me from it so long, but if it be as pleasant to you as
it is to me, you will not be weary of it though I go forward but like a
snaile, but hereafter I will go faster, and take more, and give you the best
thereof. Let us proceed.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people. etc.

He speaks this to the end that the eyes of all mankind may be fixed upon
him, as the eyes of all Israel were fixed upon the Brazen serpent in the
wilderness, that when Number. 21.
they be stinged with the sting of that fiery serpent which deceived our
forefathers, they may fly unto him for help lest they perish in their sin,
and their blood be on their own heads.

David being to encounter with Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.
Saul took and put on his harness, but he could not wear it, it was too
heavy for his little body, therefore he took nothing but a staff and a few
stones in a scrip, and so David slew the pride of the Philistines and the fear
of Israel. And even thus the Lord set his Son to fight with the Prince of
this world, not with swords and targets, bows and bills, but with the word
and spirit of God, with the which he has overcome, and through him we also
have the victory, and for this cause has he been prepared, that all people
might have cause to rejoice in him.

Which thou have prepared.
He was prepared long ago, as it does most plainly appear, for the Virgin
which bare him, the place of his birth, the poor estate wherein it was, his
miracles, his Apostles, his torments, his cross, his death, his resurrection,
and his ascensio^ into heaven, al these were foreshewed and foretold long
before they came to pass. Therefore some said, who is this that is so often
spoken of by the Prophets? who is this that can do many miracles that the
Scribes and Pharisees cannot do? Luke. 4. 7. John 11. Luke 8. Mat. 27. John 10.
Mar. 6.
that can raise the dead, that can cease the winds, calm the waters, at
whose suffering the earth quaked, the sun hid his face, darkness came over
all, and being dead, rose again by his own power, and ascended into heaven in
the sight of a great multitude. How can it be then but it must be known before
the face of all people, which was so manifest by dreams, by visions, by
oracles, by power, by authority, and every thing had a tongue to speak for God.
Every thing was prepared for him before he came to be revealed, he came not in
the beginning, nor in the ending, he came not in the ending, that we which come
after him might long for his second coming. He came not in the beginning,
because that such a Prince as he should have many banners and triumphs before
him. He came not in the beginning, because the eyes of faith should not be
daseled in him, and lest they should forget him, and his coming so long since
which lived in the latter ages, even as you forget that which I have said as
soon as you are gone hence. He came not in the beginning, because if he had
come before man had sinned, man would have acknowledged no need of a physician,
but when man had sinned, that he might feel the smart of sin, therefore he
came not then, for when they were cast out of Paradise, they ran unto Christ as
the Israelites did to the serpent. He came not in the beginning but in the
perfect age of the world, to show that he brought with him perfection, perfect
joy, perfect peace, perfect wisdom, perfect righteousness, perfect justice,
perfect truth, signifying thereby that notwithstanding he came in the perfect
age thereof, yet he found all things imperfect.

The Jews thought that he should come like some great Prince, with po^pe and
glory, which was a carnal conceit, for herein they were maruelously deceived,
his father was but a poor carpenter, and his mother but a simple woman, and he
a silly babe wrapped in clouts. Then ought not we to reverence our Lord and to
praise his name, for that he became so humble for us most vile wretches that
are worthy of nothing? and yet we see how cruelly they dealt with this blessed
one which came to save them. Ignorance sat in the chair, deceit gave the
sentence, and cruelty executed him, with the most painful and shameful death
of the cross. O that your eyes do not dasell, and your ears tingle, and your
hearts marvel at this dealing of theirs to our loving Savior which came to
save them if they would, and now see that he will abase him self for our sakes
even to the uttermost, o wonderful thing to think of. If you would mark I
would make you in love with him before I have done with you, I say unto all
those that come hither to be edified, take your fill of pleasure, enter into
Paradise, lift up your eyes, stretch forth your hands, and eat your fill of
the tree of life, and the Lord will go home with you, embrace him and kiss
him, entertain him well, and he will dwell with you for ever. But you that
come hither for fashions sake, either to see or beseene, to find fault with
somewhat, or to make an hypocritical show of godliness where there is none. I
tell you that comfort shall shake hands with you at the door, mark it, and you
shall see that my words are true. Show me what it is that is better then
salvation. I would have none of you to be damned if I might prevent it, nor so
much as a piece of you to be given to Satan, therefore I would I knew that
stone that would kill Goliath, for I would strike it with all my might into his
temples. If you will, you may be saved, and the Lord will one day put those
words in my mouth that will touch your hearts. Therefore now arise, kiss and
embrace the sweet babe Jesus, and then afterward frame your selves to obey him;
for then the Lord will knock at your hearts, and if ye will let him in, he will
teach you all things. The Lord came not in the beginning nor in the ending, but
he came in the middle age of the world, to show that if it will not learn now,
it will never learn to come unto God by repentance and ame^dment, that they
may learn to kiss the son Psalm. 2.
lest he be angry, and so they perish in his wrath like Sodom. He came in the
middle age of the world, to show that he was indifferent for the world, to give
light and life unto all that return unto him, for God respects Act. 10.
no persons, but every man of what nation or country soever he be, that
fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him and he will fulfill
their joys through Christ, yet not when we will, but according to his own
good pleasure, and when he thinks good. Therefore stay Daniell, thou shall
have thy diner anon, the Angel and Habacuc are about it. Stay Helias, anon 1.
Kings 17. Exodus 14.
the ravens will bring thee meat, and thou shall have enough. Anon Moses will
deliver Israel. So salvation is already prepared of God, and has been long
since with fullness, knowledge, and all excellent gifts, and he will give them
to us when he sees good, but we like whining children, that will not stay till
their milk be cold, but would have it though they be scalded with it: so we
would have the knowledge of God and liberty before we know how to use it. We
would know the high mysteries and deep counsels of God before we know our
selves, we would have the liberty of the Gospdll, when we know no way how to
use it but in security. But the Lord, he will wisely give unto us as it were
our bellies full when he sees it good, and when heseeth us ready for it, who
knows our hearts better then we ourselves.

A light to be revealed to the Gentilos, and the glory of thy people Israel.

You have heard Simeon showing the cause why the Son was sent from the
Father, why he became man which reigned before in Paradise. What moved God to
leave his joy and his bliss, and suffer more then all the world could suffer
together? A great cause it is that would make a king leave his kingdom and fall
to beggerie. A great and wonderful cause it was that made Jehovah to come
down from heaven to suffer misery upon the earth. Two causes Simeon shows
why this Messiah came from heaven. The first, that he might enlighten the
Gentiles, which sat in darkness, and the second, that he might be the glory
of Israel, which gloried in their sacrifices and in their ceremonies, and so
had no glory before he came, but were like the Moon when the Sun does shine
upon it, or like Rachel which despised Lea and became barren. And they despised
Genesis 19.
the Gentiles light, like that son which was angry because his lost brother
came home Luke 15.
again, or like those laborers which checked the Lord of the vineyard,
because he gave unto the other laborers more then he Mat. 20.
gave unto them. But the Gentiles are like Genesis 29.
Lea, who being despised became fruitful. Simeon rejoiced in Christ, not only
for that he was the glory of Israel, but also for that he was the light of
the Gentiles. Shall the head be sorrowful because the hand is well? nay rather
the hand should be glad because the head is well, and the head because the hand
is well. The father should be glad because his son is stronger then himself,
the mother should be glad because her daughter is wiser then her self, the
brother should be glad because his brother is richer then him self, the
mistress should rejoice because her maid is a better houswife then her self.
But we envy our brethren and our neighbors, because they are better then we,
and because God has blessed them with temporal or spiritual things above us:
if we see that they have learning, then we envy them for their learning, if he
have more gifts, we envy him for his gifts, if he have more knowledge we
envy him for his knowledge, if he have more zeal we envy him for his zeal,
if he have more riches we envy him for his riches, and how can we rejoice when
every bodies good is our evil, and every bodies joy is our sorrow? But fix
your eyes upon Christ alone, and he will fulfill your joy, if you look not
back to Sodom like Lots wife. If you love joy and gladness, Genesis 19.
Christ is joy and gladness, if thou love comfort, why Christ is the comforter
of all that bear his cross, if thou love life, Christ is eternal life, if
thou love peace, Christ is peace, if thou love riches, Christ is full of
heavenly riches, and full of liberality to bestow them upon all such as love
God: so Christ is all in all unto the godly, and they have more joy in Christ
always and in all things, then the richest, and glorious, and sumptuous Prince
in the world, then Salomo^ him self had in worldly riches, honors, pleasures,
ease or felicity. For the wicked which put their trust in riches, and make
the^ gods of gold and money, ease and pleasures, though they do all that they
can to fulfill their lusts, and take never so much pleasures, and be never so
merry, yet they can have no true joy, nor no peace of conscience, for all the
peace, the mirth and sport they have, is but deceit, all false and indurable,
like the grass, green in the morning and withered ere night. But when the
Lord does knock at their hearts, and strike them with a feeling of their
horrible transgressions, as no doubt he will, then they are all in a maze, and
they can have no Isa 48. and 58.
joy, no peace, no rest, but they may say, in laughter my soul is sorrowful,
in ease my soul has trouble, in mirth moan, in riches poverty, in glory
shame, in life my soul is even dead, in plenty my soul wants all things
wherein it should rejoice, it is destitute of all comfort, and possessed with
all slavish fears like Cain, who being Lord of Genesis 4.
all the earth, yet had no joy in it when God had once forsaken him. Likewise
Saul when 1. Sam. 16.
God had forsaken him, he had no joy of all his kingdom nor of all his riches,
and then who had more joy Saul the king or David the subject? So then we see
that perfect joy can be had in nothing but in God and in Jesus Christ.
Wherefore as by the stream you may be led to the fountain, even so let the
joy and peace of this life serve to lea^e us to God which is perfect joy and
peace, and there rest, like the wise men which were guided by the star, to
come to the true son of grace Jesus Christ when he was borne: and if we rest
not in him when we have found him there is no rest for us, but like the
restless dove which fluttereth about and finds no rest any way til she
returned to the Ark, but we seem as though we sought him and found him, when
as we do but play the hypocrite. Solomon says that the ways of a whore are
prosperity and welfare, for she ever puts on a vizard that she might not be
known to be so vile as she is: so under the color of goodness evil is
always l^^king. Therefore Christ is called the light, because that we should
leave our foolishnes seeing light is come, and that we should forsake all our
lights which are but darkness, and (...) unto his light which is the true
light indeed. He came to lighten the Gentiles, and they received him with
thankfulness, of whom there was no hope of goodness left. Who would suppose
that the barren woman should become fruitful, or the prodigal son return
home again? It is like as if an owl should be converted to see light, or as
if the stream should return into the fountain, or as if an old man should
become young again.

A light to be (...) to the Gentiles.

To be revealed not yet revealed, the Jews must first reject him before the
Gentiles receive him and when the Jews did oppress him, condemn him, and
crucify him, then were his arms spread unto the whole world. When the guests
would not come, then he sends into the high ways to compel others that
would come willingly unto it. Luke 14. 23.
Comfort is on foot, and that which will come shall come, etc. The Queen of
Saba Mat. 12.
came from the uttermost part of the earth to hear Salomons wisdom, and the
wise men came from the East to see Jesus Christ, Mat. 2.
but we may say, the Lord was here by in the Temple and I was in my shop,
selling and buying lying, deceiving and swearing. Well, when he comes back
again I will be better acquainted with him: and so we esteem not of his
presence in any reverent sort. The Sunamite said, Let us build a chamber for 2.
Kin. 4. 10.
the man of God, then we should build an house. Zacheus did climb up into a
tree to Luke 19.
see his savior, and the Lord seeing his diligence called him, Zaoheus come
down, for I will dine at thy house this day, and that was a joyful day with
Zaoheus, for then salvation came into his house and upon al his family: he gave
the Lord a feast, and the Lord made him a far better feast of peace, a feast
of joy, a feast of heavenly things, and so for his zeal and endeavor to see
Christ bodily, he showed him self unto him spiritually, even to his hearts
desire. To be revealed.

Have an eye to the future tense, that which 1. Kings 3. 12. 11. Iud. 13. and
15. and 16. Luke 6. Act. 1. Act. 9. Mat. 26. Act. 4. Act. 7.
is not shall be. As for example, Solomon was wise but he is foolish, Sampson
was strong, but he is weak, Judas was a preacher but he is a reprobate, Paul
was a persecutor, but he is a preacher, Peter was a denier of Christ, but now
he is a bold professor of Christ, Moses was learned in the wisdom of the
Egyptians, but now he is learned in the wisdom of God, by which the wisdom of
the Egyptians is made but mere foolishness in the sight of God. Other wise
men, as heathen Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Crates, and such like,
these were counted very wise men in the sight of the world, yet these were
Gentiles that wrote so many ^ookes full of wisdom, and all so adorned with
notable sentences and witty sayings, that one would think all wisdom were
buried with them, so famous were they, and so full of earthly understanding,
teaching manners, counsels and policies: yet for my part I have neither seen
nor heard of any such being wise in worldly things and without the wisdom of
God, but that they have committed some notorious foolishness in the sight of
all men, like Achitophel, of whom we read 2. Sam. 17.
that he was so wise a counselor, and yet see the end of him, he hanged him
self, and all for want of the knowledge of God. It were better therefore for
him to have had more wisdom and less wit. Crates, Aristotle and Plato and
all the rest of the wise Philosophers have either poisoned, burned, or drowned
them selves, and so we see that the end of worldly wisdom is mere
foolishness, and 1. Cor. 1. 20
the foolish have more peace then the wise: for their wisdom without the
fear of God does the^ no more good, then the Arc did to the Philistines,
which did nothing but I^d. 5.
torment them, because they knew not how to use it, and therefore irreverently
abused it. For if your wisdom consist in eloquence of words, in profunditie
of wit, to gain craftily and spend warily, to invent laws, to expound riddles
and interpret dreams, to tell fortunes, and prophecy of matters by learning,
all these without the fear of God do us no more good then their wit did these
Philosophers, which notwithstanding sat in darkness. And I am afraid though
Christ brought light unto the Gentiles, yet it may be said, that the Gentiles
sit in darkness still, saving a few Levites scattered upon the mountains, for
whose sake Sodom is spared. And because those had not the knowledge of God,
therefore they worshipped Mars and Cupid, sun and moon, beasts and serpe^ts:
so the Philistines worshipped Dago^, Iud. 5. Act. 19.
the Ephesians worshipped Diana, the Assyrians Nesroch, the Israelites
worshipped a calf, Ieroboa^ worshipped Beelzebub, the Moabites worshipped
Chamos, the Samaritanes did worship unto Baall: so the truth seems falsehood,
and error seems truth. As for example, that the world should be made of
nothing, that the word became flesh, that God and man was joined together in
one body, then one man may be righteous in the righteousness of another which
is Christ, and that the dead shall rise again, these seemed foolishness unto
the Gentiles, neither could they believe them. No more can some Gentiles
amongst us at this day, which are but natural men, therefore they do not
believe them: for when they professed them selves to be wise they became fools,
says the holy Ghost.

So then we see now what Christ has Romans 2.
done for us, he has bound that serpent, which has sown all the tares, so
that the devil is feign for want of better lodging, to enter into swine.

Heretofore, whereas one followed God a thousand followed Baall, but now kings
and Princes lift up their heads, desiring Christ to reign with them and in
them. Heretofore we made our selves like the wounded man, we were spoiled, we
were stripped naked, and we were bathed in our blood, being full of wounds, but
now Christ has furnished us, he has washed us, he has clothed us, and we are
now become true Israelites: we which were the vile and wild olives, he has
grafted up upon the true olive, and planted us in a fruitful soil. And what
cause can we show for this but only mercy? For heretofore we were called
foolish, but the Lord has made us wise according to the wisdom of God in
these days by his spirit: but if you deserve to be called the foolish nation
again, then ye are most unhappy and most cursed. So now we have heard that the
Lord does ^eueale all his counsels unto his Prophets, and how the glory of
Israel is now revealed to be the light of the Gentiles. And you have heard the
cause why: because the Jews rejected their own salvation. You have heard that
the cause was only his mercy and his love, because mercy can not contain it
self within Jerusalem.

A light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

You have heard why Christ is called light, why he is called the light of the
Gentiles, why the Lord did change a curse unto a blessing, and why the Gentiles
did change darkness for light, and a thousand gods for one true God. Then the
Gentiles received more grace then they desired, for the Lord came uncalled into
their houses, and made a feast unto them in their own houses. The light of the
Gentiles is our light, your light, and my light: Christ is our grace, your
grace, and my grace, and Christ is our salvation, your salvation, and my
salvation. He came unto the Jews, and for the Jews, and yet his coming unto
the Gentiles was better then to the Jews. He came into the world when the
world did abound in all wickedness, and saved us when we most deserved wrath.
Wonder at this you that wonder at nothing, that the Lord would come to bring
salvation, to redeem our lost souls, even as it were against our wills: so
that now we would not be as we were for a thousand worlds. I showed the
blindness of the Jews, who having heard of their reiection, and of our
conversion, and yet understood it not, neither sought to prevent Gods wrath in
rejecting of them. Therefore the rock which should have saved them, did shiuer
them in pieces: wherein was showed their wonderful blockishnesse, having it so
often foretold by their Ptophets, figured in their Law, shadowed in their
sacrifices, and read in their churches from Saboth to Saboth. Every thing that
comes to pass in churches, in commonweals, in cities, in countries, in
kingdoms, and in prou^^ces, these are all foretold in the scriptures, and yet
none do understand it, saving a few chosen ones whom God loves. For, the
coming of Antichrist, the overthrow of kingdoms, the darkness of Popery,
the light of the Gospel, the conversion of the Gentiles, and the rejecting of
the Jews, all these are set down in the scriptures, and yet we can not
understand it, though we hear it day by day, because we do not give our minds
to understanding. Such hearers shall stand in a maze before the righteous and
terrible throne of God: the dead shall rise, the trumpe shall blow, and all the
world shall be in an uproar, and they shall stand quaking, when their hearing
without profiting shall be laid to their charge, and they shall say, o we have
known no such things: but surely if the Jews could come out of hell, they
would admonish us to take better heed how we hear: for we hear as though we
did not hear at all, our minds are otherwise occupied. Now when we see any
thing come come to pass as it is foretold in the Scriptures, then we must say
as Christ said, this prophecy is fulfilled, for all things that are written
are come to scriptum est and factum est, that is, as sure as it is written, so
surely does it come to pass. It prophecieth nothing but that which truly is
fulfilled in due time, and the more often it speaks of a thing, the more
certain, the more excellent, and the more to be believed it is. Like a jewel
that is beset with pearl, so is our calling ordained with scriptures for so
does God tender our calling, which is so often in his mouth, and we so often in
his remembrance, that he speaks of us in every book throughout the whole
scriptures, like a kind spouse whose love is in a strange country, and he
delights him self with thoughts and meditations of her: so he did long until
the Gentiles were come to him again, like the prodigal child, whose father
did long Luke 15.
until he had embraced him. When shall my prodigal son come home again
says he? I will put my best garment on his back, and my gold ring upon his
finger, and his fare shall be the daintiest morsel. And thus God longs for
our salvation, and he knocks at our doors, Is faith here? is love here? is
one called the fear of God in this place? And as love makes lovers sometime
to speak plainly and familiarly one to another, sometime by dark speeches and
riddles, sometime by letters, sometime by dumb shows and signs, and sometime
to hide them selves one from another: so our God speaks sometimes plainly
unto his Church, sometime darkely and mystically, sometime he turns his face
from his Church and dear spouse, as though he would not speak unto her for
love as appears in the book of the Canticles.

The first type or figure was Caine and Certain types and figures of the
election of the Gentiles and the reiection of the Jews, which here he rehears^d
for the confirmation of this doctrine. Genesis 4.
Abell, Caine was the eldest son of Adam, and Abell the younger, yet God loved
Abell and accepted his sacrifices, but God rejected Caine for his wickedness,
and he became a reprobate: even so does God, he rejects the Jews which were
the eldest son, the true olive, and the seed of promise, and Gods dear
children if the^ had continued in obedience, and he takes us being but the
youngest son, the wyld olive, and makes us children by adoption unto him,
only of his mere mercy without any other cause.

The 2. example was Sem and Iaphet, both Genesis 9.
which were Noah's sons, Sem was the first son and Iaphet the third and yo^gest,
and of this Iaphet came the Gentiles: of him said Noah, God persuade Iaphet
that he may dwell in the te^ts of Sem, that is, that they may be united
together, as we see it is come to pass. Other sheep I have says Christ,
which are not of this fold, them also will I bring, and they shall hear my
voice, and there shall be one sheep fold and one shepherd. John 10.


The third type or figure of Christ was Genesis 21.
Ismael and Isaac, both the sons of Abraham: Ismaell was the eldest, Isaac
the younger yet Isaac was chosen of God and a figure of Christ at that time when
he went to have been offered as a sweet sacrifice at Gods commandment. And
Ismael his eldest brother was a mocker of his brother, and therefore he was put
away, and the Lord was not with Genesis 22.
him.

The fourth type or figure was Jacob and Genesis 25.
Esau, both sons to Isaac: Esau was the elder brother and Jacob the younger,
yet God loved Jacob and hated Esau, because Esau contemned his birthright, and
sold it to Jacob for a mess of pottage, and therefore Jacob stole the blessing
from him: so God blessed Jacob, but he cursed Esau, whereby is showed that the
Lord did for the contempt of the Jews, take away their birthright and their
blessing, and has given it unto us.

The fifth type of figure was Lea, which Genesis 29.
was squint eyed, and was despised, because she was not so fair and so well
favored as her sister Rachell, and yet the Lord made her fruitful and Rachell
barren: so we being despised for our barrenness in all goodness, yet the Lord
in mercy made us fruteful and revived us.

The sixth figure was Manasses and Ephraim Genesis 48.
the two sons of Joseph, Manasses was the eldest, and Ephram was the youngest.
Both of them Joseph having brought to Jacob his father that he might bless
them, he took Manasses and put him toward Jacobs right hand, that he might
bless him first and more plentifully, and he took Ephraim and put him
toward Jacobs left hand. But Jacob stretched out his right hand, and laid it
on Ephraims head which was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasses,
directing his hands so of purpose, for Manasses was the elder of them both.
Thus the Lord blessed us when there was no hope left for us.

The seventh figure was Rahab a harlot Joshua 2.
in Jericho, who was a Gentile, yet her heart was touched so, that she received
and entertained the spies that Israel sent, and in the time of danger hid
them, that they should take no harm, signifying thereby, that the Gentiles
should receive and embrace the true Israelites and messengers of the Gospel,
and keep them as safely, and defend them as diligently as Rahab did the spies
of Israel.

The eight figure was Ruth a Moabite, of her Christ Jesus vouchsafed to come as
Ruth. 4.
concerning the flesh, to show that he came not only of the Jews and for the
Jews, but also of and for the Gentiles, which were the lost sheep, unhoped
for, being strangers from the covenant.

The ninth figure was Sampson, who being a Jew, would needs marry with a
Gentile, Judge. 14.
signifying that Christ Jesus would also marry with the Gentiles, as he did
with the Jews.

The tenth figure was Solomon, who married Pharaos daughter which was an
Egyptian 1. Kings 11.
and Gentile, signifying thereby that Christ would take him a spouse among the
Gentiles to marry with him self as David Psalm. 45.
in the Psalms declares.

The eleventh figure was Naaman the Syrian, whose leprosy is turned upon
Gehezie, the leprosy of an heathen and ignorant man turned upon an Israelite,
and one that had the knowledge of God, being the servant of a Prophet,
signifying that our leprosy of sin and ignorance should be turned from us
upon the Jews, who had the knowledge of the law of God, but esteemed it not,
but were unthankful for it. Many like examples there are in the new
Testament: like as the Cherubins, though severed in su^der, yet looked one
toward another, and both upon the mercy seat: so the old Testament and the
new look look one toward another and yet point at one and the same thing.

The first type or figure in the new Testament Matt. 2.
was the wise men, which were the first fruits of the Gentiles, and came from
the East, being guided by a star: signifying that by the guiding of the word
and spirit of God, the Gentiles should come from all the places of the world to
embrace Christ Jesus with joy.

The second Type or figure was Christ Matt. 2
himself, his going into Egypt, signifying thereby that he should go from the
Jews to the Gentiles, because the Jews refused him through unbelief,
abundance of wickedness, and want of reformation: so we see that nothing can
drive awaite Christ but sin.

The third Type was Christ whipping Mat. 21. 12
the Jews out of the temple, showing thereby that the Jews should be whipped
or cast out of the spiritual temple, and the gentiles should occupy it. This
beloved, belongs unto us, unto whom the Lord so wonderfully has made his
light to shine.

The fourth figure is the parable of the vineyard, which was taken from them
that Mat. 21. ^ers. 33.
possessed it, and given to them that should bring forth the fruits thereof, and
yield better increase unto the Lord of the Vineyard.

The fifth figure was the parable of the two Mat. 22. verse. 18.
sons that were bidden to go and work in their fathers vineyard, of whom the
first said he would and did not: the second said he would not, and did repent,
and went to labor in the vineyard: the first signified the Jews, which made
many vows with such a show of godliness which was but hypocrisy, whom the
Lord rejected and cast off, and said, that the publicanes and sinners should
stand in judgment to condemn the greatest of them.

The sixth figure, was the feast that the Mat. 22. 2.
Lord made unto the disobedient guestes which the Lord invited to his banquet,
and was only ordained for them, and promised to come unto it, and yet refused
and would not come, but alleged slieght excuses taken from their love of
earthly and transitory things above God. Therefore the Lord sent into the hie
ways to call and compel the Gentiles to come, which came though they left
their wedding garments behind them.

The 7. Tipe or figure was the vision of Acts. 10.
Peter in Ioppa, when he was on the top of the house, where he saw the vessel
come down that had in it all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and
wild beasts, and fowls of the air, and creeping things, where also the voice
said unto him, Arise Peter, kill and eat: wherein the Lord showed unto him,
that he should count no man unclean, although the Gentiles then were counted
unclean, as were the unclean beasts set down in the law of God, and
therefore when Peter was sent for to Cornelius house, he said, Of a truth I
perceive verse. 34.
that God has no respect of persons, but in every nation he that fears God,
and works righteousness is accepted of him. Many other examples of our
calling, as the straied sheep, the lost groate, the prodigal son, and
Christ eating with publicanes and sinners, which when we read we should cast
our figure and say, of whom is this spoken? of the gentiles? then it is of me,
for I am a gentile. But am I converted? If I be not the^ have I not fulfilled
this prophecy, therefore let us strive to do well, and to mortify and subdue
sin which dwells in our mortal bodies: for none but the valiant can enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

Now all these prophecies are fulfilled, the blind see, the lame go, the dumb
speak, the deaf hear, the maimed work, the dead are quickened, the leapers
are cleansed, and the poor receive the Gospel. Therefore who will despair,
and say, light is not revealed unto me, when as he sees it to be revealed unto
whole nations? And so solemn is our calling, as that in so many places of the
scripture it is foretold, whereby we see how dearly the Lord tendereth our
salvation: like as a kind spouse which was longed for while she was in a
strange country: so Christ longed for the gentiles, till they came home again
unto him. Therefore let us now consider what he gives us, namely
righteousness, and salvation, first righteousness, then salvation: first
repentance, and then forgiveness of sins, the sun of the gospel, least we
should see heaven in hell, and light in darkness, and joy in anguishes.

Let us not contemn our light, or grow careless of it: let us not build with
one hand and overthrow with the other by profaneness, like those men which
while they surfetted at their gluttonous tables, did call upon God for health.
Christ is not received with the hand, if the father offering a gift do see the
son stretch forth his left hand, he will withdraw his gift from him. I say
let us not contemn our light as the Jews contemned their glory. For what is
light to him that will shut his eyes against it? What is this light? It is such
a glorious light, and such an excellent revelation, that great and mighty
kings have earnestly desired to see, and princes have laid down their crowns
to reveal it. Let us embrace this light, Let us take and put on the wedding
garment, and go to the banquet, unto which a thousand messengers have invited
us, and do allege none excuses, I have married a wife, I have bought oxen, I
go to see a farm, Mat. 22.
etc. and therefore I cannot come, neither will I come. Well do so, if that ye
will needs: but remember that thou wast invited, and therefore the blessing
shall be given to another. Therefore shall Esau weep for the blessing but
shall not have it. Heb. 1^.


But give me a reason I pray thee, why thou will be called the servant of God,
which do not serve him, or the child of God, which do not love him, or the
disciple of Christ which do not learn of him: yet his rain falls upon
all, the just and unjust, and he gives thee al things for nothing ^ the sun
does give his light for nothing, the dew does give his moisture for nothing,
the ^^uers do give their waters for nothing, and the earth does give her fruit
for nothing.

What shall we do then when the sun shines? We must not do as we do in the
dark, for then men ought to betake them to their labor. Learn of the savage
beasts, who as soon as the day springs, betake the^ to their travel, and
every bird welcommeth it with many a sweet song.

Christ is light, and this light is come, Therefore he that sees not now is
blind, and he that hears not now is deaf, and he that works not now is
maimed. But we will not work holy works according to the word, neither in
light nor darkness: we can see to sin in the dark as well as in the light, for
the light discovers both the harlot ^^ the these, for he is afraid of the
light: where light is not, Christ is not: but Christ John. 1.
is light, and let none be afraid to seek this light which is so good, so
excellent, and so profitable for us. For it does not only deso^e it solfe,
but al other things round about it. Therefore if thou have this light, thy
faith, thy fear, thy love will show it self, and good things cannot now hide
themselves, for he that is light does delight to please God in the light. It is
no marvel though a man stumble in the dark, but he which stumbleth in the
light is not very strong, because he sees his way before him. Once we
stumbled at every straw when we walked in darkness, for then light had a
fall, pride had a fall, lust had a fall, drunkenness had a ^al, penury had a
fall ignorance had a fall: or if you will, pride rose and we fell, lust rose,
and we fell, etc.

Were Egypt as light as Goshen, that is, whether the Jews have received their
glory or no, yet if thou sin in the dark the light will bewray thee, and thy
conscience will accuse thee, and condemn thee for it. Therefore now give over
darkness, and arm thee with light, for your life shines like the light,
therefore now we should be Israel, for Israel is revolted.

But many scrolles may be written of our sins, and thus the gentiles are as
gentiles still. He that believes not the word, is an infidel, he that
believes not God, is an Atheist, he that worshippeth any thing more than God,
is an idolater: every man's conscience shall condemn himself.

Men will leave godliness for riches but they will not leave their riches for
godliness.

The Jews never served God at any time with such devotion as they do now
their gold and their riches.

Many the^e are which could be content never to die, but live here with their
riches and pleasures.

Is not the godly more despited for his godliness than the wicked for his
wickedness?

Are not the members of Christ more hated, and worse entertained by us then the
limbs of Satan? So dearly does every one love sin and draws sin upon
sin like a chain, or monsters drawn in a chain: pride shows, drunkenness
shows every man his sin. They came unto us, and said, your fathers loved
us well, and said unto us, if you will be fair, you shall be wise, if you will
be drunk, you shall be rich, and so every one points at, and shows us the
way which leads to destruction, and how few are the number of them which
shows us the way of virtue and godliness?

And thus we are even as forward as those Jews which strive who shall come to
hell first. Who did ever thank God that he was not borne an hundred years
ago, when ignorance spread over all, and all Egypt was smitten with darkness,
or that the Lord has not left him to himself to become an Atheist, or an
Epicure which lives without God in the world? We have all Gods gifts offered
us, but we have refused them. Christ brought light: but we had rather he had
brought darkness, for we love darkness more then light. The Angels, the
heavens, the word, the spirit, are light, and we which see it are darkness,
for we can not abide light, but are like an Owl which flies out of a have
field from the light of the day, such a death is day unto us. Faith is flowen
away, truth is become a pilgrim, and every string is out of tune. He which
should weep and be sorrowful laughes, and truth is brought to the ground, yea
poor truth is even persecuted to the death, therefore sinners are stubble, and
their sentence is, burn them.

How fine would be the way of virtue, if you would pare away the rubs that are
in it, if you would take away all occasions of sin, and give it gall to eat,
and when you have done so, set a crown of thorns upon his head, and when you
have thus crow- (...) you have condemned it, put it to death, and when you have
put it to death, bury it: and when you have buried it, ^oll a great stone upon
the head of it, and set watch men to keep it, and let your watchmen be
fasting and prayer, that it may never rise again to reign any more, the which
the Lord for his mercy sake grant, Amen.

THE CALLING OF JONAH.
Jonah 1. 1. 2. 1 The word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai
saying,

2 Arise, and go to Niniuie that great City, and cry against it, for their
wickedness is come ^p before me.


YOu have heard the sweet song of old father Simeon, like the pleasant song of
a sweet bird before her death, setting forth the joy of the righteous which
embrace Christ Jesus. Before Christ Jesus vouchsafed to come unto us, we would
not come unto him, but in all our doings we wrought our condemnation, and
through the innumerable heaps of our iniquities, labored to drive him without
all hope of mercy from us. So we continued like flies which flutter about the
candle till they have consumed them selves. When we had done as much as in us
lay to drive him away from us, then he saved, and recompensed good for evil
unto us. So that if God had loved us no better the^ we loved our selves, we
might have perished in our sin, and our blood should be upon our own heads.
If Christ be the light of the Gentiles, let us embrace him^ and let every one
walk as becomes the children of light, but many do shut their eyes against
it, least they should see, and many do not only smoother their own light, but
the Sun says unto the Moon, shine not, and the Moon says unto the Stars,
be not bright. And many have smothered their light so long, that the dampe has
put out the candle and thus they labor to bring the darkness of Egypt upon
Goshen: so that their eyes have forgotten to see, and so many go out of the
way, because they would not look upon the candle, and the devil gives to
every one that which he wishes, so it may be for his hurt: to the bramble
fire, and who can but pity that the same Manna which comes from heaven
should be poisoned with it?

The Jews had no cause to envy our light, for he gave the^ glory: he was
poor, and yet he gave them riches: he was counted base, and yet he made them
honorable, he was contemned, and yet he made them beloved: they were full of
darkness, and he brought them light, but they contemned this light, and so
procured their own condemnation. And therefore now it is come to pass that
they are become vagabonds upon the earth, and most contemned of all other
nations, and every people have a dwelling: but since they prophesied evil
unto themselves, saying his blood be upon us and our children, goodness has
put on the face of bath fullness amongst them.

If thou embrace Christ as Simeon did, then Christ is thy glory, but if thy
glory consist in beauty which fades, in gay clothing which wears, in
wealth which wastes, or in gold which rusteth, then Christ is not thy glory.

We have gone long with an old man, and now we have lost him, but we are loath
to part with him he is such a good companion, nevertheless we hope to find
him again in Jonah.

We have gone but slowly with him as with an old man which is not very swift
on foot, but now we must run with Jonah as with a post, least Niniuie be
destroyed.

The word of the Lord came unto Jonah.

I need not show the authority of Prophets, but concerning their sorts and
difference: there are three sorts of Prophets. The first were such as called
upon the name of the Lord in prayer for the people, and received an answer from
the Lord in the peoples behalf, of which sort was Samuel, and these (...).
Sa. 10. 9
were called Seers. A second sort of Prophets were such as God raised to
expound the law, and declare the will of God unto the people, when the Priests
and such as should do so, were slack in their callings: of which sort was
Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiell, Damell, Hose, Ioell, A^^os, Obadiah, Jonah, and the
rest of the holy Prophets. A third sort were such as have been since Christ,
woorking such like effects, of which sort was the Prophet Agabus, of whom
mention is Act. 11, 28.
made in the eleventh of the Acts and the 28. verse.

Now in the second sort of these was Jonah, whom God sent to declare his will
unto his people, unto whom also the Lord did reveal the subversion of
kingdoms, the overthrow of Tribes, the captivity of Nations, and calamities
that were to come unto the sons of men for iniquity and rebellion against
God.

As all wise men were not borne at once, nor lived together: so these holy
Prophets have not been at once, but were raised up by the Lord God, some here,
some there, according to his pleasure, and as he saw the people stand in need
of them by reason of the corruption of the times.

And furthermore, the Lord has not at any time revealed unto one of these, all
things that might be revealed, but as much as was sufficient for them every
one in their times and places. Neither has any of them told as much of the
will of God as might be, nor the expounding of his laws. But the Patriarchs
have left some to the Prophets, and the Prophets have left some to the
Apostles, but they have left none for us, but they have all left open the whole
will of GOD unto us, and every one brings Gold, and Myrrh, and
Frankensense, like the wise men which came to see our Lord.

There are three things which moved me to take this story in hand above al
others. First because you know the story, and therefore can the better
conceive of the matter as I go forward with it. Secondly because it is brief
and does contain a great deal in a little. Thirdly, because it is most
agreeable for the time and state of this sinful age wherein we live, and
therefore most convenient for us. It is manifest that Jonah lived in a very
troublesome time, namely in the time of Jeroboam a wicked king, of whom it was
said, that he not only sinned himself against the Lord, but it is he which is
called the Ieroboa^ that made Israel to sin. Also this comme^deth the
constancy of Jonah, that he in the midst of all the corruptions wherewith all
the people were overflowed, kept him self uncorrupted and unspotted amongst
them all. And furthermore it lays open and magnifieth the great love of God,
in that he sent a Prophet to admonish his ungodly people, when as he should
have sent a thunderbolt to terrify them, or rather utterly to destroy them: so
that there mercy stepped before judgment.

His name was Jonah, which signifies a dove, which admonishes us, that as we
labor to be as wise as serpents, so we should also desire that we might be as
simple as doves. His fathers name was Amittai, which signifies truth. I would
that truth were every preachers father.

There are three special things contained in this history. First, the great
mercy of God, expressed in this, that he sent a Prophet to Niniuie a City of
the Ge^tils, which were strangers from the covenant, from the promise, and
strangers from the common wealth of Israel.

The second thing was Jonah, who being no Gentile but an Israelite, which knew
his masters will what it was, did yet presumptuously neglect the same, not of
a sudden desire, for he had time enough to consider what he did, and yet see
what mercy did: the Lord prepared a great whale in the bottom of the sea,
where there was no hope of life for him: afterward the Lord having delivered
him out of the whales belly, he went and preached at Niniuie so zealously, as
though he had never been the man which was so disobedient before. And when he
had done, he murmured against God worse the^ ever he did, and all because he
spared the city.

The third thing was, the mariners which had been idolaters all their lives,
yet now by the great power of God moving them, called upon the true God, of
whom they had heard by Jonah, and by whose mighty power they were saved.

But in the mean while, Niniuie set on the score, and had no ho with them in
working wickedness: but still filling the cup of all abominations, and
running down to hell with as much speed and force as they could, and no stay
but the peril of death. And Jonah, he rebelleth against God, for being sent to
Niniuie, he went to Tarshish.

There are four special things to be noted in Jonah. First, the danger of
Jonah by his disobedience. Secondly, the behavior of Jonah in the whales
belly. Thirdly, the grudging and murmuring of Jonah against the Lord God. And
fourthlie, the rebuking of Jonah by God for his impiety.

He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward. Therefore let us prepare our ears to hear and receive the word of
God preached by his ministers, and let us think that Jonah is come again to
our houses to preach, whether it be forty days, or forty weeks, or forty
years, they that live like Sodom, shall be punished like Sodom.

The word of the Lord came to Jonah the son of Amittai saying, Arise^ etc.

We have seen Jonah a far off, if we would we might see him nearer.

As our Savior said to his disciples, Pray Mat. 24. 20
that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath: so say I unto you,
pray that the Lords coming be not on the week days therefore: if he did
come then, how should he find you? Therefore I pray you learn now, and give
good ear that ye may^ hear sufficient for all the week.

The word of the Lord came, etc.

Wherein I observe that Jonah went not before he was sent: for he going to
preach unto the Gentiles, it was needful that he should have a special
calling and commission from the Lord himself: for it was unmeet to cast the
childrens bread unto dogs, unless he had a special commandment from God so
to do.

None ought to take upon him the function of preaching in the church, unless
they have their warrant or authority from God, Heb. 5. 4.
as Aaron had. And although they have not their authority in that form and
manner as Jonah had his, (namely) as it were by word of mouth, even from God
himself, Arise and go to Niniuie. Yet they must have their warrant from him
(else their calling is unlawful.)

But now there is another authority crept into the Church that makes so many
idols, which have eyes and see not, tongues and speak not, ears and hear
not, and that is this. When one stalleth up another into Moses chair, not
having Moses rod, nor Moses spirit. And this gall will not hold spurring.
Further I observe, that as the word of the Lord came to Jonah: so the word of
the Pope came to his priests, Jesuits and Seminaries, but so and in such sort
many times, that they are drawn to Tiburne while Masses are said for them at
Rome.

The word of the Lord came unto Jonah. etc.

Wherein also I observe, that which came unto him was not always with him, but
so it was, that when the word of the Lord came unto any of the Prophets, then
they were well furnished with ability, to teach, to preach, to reprove, or to
command whosoever the Lord would have so handled, as by example: Nathan the
Prophet bad David the king that he should build a temple. 2. Sam 1. 1. Chron. 11
2. Sam. 1. and 1. Chron. 11. And a little after he came and bad him that he
should not build it. Where we see that when he bad him build it, then the
spirit of the Lord came not unto him to bid him so to do. And therefore the
spirit of God came upon him the very same night, and bad him that he should go
to David, and bid him that he should not build it. For this is evident, that as
God himself is constant, so his spirit and his word are constant, and
therefore never faith and vnsaith one thing.

Again the Prophet Elisha said, 2. Kin. 4. 2. King. 4.
that the Sunamites heart was grieved, but the Lord had hid it from him, and
had not as then declared the same unto him: which does note unto us, that the
same word whereby the Lord has, and does reveal marvelous things unto his
Prophets, was not now upon him, neither is always upon any Prophet, but
according to the will of God it comes unto them, to reveal unto them what he
would have them to do, and when it pleases him.

Also Daniel said, that the Lord did not reveal the kings dream unto him, for
any wisdom that he had more then any living, but only for the kings sake, and
for the poor people of Gods sake, and so you must think of us that are the
ministers of the Gospel, that the Lord does not reveal his will unto us, for
any wisdom or worthiness that is in us more then other men, but for your
sakes, and that we might reveal it unto you, therefore hear us even for that
cause, because the Lord has revealed unto us these things for your sakes, and
good. From the calling we come to the charge.

Arise and go to Niniuie that great^ etc.

God comes and finds us al a sleep, then he bids us arise, for they are
not fit to convert others, which are not yet converted themselves, according to
that saying of Christ to Peter: When thou art converted (says he) strengthen
thy brethren, teaching Luke 22. 32
them by your experience. Now a days men take upon them to reprove others for
committing such things as themselves have practiced, and do practice without
amendment, notwithstanding their diligence in teaching others their duty, they
can teach all the doctrine of Christ, saving three sillables, that is: Follow
me, Therefore these are like some Tailers, which are very busy in decking and
tricking up of others, but go bare and beggarly themselves. They will not let us
pluck out the moate that is in their eyes vutill we have plucked out the beam
in our own eyes. Niniuie was the greatest and the auncientest city in the
land of Assyria, and the name of it signified Beautiful, which name was given
it rather for the greatness and beauty thereof, then for the name of Ashur,
which was the builder and first founder therof^ as we read in the book of
Genesis. Some think it to be built by Ninus, Ge^ 10. 11.
but I am not of that mind. It had a fair name, but foul deeds like this
city.

The Jews would not hear the word of God by Jonah, and therefore the Lord sent
to Niniuie, signifying thereby that the Jews for their contempt and negligence
should be rejected, and the Gentiles should be received into the favor of God,
that they might be an holy and sanctified people unto the Lord in their stead.
Their sin is noted in this, that they sinned even until the Prophets were
gone from them. Therefore this was as it were to shake off the dust of their
feet to witness against them for their obstinacy and hardness of heart, and
to let them see that the wickedest Gentiles were more righteous then they, that
they repented at the voice of one Prophet, yea and with one sermon: whereas
they refused and resisted all the holy and worthy Prophets that God sent unto
them.

Again, the calling of the Gentiles is declared in this their submission with
all willingness, which they did show unto the words of this prophet whereas:
the Jews rejected all the words of God, and would not hear the Prophets, whom
God had raised up amongst them, which made those Niniuits to proclaim a fast,
to put on sackcloth and to humble themselves before the Lord, desiring him to
turn away his wrath from their city? Thus they repented, and repenting were
saved with mercy: so they which grieve the spirit, quench the spirit, for the
word of God went from Samaria to Niniuie.

The Gospel was in Ephesus, but it went from thence and came to England: and
it may go again from England. Let the^ which think that they stand, take heed
least they fall.

Niniuie received the word of God, and never heard it before, and this shows
that the foolish and simple are more diligent and ready to hear and receive
the word of god, than those that are wise in their own conceit, and also in
the view of the world. What says Christ, the poor receive the Gospel: Mat.
11, 5. 1. Cor. 1. 2 6
what says Paul: not many rich, not many wise. For if we have knowledge, if
this knowledge be like the Pharisees, that is, in show of sincerity, in
counterfeit holiness, and hollow-hart friendship through hypocrisy, it had
been better for us that we had been ignorant, for it will but leave us
inexcusable, it will be found insufficient to save us, but sufficient to
condemn us, because we know our masters will and do it not: Luke 12. 4^ 84.
Act^. 8. 20.
therefore as Peter said to Simon Magus, thy money perish with thee. So will
the Lord say unto such: thy knowledge perish with thee, seeing it is
unprofitable.

That great city, etc.

As if he had said, Fear it not, for though it were never so great I am able
to destroy it, and will destroy it if it does offend me. And moreover, the
greater it is, the more ungodly. For as one man takes sickness of another: so
one man is infected by ill example of another, and so taught to sin the more,
till the measure of sin be full. Niniuie had 1500. towers in it, and 120000
little children, as is noted in the end Ion 4. 11
of this story: therefore it may well be called a great city.

But yet the greatness, the beauty, the strength, and riches of this city,
could not withstand the hand of God, or keep it from destruction, but rather
further it and hasten it. For with the more excellent ornaments that it was
adorned by the Lord, the more heinous and grievous in his sight was the abuse
of them. Therefore the hugeness, nor the strength of this or any other City,
can save it from the judgment of God, being sinful in his sight.

Great Sodom is destroyed: Ierico is destroyed: Genesis 19. Josh. 6. and 1 ^in 24.
25 R^u. 18. 2.
great Niniuie is destroyed: great Jerusalem is destroyed, and great Rome the
room of all unclean spirits, stays for her destruction, like a whore that
stays for her punishment till she be delivered: and all these were punished
for unthankfulness and contempt of the word of God. Yet Ierico, nor Sodom,
nor Niniuie, have had half the preaching that we have: yet we are unthankful
too.

When Sodom was burnede, Zoar stood safe: when Jerusalem was destroyed,
Bethlehem Genesis 19. Ier. 41. 17.
stood still: so the Lord does always provide for his people, though he make
never so great a slaughter and destruction amongst his enemies.

Great Sodom is destroyed, great Niniuie is destroyed, great Jerusalem is
destroyed, then what have we to look for?

Jonah was cast into the sea, swallowed of a fish, and cast up again, and
after all this, he must go preach at Niniuie, and he must convert it within
forty days, and that without miracles, which wanne great credit among the
Gentiles. Within forty days he must convert Niniuie, in forty days the
seed sown, grown, and ripe.

Who would have thought Jonah should have been cast out of the sea to convert
Niniuie?

They that scorned at Jonah, are converted by Jonah, and they that despised the
word, are overcome by the word.

Though Jonah were cast out of a ship, swallowed of a fish, and cast out of
the sea, yet there is hope of him.

Joseph is in prison^, and who knows what shall become of him? who would have
thought that Saul should become Paul, or Zacheus a Christian?

God would not suffer any people to 2. Pet. 2. 5. Genesis 19. Exodus 4.
be untaught: therefore he sent unto the old world Noah, Lot to Sodom,
Moses to Israel. Think no worse of no man though he were cast out of the sea
as Jonah, or baselie brought up, for the Savior of Israel is brought out of
the flags, and the salvation of the whole world out of a stall.

It is said that GOD works many things at once. It might well be said, for
the mercy of God, the conversion of the Gentiles, the reiection of the Jews
were al set forth herein, and yet a further matter was contained in it.

And although the Jews were a wicked and a stiff necked people, yet there
were some good men among them whom the Prophets call a remnant, like the
gleaning after harvest, or like a cluster of grapes on the top of the vine
after the vintage. And these must be remembered in mercy, because of the
covenant made unto their fathers. So among them that went into captivity,
there was Shidrach, Misach, and Abednego. And so all do not kneel to Bell, for
they whom the Lord preserves do not.

The Lord because of his covenant does always provide for his chosen, although
there be never so great calamity or trouble, as we see in the book of Genesis
45. chapt. Genesis 45.
when there was a great time of dearth and scarcity to come upon the land
where Jacob was, then the Lord sent Joseph to provide for his father Jacob,
least he should want bread, he or any of his sons, and folks, and so ordered
the matter, that Joseph was treasurer over all the corn in Egypt. And so among
the Turks and the Spaniards and infidels, the Lord will find means to do them
good which unfeignedly love him, and in the dungeon, and in the prison, and in
bonds, yea and in death, the godly shall find God.

And cry against it.

First God bids him, Arise and shake off all impediments, and then to go and
call them to the battle, and now he bids him cry out against them, and so
terrify them. Every Prophet is a crier, as appears where the Lord bids
Esaie to lift up his Esaias. 48. 1.
voice like a Trumpet. Every Prophet must both be plain and bold, and this
many times makes the poor servants of God to speak their minds as plain and
bold as if they sat in judgment. John was a voice, a voice would not serve,
he was the voice Luke. 3.
of a crier, and yet he could not make the crooked straight, nor the rough
plain.

If they were not deaf, they need not to cry one to another, such is the
dumbness of preachers, the deafness of hearers, and the slownesse of
followers, that there is but little good done, and but a few fruits gathered. If
ye were not deaf, we need not to cry: and therefore we cry with mouth, with
heart, with hand, with foot, and with all the powers of our bodies unto you,
and yet how little do you regard it^ But are not ye commanded to hear as well
as we to cry? yet the cock croweth when men are fastest asleep, yea the
cock croweth, and still Peter denies Mat. 26. 70. 72, 74.
his master.

Before you cry unto the Lord, hear what the word cries unto you, and let
not your works cry for vengeance while your tongues cry for mercy.

When men hear the preacher speak against pride, hypocrisy, covetousness,
or any other sin, then they look one upon another, as though it belonged
not unto them: but who can say his heart is clean? In the second of the Acts,
the holy Ghost Acts. 2.
came down in fire and tongs: but this fire is quenched, and the tongues are
tied up: though they cannot speak, they can see; they can see if a great
benefice fall though it be an hundred miles off: yet Pharao had more care of
his sheep, then we have of our souls.

And cry against them: For their wickedness is come up. etc.

Fair Niniuie, proud Niuiuie must be destroyed: no man sits so high, but
destruction sits above him. Justice would have come against them before it
cried against them. But while they heard the cry of God, God heard their
cries, and took pity on them.

When God cries, then we should weep, considering wherefore he cries: for
there is nothing that can provoke the Lord to cry, but sin, and that he ever
cries against. Do what thou will, and say what thou will, and the Lord will not
be offended with you unless you sin. For as an angry man ever pursues that
which he hates, until he has destroyed it: so the Lord ever crosses and
hinders us in all our wicked actions, until he has slain sin in us.

Our sins buffet God on every side, as the Jews buffetted Christ: first on
the right side, and then on the left side, and never leave till we have
provoked him to cry against us.

And cry against it, etc.
Reproof is the necessariest office, yet it is least regarded, and least
esteemed. For now we think if one does reprove us, that he hates us.

But the Lord says Leuit. 19. Thou Leui. 19. 17
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shall reprove him, and suffer
him not to sin: noting thereby, that if we flatter any in their sin, or
see them sin, and not reprove them for it, that it is a manifest sign that
they do it of hatred, how great love and good will so ever they pretend toward
them, seeing the matter tendes to the hurt of their souls, and the offense of
God. If a preacher reprove sin, he is thought to do it of hatred, or of some
particular grudge: and others as though they were galled, will say, let him
keep his text: or they will say, he is beside his book, as though no text in
scripture does reprove sin, and so of al doctrines, the doctrine of reproof
and reprehension of sin is most contemned, and least esteemed. But let a
preacher preach dark mysteries, or profane speeches, or unprofitable fables,
or frivolous questions, or curious inventions, or od conceits, or brainsicke
dreams, and any of these will be more welcome unto the^ then reprehension
which is most profitable and necessariest of all. Balaams ass never spoke but
once, and then he reproved. Then Number. 22. 28.
if Balaams ass reproved Balaa^, how much more ought Balaam to reprove asses,
or such as will be no otherwise then beasts in their behavior.

When we reprove you for sins, whether they be usual, or private, you think
ill of us. If a preacher reprove a public sin, which is used and tolerated
amongst many, he is hated of many, and thought to be too busy, or that he is
toosharpe and rough. And they say, that whereas he, should preach Gods love
and mercy, he tells us of the law, and so does throw us down too low, etc. And
if he repr^^ue a sin that is done privately he is thought to be envious, and
one that preaches the law, and thereby throws some to despair, and so al
reproof is thought by them intolerable. But we preach hell to bring you to
heaven, we preach the law to lead you to the Gospel, we preach judgment, that
you might find mercy, we threaten, as though we should strike you, we rebuke
as though we were angry with you, and exclaim as though we did hate you: but
we love you in the dearest blood we have. The Lord grant us all to love the
truth to the end.

THE REBELLION OF JONAH, IN TWO SERMONS.
Jonah 1. 2. 3. 2 Arise and go to Niniuie that great City, and cry against
it, for their wickedness is come up before me.

3 But Jonah rose up to fly to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and
went down to Iapho, and he found a ship going to Tarshish, so he paid the
fare thereof, and went down into it that he might go with them unto Tarshish
from the presence of the Lord.


TO comfort Jonah against all evil temptations which might befall him, God
says that their wickedness is come up before him. As if he had said, fear
nothing, but go, for the quarrel is mine, I have sent thee, their sins provoke
me thus to stand against them.

When God sends criers unto a people, it is a most manifest sign that their
wickedness is come up before him, which does cause him thus to exclaim
against them, and then if they will not repent while Gods criers continue crying
amongst them, the Lord of hosts will rise up in arms against them.

I showed you the Ninevites sins in a scroll, to see how they go in ranks up
to heaven, thereby to show to the daughters of Niniuie, that wealth and
wickedness go together, prosperity and security kiss each other: and yet
the world tempts, and the flesh yields before we sin.

To them which ask how our sins ascend and fly up until they come before
the presence of God, I answer, that God here speaks unto us after the manner
of men, who can not see a thing before it be brought nigh unto them, even where
they are.

Sin amounts up on high, like the tempter which led Christ unto the top of the
pinnacle to behold all the pleasures of the world at once, and then when we fall
down before the god of this world, the God of heaven is tempted, whether he
be just or no: therefore wrath speaks out of the fire, now thou have taken thy
pleasure, thou must take also thy punishment.

For your wickedness is come up before me.

As if he had said, O Niniuie, you are like men araigned and your sins stand
crying at the bar not for mercy and forgiveness, but for judgment, wrath,
and vengeance to fall upon you for your outrageous swarms of iniquities.

A most heavy and grievous thing it is if you knew what you are doing here,
and what your sins are doing at the bar of Gods just judgment. For even
now before you came hither, you were serving the devil in sin, but now it is
too late to speak of it, and where are they now? flesh and blood could not
stay them, nature could not stay them, pleasures could not stay them, riches
could not stay them, nor it could not stay it self, but it is ascended up
before the face of the eternal God, to stand at this bar and cry for
vengeance to fall upon us, for committing such heinous sins against the
majesty of God.

An arrow is swift, the Sun is swifter, but sin is swifter then all: for in
a moment it is judged in heaven, punished in hell, and ranging upon the earth.
Nemrod could not reach to heaven, but his sins could reach to heaven. Our
sins ascend like the tower of Nemrod, but they fall to confusion like Genesis 11.
Babell.

It is like the Eagle which takes a shelfish, and flies into the sky with
it, and then she lets it fall upon the rocks, and so dasheth it in pieces,
and then she deuou^es it.

My last note was, that that which we cast behind us, the Lord does set before
him, We fast before him, we pray before him, we give alms before him, and we
do every good thing before him, because we do it freely, and as it were,
caring not who looks upon us: but we suppose we sin behind him, because at
such a time our conscience accusing us, we fall to hiding and cloking of our
sin, thinking if we can hide it from men, that God cannot see it. But let us
not deceive our selves, for God sees not as man sees. Job. 10. 4.
Man ca^ see but only outward things committed in action: but God sees and
knows, and searches the secrets of the heart, all Pro. 16. 3. Heb. 4.
the thoughts and imaginations of it.

A man can see but one thing at once, he cannot turn his right eye one way,
and left eye another: he cannot see two things at one instant: but God sees
all things at one instant. Though we, sin as closely aswe can for fear of
hatred, or shame of the world, or for any other respect: yet God says, your
sin is come up before me. For though we cover it, and hide it and color it,
yea and as it were bury it as well as lies in us, yet all is open unto him:
therefore (...) says, your sin is come up before me.

When we speak evil, he is all ears to hear us, when we do evil, he is all
eyes to behold it, and when we will be obstinate in our wickedness, then he is
all hand to punish and plague us, and in the end to root us out from all our
pleasures. But when we repent, he is all mercy and love, and when we amend our
lives, and leave all our wicked ways to walk before him in holiness ever
after, then he is all truth and righteousness to forgive us all our former
wicked life, and to wash us from our uncleanness and sin. Therefore o
foolish man, do not think that God sees not that which man sees not: for
when he looks up, he sees all below also, and when he looks down, he sees
all above also.

Ananias might have gained by his craft Acts 5.
if God had not seen his heart which men saw not, therefore he lost his life,
and his goods too.

If God had not seen that which men see 2. King. 5.
not, Gehezi might have gained a bribe for his labor, when he ran after
Naaman the Assyrian, and told him a lie for his profit. But God seeing his
fetches which men saw not, turned his bribe to a leprosy, and so made him a
leper for his lobor. A fearful example for such as take bribes: they care not
what bribes they take so men see it not.

My husband is gone forth says the harlot to her lover, in the Proverbs, and
he shall Pro. 7. 19. 20. Luke 12.
not see this. The man that said, Be merry my soul, and take thy pleasure for
many years, might have done it if God had not seen him, and rewarded him as
his meaning deserved: did not my spirit go with thee, said 2. King. 5.
Eliseus to Gehezi? did not this eye go with thee? O Lord what is man that thou
so watchest him? If God had not seen Acha^ take up the piece of gold, he had
kept it to himself Iosu. 7.
for his labor, and no man should have known where he had it. But God seeing
it (though closely done) rewarded him with shame and grief in the sight of all
Israel. O Lord what is man that thou so watchest him. Achan would never have
stolen if he had known that God did see him. Gehezi durst never have taken a
bribe, if he had thought that god beheld his doings. Will thou steal, the
owner looking on thee? will thou speak treason in the kings hearing? Neither
would we lie, nor swear, nor steal, nor hurt, nor be profane at any time, if
we considered that the Lord sees us, and remembered that he watches us: if we
would do thus, sin might go ^begging for want of service. Therefore if you will
mark but this part of my sermon, that God sees all, you would refrain from
those things secretly, (that are to the offense of god) which you for fear or
shame will not do before men, and you would say even when your hand is at it, I
will not do it, because the Lord sees vs^ Now therefore repent thee of all the
evil that thou have done, run and ^ie thee as fast as ever thou can, and
strive who goes fastest, thy sin or thy prayers.

These are the faint spies, that went to see the land of Canaan, which say,
that journey is farther then you are able to go all your life, the way is like
a thicket, and the door like a needels eye, therefore it is impossible for you
to come thither. But when you send faith, hope, and love (those messengers of
peace and truth) they will bring you word saying, your ruffes must be ruffled,
and your fardingales crushed, and none shall be kept out, but such as love the
world better then heaven, or such as will take their sins with them: for that
it is not the fashion of that country; but we must leave them like the shadow
when we go into the door, and we must shake hands with them, and bid them
farewell.

Now it follows how Jonah fled to Tarshish. We can not stand to speak of
Tarshish, nor what it is to fly from God, but how Jonah was sent to Niniuie,
and how he went to Tarshish, this shall be our meditation. Jonah the Prophet
was commanded to go to Niniuie, and there to cry out against sin, to preach
against pride, and all kind of ungodliness, thereby to reclaim them and stir
them up in laying open their sin, and the punishment which hanged over them,
that they might speedily repent, and so turn away from them the wrath of God
thereby deserved. What a happy message was this? and what a happy thing for
Niniuie, that the Lord would vouchsafe the^ so great mercy? O but still one
fly or other marres the whole box of ointment: as soon as he was Eccles. 10.
1^
commanded to go thither, Satan stood in the gap, and entised him to go to
Tarshish, lest the Ninevites kill him or some way hurt him. Jonah was no sooner
tempted, and thus entised by Satan to go to Tarshish, but he forthwith
yielded, and having yielded, then he to go, and so Jonah made him self a
runaway and a disobedient servant to his God. And thus Satan is ever entising
or crossing us, when we are addressing our selves to do the will of our God.
There is no commandment of God, but the devil commands the contrary, and
he is ever unsaying that which God says: for our good God says unto Adam, if
you eat of the forbidden Gene. 2. 17.
fruit you shall die, the devil came, and he told them, no, you shall not
die, but you shall be as Gods if you eat theof. God says, Genesis 3. 4.
submit your selves one to another in brotherly 1. Pet. 5. 5.
love, the devil says, be proud and lusty, scornful and ambitious: God
says, love thy neighbor as thy self, the devil Mat. 22.
says, be envious, but love thy self and none but thy self: God says, labor
for the food John. 6. 27.
which perishes not, the devil bids labor for such food which perishes, as
dainties, and plenty of pleasant things: God says, forsake the world, the
devil says, love and Romans 12. 2. 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
esteem the world with the things of the world, and we do it at his
commandment. And thus is man led captive to destruction with the chains of
sin. One said, God spoke and it was done, but I say, the devil speaks Genesis
1. 3. 9.
and it is done: for he is such an Orator that no man can deny him. This made
Demas to embrace the world, Judas to betray 2 Timothy 4. 10^ Mat. 26. 48. 70. Iud.
14 17. Genesis 4. 8. 2. King. 5. 22. 24.
his master, Peter to deny his Lord, Sampson to reveal his secret, Cain to
kill his brother, Gehezi to take a bribe, and there is such harping in the
balance, that constancy is put out of her place. Yet this privilege has God
given unto us, that if we resist the devil, James 5.
he will fly away from us. But the devil has not this promise, that when he
resists, we shall fly from him, notwithstanding the devil is ever as busy as
if he had such a promise, yea and full often does overcome, which is a sign
that we do not resist him any thing thoroughly: but rather as it should seem we
join with him, rather to do his will the^ gods will: and this made foolish
Balaam to ask Number. 22.
again and again, till God seeing him bent contrary to his will, left him
unto himself. and so Balaam went on in sin so long til the very ass whereon
he rode was constrained to reprove him, and cry out against him.

But Jonah rose up to go down to Tarshish, and he went to Iapho.

They that should preach at Niniuie, are loytering at Tarshish, and like a
drone does the Nonresident keep his benefice, but for shame will thou keep it
still, either go and preach at Niniuie as you are co^mmanded, or leave your
privilege and benefice. But they stand staggering, ashamed to keep it, and
loath to leave off, for the sweet morsels of Bells priests are so pleasant unto
them, that they cannot find in their hearts to leave them as long as they are
able to keep it. Jonah was sent to Niniuie, but he went toward Tarshish. And
so it is always with us, either we say or do evil, or else we do nothing, or
we take one thing for another and so we are ever doing that we should not do.
And as Jonah took Tarshish for Niniuie: so we take the Devil for an Angel,
light for darkness: pride for handsomnesse: sin for godliness: and evil for
goodness. No marvel it was that Jonah fled, least he should go to Niniuie:
for this is a stumbling vocation among men, yea hated and rejected by the
children of this world, which always Exodus 18. 4. Iere. 20. 7.
kick against it, and therefore it was that Moses murmured, and Jeremy
complained. If you would ask for a paineful vocation, this is it: if for a
contemptible vocation, this is it: for reproving, we are reproved: and it is as
easy to wash a Blackemoore, as to convert a sinner, because Satan is ever
crossing men from doing the will of God: and as earnest as the Lord was in
stopping the way of Balaam, least he should commit wickedness, so earnestly
did the devil stop the way of Jonah, lest he in obedience should do the will
of God.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and
went down to Iapho, and he found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the
fare thereof, and went down into it, that he might go with them unto Tarshish
from the presence of the Lord.

We have heard how busy Satan is to hinder the course of preaching, by
persuading Jonah (with such reasons as seemed strong unto flesh and blood) that
he should not go to preach at Niniuie. I have long preached unto the Jews,
which are the chosen people of God, and seeing they will not hear me, it is in
vain to preach unto these Gentiles, which never heard of God or godliness, and
therefore will esteem my words the less. Thus Jonah is loath to loose his
labor, and puts in a doubt where he needs not, because he considered not the
great power of God in men's hearts. The Ninevites are heathen people, and
therefore (says Jonah) why should I venture my self among them? for seeing
mine own countrymen kick against my words, and cannot abide to hear the
word, which comes from the Lord to reprove sin, then how much more shall I
be despised by these, and persecuted to death. Thus flesh and blood stands
staggering when it should do any good: but when it goes about to do any
mischief, it never thinks nor considers why or wherefore it should sin,
when as it should be sorry for it before it be committed, even as soon as it
is thought upon. When God commands us to do any thing that is holy and good,
then we look one upon another as though we cared not who did that, like Peter
when he was commanded by our Savior to take up his cross, he asks, what
shall John do? John. 21. 19. 20.
as if he were unwilling, and would rather that John should do it then he.

If I go and preach unto these infidels, saying, yet forty days, and Niniuie
shall be destroyed, then (says Jonah) it may be they will repent, and God will
have mercy upon them, so I shall be counted a false Prophet for my labor. And
thus we regard our credit more then the glory of God: and rather then we would
receive any reproach by our doing (in the sight of the world,) we rather choose
to enter into no great action touching the glory of God and the good of the
church. If I preach unto the Gentiles (says Jonah) I shall bring shame upon
Israel before all people, because a Prophet is gone from them for their
obstinacy, choosing rather to preach unto uncircumcised Gentiles then unto
the^, as if there were more hope of the Gentiles then of them. And further, if
these Gentiles do repent at my preaching, and the Lord take pity upon them,
and receive them to his favor, so the Jews shall be rejected. Thus Jonah
loves the son better the^ the father. And surely this was a sore temptation,
to bid a man (being in reasonable good estate touching his body and life) that
he should go and preach unto a savage heathen people that never heard of
preaching to tell the^ that there is but one only and true God, who will serve
a thousand, and cannot abide the Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
contrary to be spoken.

If a preacher were commanded to go and preach at Rome gates, against
Antichrists jurisdiction, and the idolatry that is so ordinarily used in that
sinagogue of uncleanness, seeing that is a matter, for which they torment and
kill, all that preach it sincerely: then I think that it would hardly come to
pass at all, that this preacher would go from a reasonable quiet estate
touching his body, to venture his life among such cruel tyrants, I think he
would rather fly to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, if by any
possibility he might do it.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and he
went down to Iapho, where he found a ship, and he went down into it, etc.

This is the way to Tarshish, but now what need he to rehearse all this? had
it not been enough to say, that he went to fly, and leave his business
undone? But all this is to show the stubburnnesse and disobedience of Jonah,
yet this thing was not done upon the sudden, but he had time enough to consider
what he did, betwixt Samaria and Iapho: he might have considered what he did
before he went into the haven, and when he came to the haven, he should not
have paid the fare; and when he had paid the fare, he should not have entered
the ship; and when he came into the ship, he should not have hoysed up the
sails to fly from God. But thus sin runs on wheels, as it were down a
hill, in all post have, and never stays till it ariue even in hell. Now Jonah
thinks, that because he came safe to Iapho, therefore he may go to the haven,
therefore he may pay the fare, and because he paid the fare in peace, therefore
he may take shipping; and because he entered the ship in safety therefore he may
hoyse up the sails to go; and because he hoysed up the sails without danger,
therefore he may go safely to Tarshish.

So sins follow one another like linkes of a chain, till the tempest of
destruction break it in sunder. Therefore one said, I have sworn and God did
not punish me, therefore I will steal: I have stolen, and God did not punish
me, therefore I will kill: I have killed and God did not punish me, then why may
not I do what I list? I may do this as well as I have done other things
heretofore. Jonah confesses his sin, that we might confess. First, he
confesses that he knew his masters will, and did it not: secondly, he took
another course quite contrary to that he was commanded; but happy were Jonah
if he had gone before he was made to go. If that he had considered with
himself that God is the Lord, who is allseeing and almighty, from whom
nothing can be co^cealed, he would never have taken his journey to Iapho, or
when he came to Iapho he would not have paid the fare, or when he paid the
fare, he would not have entered the ship, or when he was gone into the ship, he
would not have hoyst the sails, but rather would have leapt out of that ship
that should carry him from his God, but he forgets himself, thinking that the
creatures can hide him from the creator, which is an Heb. 4. 13.
absurd thing to think, seeing nothing can be hid from him. And so Niniuie is
still like Niniuie, but Jonah is not like Jonah, then sin is crying, and the
Prophet is flying, and so all falls to confusion. All those that pity Jonah,
let them pity themselves, for if we consider our own estate, we have as many
and as foul sins in us as there were in Jonah, yea or in Niniuie. But here
mark the subtlety of the devil, Jonah from going to Niniuie by these former
reasons, the^ the goodliest city in all Samaria should be destroyed, and so
the very angels in heaven should mourn. Jonah would repent and turn back
from going, (being commanded) then Jonah should be counted a false Prophet in
Israel, and so a Prophet should be discredited. Jonah would repent, he could put
such a Prophet out of Gods favor, and make him be despised, he thought that
then he should get well by his labor. So we see that the devil has power to
tempt us to sin, but not to force us to sin. Then lo a comfort, that our
enemies power is in our fathers hand: therefore our Savior says to Peter,
fatha^ has desired to sift Luke. 22. 31. 32.
thee and winnow thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail thee not. Who is this whose peril Satan so earnestly desires? even
Peter's, yea Peter an Apostle. Was not flesh a valiant captain think you, that
has led a Prophet captive, for who can gainsay him that comes like an
Angel? who can resist him that sees the whole world? will you resist him, if
I show to you he is an hypocrite? for he says, If you fall down and worship
this world, you shall come to heaven: so he is ever alluring by deceits,
stealing our hearts away with a vain hope of much pleasure, because he knows
man's nature is bent to love such things: so his baits are pleasures, and his
snares are sins. Whatsoever we do, it comes from one of these three
spirits: the spirit of Satan, the spirit of God, or our own spirit. The
spirit of God is gentle, loving, and meek, not forcing nor threatening,
therefore Mat. 10. 16 Luke. 14. 24.
Christ says, If you will follow me, then take up this cross: and mark his
spirit, he says not you shall follow, but says, if you will follow me. That
order is observed in the Canticles, where he says, Open unto me, Cant. 5. 2.
my sister, my spouse, etc. And then if she did not open unto him he went his
way mildly, Cant. 5. 5.
without any threats. The spirit of Satan takes another course: for when by
lying and deceit he cannot allure us to sin, he threatens us with sin,
grief, or loss of goods, solitariness or loss of pleasure, and sometime by
his ministers, lims of his own likeness working, he threatens death and
earthly torments, such as they can inflict upon any. Christ says, If you will
follow me, take up Mat. 1. 16.
this cross, if you will: but he says, I will make you follow me, and do as I
bid you, or you shall smart for it, you shall have fire and faggot, scalding lead
and burning pitch, if you will not follow me, I will take all from you, and
make you to do as we command, and so does his eldest son Antichrist, which
v^urpeth an authority over nations, inflicting torments on the saints. Now our
own spirit is evermore hard: if it be moved by the spirit of God, it is sad,
soft and slow, but if it be moved by the spirit of Satan, it is proud, boy
sterous and stout. All good motions that we feel in our selves are the motions
of the spirit of God, although they seem unto us as proceeding from our selves,
for the spirit of God works in, and moves our spirits. The spirit of man is
always tossed between these two spirits which are ever contrary one to
another. The spirit of man when it is alone, is always occupied about worldly
things: the spirit of God is always occupied about our salvation. And the
spirit of Satan is ever occupied in procuring our condemnation etc.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish. etc.

Jonah flies unto Tarshish before he would go to Niniuie: and every one is like
the son which said he would not before he went: and so sin is borne first,
as Esau was Genesis 15. 25. 26.
borne before Jacob. Therefore if evil may compare with goodness, evil may
say he is the ancienter. If thou feel any evil in thy self, be thou wrath
with it, laboring against it, so long by fasting and prayer, till it be weary
of thy house, and until it say as the evil spirits said, here is no dwelling
for us, Let us go to yonder herd of swine: I am loath to Mat. 8. 31.
hide my treasure in the ground, but you can not hear all at once, and
therefore here I end.

THE SECOND SERMON OF THE REBELLION OF JONAH.
Jonah. 1. 3. 4. 5. 3 But Jonah rose up to fly to Tarshish from the presence
of the Lord, and went down to Iapho, and he found a ship going to Tarshish,
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, that he might go with
them unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.

4 But the Lord sent out a great vvind into the sea, and there was a mighty
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

5 Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God, and cast
the vvares out that were in the ship to lighten it thereof: but Jonah was
gone down into the side of the ship, and he lay down and was fast asleep.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish from the presence, etc.


THe last time you heard how the righteous fall, and now no less then a
Prophet, yea such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ. But who would have
thought that such a Prophet should fly from the Lord, yea and that when he
should do him most service, who counts that wickedness now, that he never
thought off while he was among the wicked? A fearful example, therefore let
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, for the way is slipperie
wherein we are to walk. When thou remembrest the fall of the Prophet, then
consider that thou art much weaker then a Prophet, and therefore the easier to
be encountered and overthrown, wherefore thou art likely to have a more
grievous fall, except the Lord do mightily uphold thee, seeing such a one
cannot stand in the sight of his so mortal enemy by his own strength.

Secondly, if thou see Jonah fly, Moses murmr, Jeremy complaining, Esaias
repining, David fall to adultery, Solomon to idolatry, and Peter to forswear,
his master, then may thou learn not to trust unto thine own strength, for
it is weakness, nor to thine own flesh, for it is sinful, but seek help
and crave strength at the hands of almighty God, which gives to every one
that asks James 5. 5.
indifferently, and hitteh no man in the teeth, which does not bruise the broken
Mat. 12. 20.
reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but does rather increase our zeal then
diminish it.

Thirdly, judge wisely of the fall of Jonah, not rashly condemning him for his
fault, for although David joined murder with adultery, yet he repented, and
is the dear child of God.

But Jonah rose up to fly unto Tarshish.
Jonah being sent to Niniuie, he flies to Tarshish, yet he went to Niniuie at
last, not of free will, as meaning only to perform his duty, but being
terrified by the whale, and all the other creatures of God which were bent
against him for his disobedience. So we serve God and do his will, when terrors
do compel us by thundering into our ears, and glauncing before our eyes, and
melting our hearts for fear. And this is my opinion, that they which come
hither to Church only on the Sabbath, come not of conscience, but for fear of
the law, yet let them know, that in so doing they fly from their comfort, yea
they fly from God. Now Jonah went to the haven, and there he found a ship not
going to Niniuie but to Tarshish. As soon he set forward to fly from God,
Satan straight ways prepared a ship, so that temptation and occasion of sin
do always go together. Shall Judas lack money, or Jonah stay for a ship? no
(says Satan) by the mouth of his ministers, here Judas take thee money and
betray thy master, and Jonah here is a ship for thee, go have thee away, and
fly from the presence of the Lord. Therefore if any will ask what the devils
occupation is, it is to provide snares and gins whereinto to entice, and
therein to catch thee and me.

And he paid the fare thereof.
This money was cast into the sea, for it did him much harm, yet it did him
small good. There are many which will spend and wast they care not how much
upon cards and dice, an unlawful game: this money also is cast into the sea,
for it does the^ much more harm then they know of, but it does the^ no good.
And so men care not what they pay for vanities and braueries, the most part of
which is unprofitable, and rather hurtful the^ necessary for the^, but only
for the vain use of the present time, and for some vain respect: this also is
cast into the sea, and thus men care not what they pay for vanities, so it do
please their mind for the present, without consideration of the end and
purpose thereof, but they will give little or nothing to do good withal: so
that Lazarus Luke 16. 21. 1. Sam. 25. 10. 11.
ca^ get nothing, and David can get no meat. Shall I take my bread and my wine
and the flesh which I have provided for my shearers, and give them unto thee,
whom I know not, says churlish Naball? We can be content to give any thing or
do any thing to win the world thereby, but we will give nothing, nor do
nothing, thereby to win the kingdom of God.

But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty
tempest, so that the ship was like to be broken.

The sin is past, but the punishment is to come: so after sin follows
revenge, the heauiest companion of wickedness, although she love not sin,
yet she will be always where wickedness is, full of strength like a Lion which
will not be tamed. For seeing obedience to the commandment was wanting,
therefore the tempest would bear rule, for unless it be an imperious cross,
we will not yield, so head strong sin is: therefore it is said that God sent a
mighty tempest that sin might have the foil, and the tempest the victory:
he that sails to Tarshish whither he is forbidden to go, would have as good
wind as he that sails to Niniuie, or whither he is commanded, but he that
does one thing for another, shall receive one thing for another, like Achab 1.
King. 22. 15. 35.
which ceased not til Michaiah had said like the other Prophets go up and
prosper, but he went up and perished. Jonah thought to ariue at Tarshish as
surely as the Spaniards thought to ariue in England, whose destruction their
fellows at home do wonder at, how their invincible power could be destroyed.
But God is strong enough for the^ that kick against him, and disdaineth to be
crossed of dust and ashes. Now Satan thou have brought him into the ship, and
persuaded him to fly from his defense for his safety, and made him believe
that he should come safe to Tarshish, that is, to live at ease and liberty,
enjoying all temporal benefits at his pleasure, and now thou have left him,
when he is in greatest danger, and rather seek to drown him then to save
him. O most wretched and deceiptfull liar, he that trusts his enemy, and he
that believes thee, shall ever be deceived, for now might Jonah say, beware by
me, for thus has the tempter deceived me, he has allured me with flattering
fantasies, and persuaded me that it was but an easy thing to fly from the
presence of the Lord, that sees always all Pro. 15. 11. Iere. 23. 24.
things, and from whom no man, no nor secret lurking in any man's heart can be
hid, but all are always in his presence. He made me believe that light could
be brought out of darkness, that good may come of evil, for he assured me,
that if I would set forth toward Tarshish, I should not only shun the presence
of the Lord, but should live at ease like one unknown, both for my vocation
and also for my behavior in the execution thereof, and so I might creep into a
familiarity with these people, and enjoy the benefit of their society.
Otherwise if I went to Niniuie as the Lord commanded, they would hate and
persecute me, yea and so I should end my life in misery, both because they
being Gentiles and I a Jew, they can not abide me, for the one holds the
other in contempt: and also because of my message, namely a Prophecy of
destruction, grounded upon a reproof of their vile and sinful pleasures.
Which message, Satan persuaded me that it would be so hainously taken, that no
death nor torment that they could devise for me would be thought sufficient,
and so I should be sure never to escape their hands alive if I went, as though
the eternal and most glorious God which sent me thither, were not able to
defend me from all evil when I come thither, as well as he did Damell in the
den of Lions, and John in the Isle of Pathmos among the savage beasts. And
when Satan had thus persuaded me, I believed him, and so took my journey to
fly from the presence of the Lord (if I could have performed my inte^tion.) But
the Lord who seeing the stubburnesse and disobedience of my heart, followed me
with great displeasure, sending such a tempest upon the sea whereon I was, that
it had like to overwhelmed us all, and so near as I was to the water, so near
I was to death by all likelihood.

Thus Satan persuades us as he did Jonah, he says to us as he said to
Christ, if you will fall down and worship me, I will give Luke. 4. 7.
you all things you would have: if you will leave the society, the exercises,
the profession, and the company of the children of God, and of the service of
God, and serve me, and worship me, in preferring your covetousness, your
pride, your envy, your lust, before the service of God, then you shall grow
rich, and you shall not be so scrupulous to swear for your gain sometime, or
to lie for your pleasure, and to cousin for riches, and you shall have good
luck, and shall have every thing at your hearts desire. But if we do his will,
we shall speed as Jonah did, we shall have the wrath and vengeance of God upon
our heads: for he has nothing to give us, although he makes us believe we
shall have great kingdoms. Yes we shall have hell for our reward, which will
make al their hearts to ache which receive it, other reward he has none. So the
devil is always a very serviceable and pleasant devil to such as fly from
God: he can find occasions at all times, and means and instruments fit for
that purpose. If thou will fly from God, the devil will lend you both spurs,
and a horse, (yea a post horse) that will carry you swiftly and lustilie away
unto all vanity and ungodly lusts. But see what Jonah got by his journey,
notwithstanding all the furtherances that Satan could work for him, he lost
his money, lost his joy, lost his credit, and almost lost his life too. Thus we
see in Jonah what it profits a man to fly from God, in obeying and
practicing the evil motions and temptations of Satan in steed of the known
will of God, for the very dumb creatures were bent against him for his
disobedience: the wind blows as though it would over turn all, the waters
roar as though they will drown all, the ship reeles and tumbles as though she
were weary of all, and the mariners cry and cast out their wares apace, as
though they would loose all: And yet the wind could not overthrow him, nor the
waters drown him, nor the whale eat him; and thus Jonah fled from God but not
God from Jonah.

But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a great
tempest, so that the ship was like to be broken.

First God spoke gently to him, Arise Jonah, go to Niniuie: then he would not
go, but seeing words would not serve, the Lord would take another way, and try
whether that could make him obedient to his voice. So the Lord caused a mighty
tempest to arise in the sea, which set them all in a maze, and made them
examine both whence the tempest came, and also wherefore, or for whose sake it
troubled them so sore, that Jonah might see (at the least) if he would see it,
that the vegea^ce of God does always accompany the stubburne and disobedient
whither soever they go: and for the acco^plishment thereof, that all the
creatures of God are bent against them, to molest trouble, and cross them in
their evil ways.

God sent a great wind.

He that made the winds, commanded Psalm. 141. 18 Isa. 13.
them, and they obey his voice: the wind and the waters obey him, but man will
not obey him. He says not, that a wind arose, but says, The Lord sent a great
wind; then it was not by chance, nor yet by witchcraft, for the mariners
(notwithstanding they were infidels) were not so gross as to ascribe it unto
any such cause, but rather thought it to be sent from some revenging power,
being provoked to indignation by some particular person among them, that had
committed some heinous fact: else why did they cast lots, to know him and find
him out that had sinned, and whose sin did procure the tempest to be sent?
Though this tempest had almost drowned Jonah, yet he says, the Lord sent it:
so the Lord sends wind to bring ships to land in safety, and the same Lord
sends tempests to drown, and break, and sincke other ships. Therefore Job
said when he was bereft of all his substance at once, and left as poor as
might be, that the Lord had taken them from him (which also gave all to him,)
adding also a tha^ksgiuing Job. 1. 21.
even for the persecuting hand of God, which did so molest him. If some had so
much loss by tempest as Job, and such danger as Jonah, they would surely say
with Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord for it.

Now the wind blows, the water tosses, the whale swims, and all to meet Jonah
which flies from God, to see if they can turn his heart which sleeps in
disobedience. The ship goes roundly for a time, the Prophet is sleeping, the
mariners are sporting, their sails flaunting, the waters calming, the winds
guiding, so merrily sin goes on before the tempest comes. The wind blows not
yet, therefore go on yet a little, and yet a little more, but yet the tempest
rushes upon them before they be ware of it, and tumbles them up and down, and
suddenly all is like to be undone. Now Jonah is in more danger then the
Ninevites. And now, o that he had stayed at home and saved his money, saved his
credit, and saved his life from the danger of the furious and unmerciful
stream. Here we may see what pains a sinner takes, and all to hurt him self.
He came to the haven, and paid the fare, and entered the ship, and hoist up
sails, and went on forward, and all to fly from God, and yet he fled not from
him but to him. Therefore David says, if I take the morning Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9.
wings and fly aloft, lo thou art there, if I go into the neathermost depth,
thy hand will find me out: therefore whither shall I fly from thee? so that
when we think that we fly from God, in running out of one place into another,
we do but run from one hand to the other, for there is no place where Gods hand
is not, and whither soever a rebellious sinner does run, the hand of God will
meet with him to cross him, and hinder his good success, although he
prophecieth never so much good unto him self in his journey. The winds could
not further Jonah, the waters could not bear him, his sleep could not save
him, the ship could not hold him, the mariners could not help him, the whale
would not spare him, but he poor man must be cast out, lest all through him be
cast away. The ship that was full of wares of great value, was ready to sink
when Jonah entered into it. He trusted to the winds, and the winds could not
further him; he trusted to the waters, and the waters could not bear him; he
trusted to the ship, the ship could not hold him; he trusted to the mariners,
the mariners could not help him. What had he offended the winds, or the waters,
or what had he offended the ship that bare him such enmity? The winds and the
waters, and Job. 5. 23.
all Gods creatures, are to take Gods part against Jonah or any other
rebellious sinner.

Though God in the beginning gave power to man, and authority over all his
creatures to rule them, yet when man sins God gives power and strength unto
his creatures to rule and bridle man. Therefore he that eue^ now was Lord over
the waters, now the waters are Lord over him. But if Jonah had thought that God
would have brought things thus to pass, he durst not have been so bold in this
enterprise. Therefore we may see that sin has no eyes while it is on going.
Tush (says the fool) it is fair weather yet (while he goes to the stocks.)
Pro. 7. 22.


But God sent a mighty tempest into the sea, so that the ship was like to be
broken.

Such a stir has God before he can come by his own, he must cross us, and
set him self and all his creatures against us, he must strain our bodies and
constrain us to it before we will yield him due obedience. The tempest must
blow, the sea must rage, the ship must reele, the heart must tremble, and all
must be in an uproar against us, and God must cross us in all our doings before
we will return from our wicked ways. The be when she has once flung does
leese her sting^ so that she ca^ sting no more: so is not punishment for it
goes in general, when one tempest is gone, another comes upon us, for if we
be sick, sickness is not dead with us, if we be poor, poverty ends not,
if we be in danger, danger is not therefore put down for ever after: and if
we be vexed, vexation has not therefore left his sting in vs^ but all these
things are Gods weapons whereof he has store, and if thou be disobedient, he
will lead thee through them all, Le^it. 26. 18. 24. 28. 36. 37. 38. 39. etc.
until he has humbled thee, and made thee to glorify him with obedience or
utterly destroyed thee.

God sent a mighty tempest into the sea, so that the ship was like to be
broken.

This ship which was so fair and goodly even now, is now like a poor ship
tossed and ready to be torn in pieces, such strife is always betwixt Gods
wrath and man's disobedience. When Gods word will not turn us, Gods sword must
spurn us.

I observe that oftentimes many are punished for one man's sin (as all the
host of Israel Ios. 7. 5. 12. Many punished for ones sin, therefore suffer
sin in none.
were punished for the sin of Achan, and here all the mariners for Ionahs
sin.) etc. To the end that men might learn thereby to admonish one another
when they see them do amiss, with love: and not to say with Cain, am I the
keeper of my brother? for he that is not careful to keep his brother Genesis 4.
9.
from sin, is not careful to keep him self from sin, therefore let us
take heed that a wicked one be not found amongst us vnadmonished. I would
there were not many worse then Jonah amongst us. Will you know what I think
of you? I think you are worse the^ Infidels, Turks, or Pagans, that in this
wonderful year of wonderful mercies, are not thankful, do not believe in
God, nor trust in him, nor glorify his name: but like Pharoes sorcerers, who
seeing the great works of God which Moses expressed, Exodus 8. 19.
passing their skill, confessed saying, surely this is the finger of God: so
you confess that it is the great work of God (as you must needs,) but where
is the fruits it has brought forth in you? The Captain says, I have done
nothing, the soldier says, I sturred not, but the Lord sent out a mighty
tempest upon the^, and after that they escaped our hands, the Lord stretched
out his might (...) arm against them, and Pharao is drowned in the sea, so
that he never attained the land of promise which he gaped for, and made full
account to po^^esse. Further, herein we Man's extremity, Gods opportunity.
may note, that extremity is Gods opportunity: for when the wind had almost
ouerturned all, and the waters had almost drowned all, and destruction had
almost devoured all, then, and not before, was Gods opportunity, to set forth
his glory. While the ship reeled, and the waters flushed, and the mariners
shriked, Jonah slept in security and void of flying, which should have
admonished all the rest, and repented of his sin which was the cause thereof.

The ship was almost broken, but not altogether broken, and Jonah cast into the
sea, and then was he not almost drowned, but altogether drowned, had not God
prepared a great whale, which saved his life in a miraculous manner, out of
which God brought him forth like Lazarus in his winding sheet, that he might
glorify God once again, and see if he could find the way to Niniuie.

The effects, that this great tempest wrought were these. The ship was like to
be broken and the mariners were sore affrayd. The ship which was so strong that
it might have encountered with instruments of war, and made so strong that it
might be able to go many voyages, and endure great tempests and many waves,
was now with one tempest and at one voyage in such a taking, that they which
were in it feared that it should have been torn all to pieces, and so they
should loose their ship, their lives, goods and all: and so vehement was the
tempest, that they were fully persuaded it was no common nor ordinary thing,
but extraordinary, and for some extraordinary cause sent upon the^ by some
great divine power. And the mariners (which live in the sea almost Marine^ like
the fishes.
like the fishes, and have the waters as their necessariest element) now
tre^bled for fear, like women which shrike at every stir in the boat, and
like little children when they are frighted. Now these courageous fellows are
brought down by danger, which defied danger, like a young soldier which
starteth at the sound of a gunne.

Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast the
wares out that were in the ship to lighten it thereof. But Jonah was gone down
into the sides of the ship, and he lay down, and was fast a sleep.

This verse is divided into two parts. The first, that the mariners at this
sudden storm were frighted and cast into amaze. The second as touching Jonah
his sleeping. After that God had spoken gently unto Jonah, and saw that his
words would not move him, the Lord sent out a mighty tempest like the
messengers which were sent to compel folks to come to the banquet: such a
Luke 14. 23.
stir has God before he can come to his due, he is feign to summon us by all
his creatures before we will yield unto his voice.

They cried eueryman unto his God, and cast forth their wares into the sea,
etc.

This is no usual matter among mariners, until they plead for life and death,
for now or never they must besturre them. Every one unto his God: which shows
that they were of diverse nations, for among the Gentiles every nation had a
several God whom they worshipped. Chamos was the god of the Moabites, and
Beelzebub the god of the Ebronites, Dagon the god of the Philistines, and 1.
Sam. 5. 5. Act. 19. 35.
the Ephesians worshipped Diana. When the wicked see that all their inventions
will not bring their enterprises to pass according to their mind, but are in
extremity, and like to be cast away for want of succor, the^ they fly unto
God being driven by compulsion as a bear unto a stake, and they crouch and
kneel, and make great shows outwardly, of humiliation and piety, all in hope
of help from God, and as it were thinking to deceive him by their hypocrisy.

In our necessity we fly every one unto In necessity every one flies to
that he has confidence in.
his god (as these mariners) in whom we repose our confidence: every one
flies unto those vanities which most feed their humor, persuading them selves
of sufficient relief from them. Come Physic heal me; come music cheer
me; come dainties seed me; come gold enrich me; come flattery please me; come
mirth glad me; come honors advance me; and come all pleasures when I wish for
you, come when I need and I will trust in you: so every man does fly unto such
vanities (in their necessity) as they take most pleasure in, supposing that
they are able of them selves to ease them: so leaving the creator which is all
powerful in him self, and running to his creatures, which have no power save
that they receive from him. Every one unto his god. That is, in the time of
necessity every one does fly for help and ease unto that, wherein he
reposeth most confidence: some run to their coffers, thinking that there it is
that is able to procure ease from any troubles: other some run to their
delights and wanton sports, supposing that there is no trouble so great, but it
will ease them of it: some to their glorious attires and costly jewels, as
thinking those can make them acceptable in the sight of God: some to their
dainty meats: some to their soft beds and easy standings, etc. But when they
begin to perceive that these will not help, which they in all the time of their
prosperity reposed their confidence in, and made more account off then God,
then they begin to crouch and kneel, and to seek out the true God in hope of
relief. If thou can heal thy self, what need thou a physician? or if
thou can help thy self out of troubles, what need have thou of succor?
Therefore these mariners seeing that they could not help themselves, cried
unto their gods, and labored with all their strength that they might not be
cast away. First they used prayer unto the divine powers for assistance: then
they used such ordinary means as they knew best in such a time, by casting
out their wares to lighten the ship of them, which rule is necessaire to be
used of all Christians in their necessity: In necessity first pray, the^ use
law, full means.
first to seek for aid and assistance at the hands of God, and then to use
all such good means to help them selves, as God shall enable them to do,
trusting that of his goodness he will bless their endeavors, else may they go
over all the world to seek help and have none, for there is no other way. God
in deed is last refuge, but he is also the first refuge which is to be sought
unto, for he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.

And cried eueryman unto his God.

They did well in that they prayed, but they prayed not well, for they prayed
every man unto his god, that is, unto feigned gods, gods in name but not in
nature, and such gods they were, as could not help so much as them selves.

And they cried. Which shows that their gods were deaf and could not hear
them, no more then they could help them. Here is a distinction in prayer: the
righteous pray when they are in need, but the ungodly rore and cry like bears
without their pray, for they despair of help before they pray for it. Every
man unto his god. They prayed much like the Papists, which in extremity cry
out Papists to their sundry Saints.
some to one saint, some to another, some to saints some to Angels, for they
think, if one will not help another will. But true prayer has two wings,
between which it must be carried up to heaven, else it cannot ascend at
Prayers wings to bring it to heaven: faith and love.
all, namely faith and love, without which no prayer can be acceptable or
amiable before God. These cried and prayed, and their prayers did beat the
sky, but could not lay the tempest, yet their prayer is here noted, to show
the custom of natural men: for the heathen do well perceive that there is a
God, (nature and experience does teach it them,) who has made the stately and
most glorious frame of the world, with all the excellent creatures therein, yet
they know him not. For though the lamps be wasted since Adam co^sulted with the
devil that he might be a God, yet there is a little light which still dwells
in darkness, like a spark hid in ashes. They would not have prayed at all,
but that nature taught them that there is a God, whose mighty power they
beheld so expressly in all the creatures, that they imagined it to be impossible
for one God to work them all: therefore they thought that there were diverse
gods as there were diverse seasons, diverse nations, diverse trades, diverse
languages, diverse and sundry kinds of all things; and so diverse nations
worshipped diverse gods. Every of these mariners did now in their extremity
call upon his god, every one upon that god which he thought most highly off,
and in whom he has in his prosperity reposed most confidence. And now while
none could help but Seeking to lay the tempest, they increase it.
one, they cried to many, and by this means while they sought to lay the
tempest, they stirred it more: for their prayers being idolatrous, were so
wicked, that it had been sufficient to provoke the Lord utterly to destroy
them, if his mercy were not wonderful Psalm. 144. 15.
over all his works, therefore blessed is he that has the Lord for his God.
What trouble soever comes unto the child of God, yet he has some
consolation, patience, and moderation of mind, to bear it withal, but when
the Lord sends adversity unto the ungodly, they have such a guilty
conscience, that when they feel the great hand of God, they are even
distracted of their wits, and made as it were senseless, that they know not
what they do: yea when trouble comes, it makes them like a heedlesse be, which
buzzeth about she knows not whither, or like the swallow, which by compulsion
of the wind, flies backward and forward till it fall into the sea, or like
Cain whose head was giddie, that he knew not whither to go, fearing to be
slain of every one whom he Genesis 4.
sees.

And cast the wares out that were in the ship into the sea.

Now the mariners are content to cast their wares into the sea, in hope of some
furtherance to save their lives thereby, for though many will venture their
lives for riches, yet they rather part with all their riches then their lives.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, says David, the Lord will Psalm. 66. 18 1.
Cor. 13. 3.
not hear me. And Paul says, though I cast my life into the fire if I have
no charity, if I retain malice in my heart, it profits me nothing, if I
cast not away sin, I Cast away sin or tho^ castest away all.
cast away all. Some will give to the poor, and yet use extortion and usury
to get money by: but God says to such, that if they regard wickedness in
their hearts it profits nothing. Though they think them selves beneficial
to the poor thereby, yet God will accept of them but as hypocrites, he will
none of their oblations, until they have humbled them selves and reformed
their own hearts before him from such uncleanness.

THE PUNISHMENT OF JONAH.
Jonah 1. 5. 6. 7. 5 But Jonah went down into the sides of the ship, and he
lay down and was fast a sleep.

6 Then the ship-maister came unto him and said, what meanest thou o sleeper?
arise and call upon thy God, if so be he will think upon us that we perish
not.

7 And they said every man to his fellovv, come let us cast lots, that we may
know for whose sake this evil is come upon us: so they cast lots, and the
lot fell upon Jonah.


THey prayed unto their gods, and their gods were now deaf whiles they were
tossed, and Jonah is gone to sleep when he should have been better occupied:
we come hither to hear the word, and here we fall a sleep, but it were far
better we were away, for we sleep when we should hear, and so we sleep in
sin: therefore let them now give ear that are a sleep, and think that the
shipmaster does iogge us by the elbow as he did Jonah. Now we are come to Jonah
his sleeping; not that we should sleep with him, but by his sleeping to be
warned of our security, and we shall see him waked, that we may learn to wake
with him. By Jonah his sleeping we see the nature of all the sons of Adam,
when they listen to the serpent they are like cha^gelings. For when they forget
God and his word, and bid conscience adieu, they sleep in sin, and sleep to
death like one sick of the lethargy.

Jonah his name signifies a dove, as I have told you, and it may well be
compared, for as the dove being gone out of the Arc could find no rest for
the sole of her foot till she returned into the Arc again: so when Jonah
rose up from the presence of the Lord, he could find no rest for his mind,
neither by sea nor land, until he returned again unto the Lord.

The cause of Jonah his going down to sleep, was to ease his mind, for it was
grievously troubled. Therefore now, o that Jonah could sleep till the tempest
were past, but it will not be, for the tempest is sent purposely to waken him.

And he was fast a sleep.

See how little Jonah is ashamed of his sin^ all the world smarted for it, and
yet he sleeps, as if he should say, neither the winds blowing, nor the waters
^ossing, nor the ship reeling, nor the wares casting, nor the mariners Jonah
sleeps whiles all else sturres.
crying, with all this stir, should move him, waken him from his sleep, or
raise him from his sin. Now Jonah might say, I was a sleep, and all might
have perished for me, if one God had not helped more then all the rest, for
Jonah sleept, but God waked, and called to the winds and the waters saying,
wash him, but you shall not drown him: fear him, but you shall not kill him:
whippe him, and when you have whipped him, send him to me, that I may send him to
Niniuie. It seems that Jonah was fast a sleep, when the winds over him
blowing, and the water under him tossing, the ship about him reeling, the
mariners by him crying, the wares ouerboord in casting, yet Jonah felt nothing,
but sleept as if there were no sturring.

We go far beyond Jonah in security, for the Lord causes the tempest to
blow down houses, the heavens to thunder over us, the earth to quake under us,
the water to ouerflow the land, fire to consume us and all that we have, frost
and snow ready to kill us with cold, and all things in an uproar round about us,
thereby always crossing us one way or other, and so to put us in mind of our
duty, the neglect whereof is the cause of all these troubles which the Lord
does send us, but we sleep with Jonah in our negligence, void of feeling,
because we consider not, nor search out as the mariners did, for whose sake
these tempests or troubles are upon us, whereas every cross should ^^urre us
up to amendment of life. Jonah repented of his disobedience, that we should
repent of ours: should we follow his example, when we see it to be so evil
that he repented it? if we do, God will deal more roughly with us then he did
with Jonah, for the Lord caused a whale to swallow him, and afterward to cast
him up again, but we shall be swallowed of that Serpent which never restores
again. He should have been their teacher if he were not a sleep, he should
have taught them to pray aright if he had any good feeling in him. For all this
while we read not that Jonah once condemned his thoughts, not so much as once
to say in him self, Jonah take heed what thou do, thou know how God may
handle thee upon the waters; if thou fly, he can overtake thee, or if thou
hidest thy self, he will find thee out. How should we be strong if a Prophet,
and such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ could not withstand this one
temptation, but suffered him self to be led away so far that when he should
run, he lay still, and when he should cry, he held his peace, and when he
should preach at Niniuie, he is going to loyter at Tarshish? and so Niniuie is
in her sin, yet Niniuie is in better case then Jonah.

In Jonah his sleeping we note and observe In Ionah^ sleep two things. I Most
secure in greatest danger. Act. 12. 21. 22. Dan. 4. 27. 30. Dan. 5. 4. 5. Luke
12. 19. 20. Judge. 16. 25 30. Sudde^ly destroyed.
two things. The first is, that when we think our selves most at rest, then we
are in greatest danger, when the shipwreck is at hand, then Jonah is a
sleep, when Herod was vaunting, then he was stricken, when Nebuchadnezzar was
in his greatest pride, then he was turned out, when Balthazar was banqueting,
the hand wrote his condemnation, when the rich man said unto his soul, thou
have enough, then his soul was taken from him and his goods also, when the
Philistines were sporting, the^ the roof fell; and thus wrath ouertaketh
sinners when they least think of it, like a Leopard which is taken while he
sleeps, or a byrd when she sings, therefore suspect thy pleasures like a
bait.

The second note is the nature of sin, 2 Sin pleasant whiles it is in doing
which is here expressed (while it is a doing) to be not bitter, but sweet, not
painful, but pleasant, like a harlot which shows nothing but her bravery
and beauty. Adam swallowed the forbidden fruit with pleasure, 2. King. 5. 27.
30. Gehezies briberie. Gene. 9. 21. Noah's wine. Da^ids adultery. 2. Sam. 11.
4. Prou. 10. 24. 33.
Gehezie lied for gold with delight, Noah drank his wine with mirth, David
committed whoredom with gladness, and so sinners go merrily, till wrath
ouertakes them at unawares like the fool, I will sit a little longer, and fold
my hands together a little, yet a little and a little longer, so: I have done
it, and I was not espied, but at last it choppes him over the ears, and the
tempest comes and blows him quite away. Where art thou now Jonah? why did
thou not remember the end? the Serpents sting is in her tail.

Then the ship-mais^er came unto him and said; what meanest thou o sleeper,
arise and call upon thy God.

Here Jonah is taken napping: sin has brought him a sleep, and now the
shipmaster wakens him. It may be the mariners may do him more good then the
tempest, it is good to use all good means in extremity. Whom sin should
waken peril cannot waken, the winds are not loud enough, not the waters
rough enough, therefore the ship-maister must waken him, else all shall be
endangered. If the winds will not waken him, let the waves waken him if the
waters will not waken him, let the mariners waken him; if he will not be
wakened; let him perish in his sleep, and die in his sin.

Now mark who is a sleep, and who wakens A Prophet wakened by a pagan.
him, Jonah is a sleep, and the mariners waken him, an Israelite, an infidel:
what a thing is this, that he which is the son of Abraham, who is wiser then
a thousand mariners, is now wakened and told his duty by a mariner? this is a
shame for Jonah, that he which should teach the Ninevites, the mariners told
him his duty, he that should So God of^^ shames his servants.
waken others, must be wakened by others, and he that should reprove sinners,
is often reproved of sinners. And thus the Lord sometimes shameth his servants,
and does vex them with a foolish nation, as he reproved Abraham by Abimelech,
and Balaam by an Genesis 20. 9. Number. 22. 28.
ass.

Now one might ask Jonah, saying, why did thou write that thou fledst from
God, or that when thou had most need to pray, thou did sleep? If thou
had not thus laid open thine own shame, thou might have been reckened as
one of the best Prophets, therefore why did thou so? Jonah did it to this
end, that in him we may see the reward of disobedience; for as Paul says,
whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction, and Jonah would never
have written it, had it not bin for our sakes. If he has done thus much for
us, which way shall we requite him? That which he would have us do for him is
this, to be warned by him, to suppress all evil motions, not suffering them
to take effect as he did.

What meanest thou o sleeper? arise.
Now the mariners, waken him, as if they should say, why Jonah do thou not
see how we are enclosed, do thou not behold our wares cast out? why do
thou not come and labor with us in this dangerous time? is this a time to
sleep in, when we are all in peril of our lives? shall we cry, and thou be
mute? shall we labour^ and thou rest? shall we fight and thou fly? this is no
time to sleep, it is a time to pray unto thy god for his assistance, and to
use the means that may save our lives. Now Jonah did not snap like some
currish dogs, and bite him that wakened him, but he arises and confesses
his sin, being content to bear the punishment, and when Jonah remembered him
self, the winds and the waters remembered them selves, and became quiet.

Many of you come to hear the word, and Against sleepers.
here you fall a sleep when you have most need to be waking, but I am glad I
have now gotten a text to waken you, for now I can not read my text, but I
must say, what meanest thou o sleeper? arise: but I pray you, have not I
wakened you, and yet you sleep again? If you mark what is said unto you, you
are a sleep though your eyes be open, and if you were as wise as Jonah, you
would not sleep here in the sight of all the people, but would rather get you
to sleep in some corner, for Jonah went under the hatches to sleep, and would
not sleep in the sight of the mariners. If you were as wise as Jonah, you
would thank him that wakened you. Solomon says, that he which reproves,
shall have more favor of a wise man, the^ he which flattereth. The Lord Jesus
says, woe be unto that servant, that when his master comes he shall find
sleeping, can thou not watch one hour, says he to Peter ca^ you not wake
while I speak unto you? You all would be found in the Church when the Lord
comes, but you would not be found sleeping in the Church, you are watched (I
see you not below) and none of you can steal a nap and not be spied, but when
your eyes be most shut and see least, then most eyes be upon you, and I can as
well stand in this pulpit unseen, as you can sit and sleep there and not be
espied. I marvel how you can sleep having so many eyes looking on you, so
many clamors in your ears, and God him self speaking unto you. Shall I
continue iogging till you be wakened? how long shall I preach before I can
convert the usurer, the extortioner, the drunkard, or the blasphemer, seeing I
speak thus long? for I can not convert you from your sleeping. What would you
do if I read some Homilies unto you, whereas you cannot waken, while I preach
unto you and speak against you? If you should see a traitor sleep upon the
hurdle, or if you should see men sleep with meat in their mouths, would you
not marvel? yet even so do you while I denounce the great judgments of God
against you, and while I am feeding some of you, you fall a sleep, and so I
preach in vain. There is a country whereof it is said, that it is night with
them, when it is day with us, I think that country be here, for how many are
here that have lost their eyes and their ears since they came hither? If all
of you were, as many of you be (I mean a sleep) the strangers which come
hither to hear, would think that you were all dead, and that I preach your
funeral sermon, therefore for shame leave your sleeping. What meanest thou o
sleeper? arise, sleep no more, and I will waken you no more.

Arise and call upon thy God, if so be he will think upon us, that we perish
not.

After that the ship-maister had wakened Jonah, he bids him call upon his God,
as if he had said, watch and pray; he speaks like a Saint, yet he is an
infidel, he said not, call upon our gods, but call upon thy God, the
ship-maister would not call him his God, but (says he) call upon thy God, and
it may be he will help us: but if he had said, call upon our God, when he said
call upon thy God, and if he had said he will help us, when he said if so be
he will help us, then he had showed some spark of faith. Because he wa^ted
help and comfort, he bids him rise, and because he was fearful, he bids him
pray: it may be (says he) he will think upon us, that we perish not, as if he
had said, Jonah, we know that thou have a God as well as we, and therefore we
say call upon thy God, for now any god may serve, therefore now if ever thou
did pray in thy life, fall to it now, for if any god do help, it is good
enough. Thus Satan leads men a blind way with zeal in hope of some relief
being in trouble. They called upon them for help, which were neither able to
hear nor assist them: and when they perceived by woeful experience that there
was no kind of su^cour to be had that way, they fly to God, and then Satan
labors to undermine that confidence and expectation of help, and to place
in stead thereof doubtfulnesse and infidelity. Thus Satan will be sure to loose
nothing by his bargain any way. That God that lays the tempest now shall be
our God, and we will worship him (says the mariners) now therefore Jonah call
upon thy God, for we have tried all the rest, and if he can not help us, we
are all gone and lost, for we have called upon all our gods, we have labored
hard to mend our state, we have cast away our goods to lighten the ship, but
all in vain, for we are no whit the better, like the woman which had spent all
Luke. 9.
her substance about Physic, yet all could not help her til Christ came: so
the Papists while they are well, they pray unto every Saint, and Angel for
succor against the troublesome times, but in extremity or at the point of
death none of them can help, so that then they are feign to fly unto God or
be destitute, as like Idolaters as one fly is like another: they are like the
heathen which worship Juno, Venus, Neptune, Pallas, lupiter, and the rest, some
hold on the one, and some one the other. Some say if John be with me, I care
not for all the pettigods, because I hold him chief: so another says if S.
Gabriell be with me, I care not for the rest, and some raise great disputations
whether this Saint, or that Saint, this Angel, or that Angel be better,
whether our Lady of Bullen, or our Lady of Rome be surest; whether S. James of
Callis, or S. James of Compostella be strongest and so like beggars which run
from door to door, they run from one Saint to another. If one god will not
help another will, as though the gods were contrary one to another, and where
one bids, the other forbids. So some thought that Venus was a friend to the
Trojans, and Pallas was not their friend, as fools think of witches, one
strikes and another heales.

Call upon thy God.

They bid him call upon his God before Infidels de^^sire the sa^ full to pr^
for them.
they knew him, but the faithful would not worship a false god though they may
be helped. By him by the example of these mariners, we may learn the substance
of every temptation that does undermine us, and we shall see that it will bid
us do this evil that this good may come of it: mark when soever Sin always
promised good.
thou art motioned to evil, if it do not promise thee some goodness to come
of it. But the servant of God ought not to do that which is evil, though
they may gain all things that can be wished by so doing: for they have learned
their lesson, and how to answer Satan at such times: why temptest thou me
Satan? for it is written thou must Romans 3. 8.
not do evil that good may come of it, and this is the armor called Scriptum
est wherewith the Lord overcame the devil in the wilderness: here we may see
the difference between the faithful and infidels.

Call upon thy God.

The mariners bid Jonah pray to his God The truly faithful desire not infidels
to pray for them.
in their behalf, but Jonah says not to the mariners pray to your gods in my
behalf. And this is also manifest that a Papist will say unto a zealous
Protestant, and one that lives well, pray for me, but a Protestant, if he be
any thing zealous, will not say unto a Papist pray thou for me, knowing that
when a Papist does pray he does it to Idols, Saints, or Angels, and therefore
their prayers are abominable in the sight of God, and therefore they will not
bid them do it, because they will not do evil to the intent that good may come
of it, whereby it is manifest that Exodus 88. 28. etc. Pharao desires Moses,
Moses not Pharaoh. 1. Sam. 15. 25.
our Religion is the true Religion our adversaries the^ selves being judges.
And so Pharao said to Moses pray for me, but Moses said not to Pharao pray thou
for me. Saul said to Samuel pray for me: but Samuel said not to Saul pray thou
for me; therefore the mariners had need of Jonah to pray for the^, and why
should not all pray to Ionahs God, and Pharao pray to Moses God, seeing God
has said call upon me in trouble and I will Psalm. 50. 13
hear thee? Call upon thy God (say they). When they saw all the other gods
would not help, they ran to another whom they knew not, yet hoping for to be
helped by him, because they thought some God there was that could do it: so the
Papists run from one god to another, from S. Dominicke to S. Francis, and why
should they run from S. Dominicke to S. Francis, but that they mistrusted S.
Dominicke? and so they go forward, but in the end the unknown God is thought
to be the best: yet the Lord taught not Peter one prayer and John another, but
taught the^ all one prayer unto one only God.

If per adventure he will think upon us that we perish not.

This if, perhaps, and peradventure cost Adam Paradise, thrice three words
were changed: the first, God said to Adam, if thou do eat of this tree,
thou shall surely dye, then Euah reported these words thus: lest peradventure
we dye, the Serpent seeing her in such a mind, so careless or forgetful of
the commandment, he came and quite changed the matter and said, you shall not
dye; thus sin creeps upon us while doubtfulnesse remains in us: so God
says you shall be saved, the tre^bling flesh says peradventure I shall, etc.
then comes Satan, and he says thou shall dye. So that if you will ask
Sinners faith.
what is the faith of sinners, or if you would have it defined it is this:
peradventure yea peradventure no, if you will ask me, whereupon this faith is
grounded, it is upon ifs, and ands: this is the faith of the ungodly, to say,
if so be God will help us, for they cannot assure themselves of any help. But
we may not doubt of our God and say, it may be, or if peradventure: for we may
freely pray to our God with confidence, and may say, our God and the God of
Jonah will surely help us, and has helped us, but yet let us know that we have
sinned like infidels, and do deserve to be punished like the Egyptians.

If so be he will etc.
This if comes in, like a little leaven which sowreth the whole lump of dow,
and like the moth, which eats the whole wedding garment, and this same little
thief has stolen away all the Papists faith. Wickedness lies sick in bed,
and calls to every one that comes by, call upon thy god and pray for me, if
so be he will look upon us and help us, and so the best hope when the tempest
comes is present death.

If so be he will think upon us.
Our God thought upon us in the time of trouble, he thought upon us and laid
the tempest when our enemies called upon their gods, Saints, and Angels, but
what do we mean beloved, when mercy is come, to send for judgment? for though
we be saved with Israel, we have deserved to be plagued with Pharao, because
we are not tha^kfull for this, namely that the Lord has thought upon us in our
distress, for he trauelleth with mercy, and labors till he be delivered,
he goes laden like a be but wants a hiue.

There are two hands, a hand to give, and a hand to receive: Gods hand to give,
and man's hand to receive, the hand of God is a bountiful and a merciful hand,
a hand lode^ with liberality, full of gracious gifts, therefore let us stretch
forth the good hand to A good hand.
receive it, (thankfully to embrace it, cheerfully to entertain it, and
carefully to keep it) let us receive it by the hand of faith, the hand of
love, and the hand, of prayer, for who so comes with this hand shall be
filled, and who so comes without it, shall go empty away, because they have
despised the ways of God: for when I instructed the^ Pro^. 1. 24. 25.
they would not hear, and what I taught them they would not learn says the
Lord.

And they said every man to his fellow, come let us cast lots, that we may
know for whose sake this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell
upon Jonah.

Now we are come to casting of lots, that we may know who troubles the ship:
for the ship is tossed and ready to sink, but no man will confess who is the
cause thereof, therefore they have concluded among them selves saying, come let
us cast lots that we may find him out.

prayed unto their gods, and seeing they could not mend them, Pharaos
sorcerers, which confessed not Exodus 8. 1^.
Gods majesty while they lived at ease, but when the Lord plagued them, then
they cried out, this is the finger of God.

Let us ca^t lots.
The lot fell upon Jonah in the end, not because he was the greatest sinner of
the^ all, Luke. 13. 1. 2. etc.
for so is the opinion of the common people, to censure them worst whom they
see most afflicted. If any one be seen to bear his cross, then many will
say, this is a wicked man, and so think well of them selves, supposing that
God is bent against them to plague them. For he corrects them as he did his
Son, but if judgment begin at the house of God, what shall become of the
ungodly? ^. Pet. 4. 17. 18.


Then they said every man to his fellow, come let us cast lots, that we may
know etc.

Every man excuses him self, though they be sinners, yet they are not great
sinners. They thought that there was but one sinner among them, for every one
of them said it is not I: they were not of David's spirit, who when he saw the
people plagued, 2. Sam. 24. 10.
said, Lord it is I.

They had past many tempests before, but they never cast lots, for their
casting of lots does note some special danger, supposing this tempest to be
sent from some angry god, and that for some one man's sin amongst them,
therefore they determined to seek him out by lots: and having found him, to
sacrifice him unto the god that, was so offended by him. But if they knew the
angry gods, they should have taken their sins by the throat, and sacrificed
them unto them. In that they cast lots, it shows that their heads were full
of doubts in this time of extremity, for the wind said, I will ouerturne the^,
the waters said, I will drown them, the ship said, I cannot hold them, the
mariners said, we cannot help Jonah nor our selves, for God was gone from them,
and Jonah his conscience accused him, within sin was bleeding, and God knocked
at the door of his heart, saying, it is for thee the tempest is come thou
fugitive. It does not appear that Jonah does free him self, in that he said
nothing but hid him, went to sleep, and tried it by the lots, for he thought,
it may be the lot will fall upon me, like a thief which (notwithstanding) in
his own heart he knows himself guilty of that wherwithall he is charged, yet
will not confess until the matter be thoroughly sifted out and proved to his
face, in such sort that he cannot for shame deny it. For every man would
extenuate Every man shifts off sin upon others.
his sin and diminish it, and every one thinks his sin salued, when he
excuses him self. Let Adam be his own judge, and he will say the woman
tempted Genesis 3. 12. 13.
him to sin, and let the woman be her own judge, and she will say, yonder
serpent persuaded her to it, let every one be their own judge, and there will
be such posting off of sin, that never a one will be found guilty. Therefore
if God had not sifted out this sin the better, Jonah would not have confessed.
Christ says, he that breaks the least commandment, Mat. 5. 19.
and teaches others so, shall be least in the kingdom of heaven, but none are
accounted sinners, unless they be openly detected of some notable and heinous
crime. If they be dicers, swearers, drunkards, brawlers, pickers, flatterers,
prophaners of the saboth, sleepers at Church, and such like, these are counted
no sins, but rather recreatio^s, for they count them no sinners, unless they
be traitors, thieves, open and gross idolaters, and such like capital crimes,
no nor these neither, were it not for fear of the law, for none but Publicanes
were counted sinners, all the rest were good fellows and just men. There is
none that will be so impudent as to say that he has no sin at all, or as the
Pope, to say that he can not err, for he that aduaunceth him self shall be as
the least in the kingdom of heaven, or as we call it, a Luke 14. 11.
squire of low degree. The Papists say, that thoughts, words, and such like
are but venial sins, for there be venial sins and mortal sins. Did you
ever read of these venial sins in the Scripture? but you think they have
nothing but the Scripture: yes, they have decrees, they have decretals, they
have visio^s, and they have a Pope that cannot err: and thus they lessen the
price of sins, and they can buy sins, sometimes for money, sometimes for
Masses, and sometimes for other rewards, and by holy water many sins are
washed away, because they are venial: but if the devil turn good unto evil,
God turns evil unto good.

The Gentiles had a custom, that in the time of common plague, they sacrificed
one for the rest, this custom they took by imitation of the Jews in offering
beasts, and of Abraham in offering his son. And thus the devil took
advantage to do evil by the service of God, in moving the Gentiles to work
abomination, by offering men in imitation of the Jews sacrifices.

Then they said, come let us cast lots.

The mariners were not so wise to prevent the tempest before it came, as they
were to lay the tempest when it might not be laid. Now whether it be lawful
to cast lots, it is not evident by this example, because they were Gentiles,
and therefore no president for us, but so far may we use them as the word does
lead us. There are two goats brought Leuit. 16.
to Aaron that he might cast lots, to see which goat should be killed, and
which should not, these goats signify Christ, for as he died, he lived again,
and as he was buried, he rose again. Again the land of Canaan is parted Number.
33.
by lots, to see what part each tribe should inhabit. Again, that thief Achan
is found Joshua 7.
out by lots, first by his tribe, then by his family, and lastly by his
particular person.

Again, it is said that Saul was chosen 1. Sam. 1.
king by lots, and lest any should have said, that it was his good luck, his
good lot, or chance to be king, therefore the Lord appointed that he should be
anointed before we was chosen by lots.

Again Mathias is chosen by lots to the Acts. 2.
Apostleship in stead of Judas, so that it is lawful in some cases to cast
lots, and it is not utterly unlawful, so that they do attribute nothing unto
them, for the lot is cast in the lap, but the disposition thereof is from the
Pro. 16. 33.
Lord: therefore they must not say that it is their chance, fortune, or good
luck, for so they make an Idol of it, and rob God of the honor due unto
him.

It was not Saules fortune to be king, but Gods mercy; it was not Ionahs chance
to be cast out, but Gods judgment; lots may be used to prevent strife, when
all other means have been used, as sometimes brethren do divide their
inheritance by lots, as the children of Israel divided the land of Chanaan. In
the Church of Geneua there is an order that in the time of plague, there should
be an house set a part for the sick to lodge in and lest they should be
vncomforted they choose out a Minister by lots to do it.

Then they said come let us cast lots.

Now we are come to put up our suits to the Court of Lawyers, to see if they
will do any thing for God, for conscience, or for love, that they would end
their suits quickly, and let the poor clients have equity. Some say that
Lawyers be good until they be counselors, like Lions which will be gentle
until their tallants grow: be not offended but amend for malice speaks not.

I am persuaded that if the lots were cast to see who troubles the ship it
would fall upon the Lawyers, be not offended but amend for malice speaks not.
A poor client comes forth accusing one, and going home accuses an hundred,
for so many seeks to gain by him, so few seeks to further him, and so many
seeks to hinder him, that all his gain is but labor and loss. For a small
matter many will come to law, to strive for that which with reason might easily
be attained without such contention, and others seek to enrich themselves with
contending for a small matter at the law with their neighbors, yet in the end
loose that they sought, and that they had beside: and so they contend and
strive about a thing commonly til the Lawyer has gained more by them then the
thing which is in controversy is worth. These are like the mouse and the
frogge, which strove so long about marsh ground till the kite came and took
it from the^ both. Others will come up to law about a small matter, and therein
so entangle themselves, that they cannot rid their hands of it, until it have
almost undone them, like a seely sheep that is hunted of a fly which runs
from bush to bush, and every bush catches a lock of him, so that the poor
sheep is thredbare ere he has done and has not a fleece left him to cover
himself withal. So he runs from Court to Court to sue, to plead, till he have
spent his cloak for his coat, were it not better to have cast lots for the
coat at first? for the law is like a butlers box, play still on till it come
to the candlestick. Therefore it is lawful for to end a controversy in a
hard matter, to use this mean when other means have ^in tried. Now whether it
be lawful to cast dice (if lots may not be used as I have proved but in hard
matters and weighty causes) when the thing is doubtful, and all good means are
tried before to avoid strife: that question is decided which none but
voluptuous Arguments against ^^cing.
men make question off^ namely, whether dice-play be a meet exercise for a
Christian soul. Solomon says the lot causes co^te^tio^ Pro. 18.
to cease, therefore lots are to end striffe: but these lots make striffe, Esau
did not sell his birthright so lightly but he had somewhat for it which
refreshed his hunger, but God has given thee a living and thou spendest it
vainly. But the mariners did cast lots to find out the sinner, they did not
cast dice to see who should win, as dicers do, for to whom the lot falls, he
takes all which deserves to loose all as well as the others, and has no right
unto it by any law, for God has not allowed one man to take an others goods for
the tripping of a dye, but either they must be merited, or they must be given,
or they must be bought, or else it is unlawfully, ungodly, vnco^scionablely to
take them. with it unless it had been a meet co^panio^ for them, thou take
another ma^s goods for nothing, whereas God has appointed thee to get thy
living with the sweat of thy brows, Gene. 3. 19.
for thou take away that which others have sweat for, and whereas thou
should live by working, already, and therefore have no voice by law? take
away these and take away dice. The patron co^demnes the clients when one voice
co^demnes another: if the exercise were lawful, such patrons as pleasure, and
covetousness would not speak for it. is evil gotten, and that he sought it
without God.

FINIS.
A PRAYER FOR THE MORNING.
O Lord prepare our hearts to prayer.
Lord God our heavenly father, we thy poor and wretched creatures, give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for our quiet and safe sleep, and for raising
us up from the same. We beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake, to prosper us
this day in our labor and travel, that principally it may be to thy glory,
next to the profit of our Master and the Commonweal, and last of all to the
discharging of our duty in this our vocation. Grant dear father, that we may
cheerfully and conscionably do our business and labors, not as men-pleasers;
but as serving thee our God, knowing thee to be the chief Master of us and
our Masters, and that thou seeing and beholding us with thy fatherly eyes,
promising reward to them that faithfully and truly walk in their vocation, and
threatening everlasting death and damnation to them that deceiptfully and
wickedly do their works and labors. We beseech thee o heavenly father, to give
us the strength of thy spirit, that godly and gladly we may overcome our
labors, and that the tediousness of this irksome labor which thou for our
sins have powered upon al mankind, may seem to us delectable and sweet. Grant
o dear Father, that we may cheerfully walk in our vocation, and faithfully
serve thee in this our service, and gladly and joyfully go forth in our
labors. Fulfill now o Lord these our requests, for thy son our Saviors sake,
in whose name we pray as he him self has taught us. Our Father etc.

Another Prayer.
Eternal God, all mighty and most merciful, we thy unworthy servants
prostrate before the throne of grace, do yield our selves body and soul unto
thee, for all thy benefits, which thou from our birth have heaped upon us, as
though we had always done thy will, although we occupied about vain things,
never marked, never loved, never served, never thanked thee so heartily for
them, as we esteem a mortal friend for the least courtesy. Therefore we come
with shame and sorrow to confess our sins, not small but grievous, not few
but infinite, not past but present, not secret but presumptuous against thy
express word and will, against our own conscience, knowledge and liking if
any had done them but our selves. O Lord if thou should require but the least
of the^ at our hands, Satan would challenge us for his, and we should never see
thy face again, nor the heavens, nor the earth, nor all the goodness which
thou have prepared for man: what shall we do then but appeal unto thy mercy,
and humbly desire thy fatherly goodness to extend that compassion toward us,
which thy beloved son our loving Savior has purchased so mightily, so
mercifully, so graciously, and so dearly for us. We believe and know, that one
drop of his blood is sufficient to heal our infirmities, pardon our
iniquities, and supply our necessities, and without thy grace our strength,
our guide, our life, we are able to do nothing but sin, as woeful experience
too long has taught us, and the example of those which are void thereof, whose
life is nothing else but the service of the world, the flesh and the devil:
therefore good Father, as thou in especial favor have appointed us to serve
thee like as thou have ordained all other creatures to serve us: so may it
please thee to send down thine heavenly spirit into this earthly mansion, to
illuminate our minds, mollify our hearts, cleanse our affections, subdue our
reason, regenerate our wills, purify our natures with thy spirit: so shall
not thy benefits, nor thy chastisements nor thy word return void, but
accomplish that, for the which they were sent, until we be renewed into the
image of thy son. Good Lord we beseech thee to look down in the multitude
of thy compassions upon thy militant church, this sinful Realm, thy gracious
handmaid our dread Sovereign, her honorable Counselors, the civil
magistrates, the painful ministers, the two Universities, the people that sit
in darkness, and all that bear thy cross, gather us into one communion of
thy truth, and give unto every one a spirit unto his calling, that being
mindful of the account, and that we are called Christians, may firmly
resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere in doing and searching thy
most holy will. Good Lord bless and sanctify our meeting, that no temptation
hinder me in speaking, or them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard and
spoken as the word of God, which is able to save our souls in that day:
howsoever it pleases thee by weak and foolish things to magnify thy self,
there is no cause o Lord most just, why thou should hear sinners, which art
displeased with sin, but for his sake which has suffered for sin and sinned
not, in whose name we are bold to lift up our hearts, hands, and voices unto
thee, saying as he has taught us, O our Father etc.

FINIS.

