ENGLANDS JOY, FOR SVPPRESSING the Papists, and banishing the Priests and
Jesuits.

1 KING. 18.21. How long hault ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
then follow him; if Ball, then follow him. 2 KING. 17.24, 25. And the King of
Assyria brought men from Babylon, and s^ow Cuthah, and from Aua, and from
Ha^^^, and from Sepharuaim, and placed them in the Cities of Samaria, in stead
of the children of Israel, and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the Cities
thereof.

And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not
the Lord: Therefore the Lord sent Lions among them, which slew some of them.

Printed M.DC.XXIV.

ENGLANDS JOY, FOR SVPPRESSING of Papistry, and banishing the Priests and
Jesuits.
I Confess that prayer is so forcible, that it opens the gates of heaven;
and as you read, how the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in the form of
fiery tongues, so through the enforcement of Prayer, all blessings spiritual
and temporal are let down amongst the children of God, like Peter's sheet.
Who would not then ask to obtain? seek to find? knock to have it opened?
and importune the father of mercy to have no denial? considering the Parable
tells us, That the wicked Judge who neither feared God nor man, granted the
widows Petition to be delivered from her clamors, and over troublesome
attendancy? and thus are we beholding to our God.

But now, to make God beholding unto us, were a secret out of the
Treasure-house of heaven indeed, wherein I will be bold to tell you how you
may be proficient, and inuit you to wisdoms school to learn a cunning which
the heart of the natural man is incapable of; and this is, to retribute
thanks to God, to give his glorious name the praise, to be grateful unto
him, and to rejoice in hymns and spiritual Songs when a benefit is imparted,
and our souls are comforted.

What a story is the story of the Jews, being delivered from Hamans cruelty
and persecution, for the purpose in hand. Hester 9.17, 18
The Text says; That they rested the same day, and made it a day of feasting
and gladness, a good day, and sent portions and presents one to another: but
wherefore was all this? For saving their lives, and prevailing against their
enemies.

But, oh thou God of heaven! that ridest upon the wings of the wind, and
hold the reins of the kingdoms of the world in thy hand, to let loose or
restrain at thy pleasure: Thou know that we have more causes to rejoice and
be glad then the Jews in their Parim. For, if we may compare the less with
the greater, they had but the preservation of their bodies, and a slight
triumph against their corporal enemies, we are in the way to save our souls,
and put our spiritual adversaries to flight, the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil.

What? Papistrie to be suppressed? The Priests and Jesuits to be banished? And
the Gospel of Jesus Christ to flourish? Psalm 45.
My soul leapes for joy, and my heart is enditing a good matter. I speak of
the things which I have made touching the King, my tongue is the pen of a ready
writer. Oh blessed be God for this alteration?

Does not Jeremy tell us, that, In Ramah there was a voice heard, Jeremy 31.
Math. 2.
lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachell weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted because they were not. Did not al England
wring their hands for sorrow, and begin to mourn and be affrighted, when they
saw the Papists so arrogantly mischievous, to insult in every town and shire,
and mock us to our faces, as if Sandolet and Tobiah were to scoff and deride
the Jews, when Nehemiah came to re-edifie the Temple. And has not God put
into the Kings heart to dam up this inundation, and to keep the raging Sea
within limitation, that it do not ouerflow the lower and fruitful grounds.

Mark but the progression of business, tell it to your Children, and write it
in the Philacteries of your garments. Did not we determine to match with Spain?
And did not Spain resolve to ouermatch us in the contract? Did he not resemble
an unmannerly and impudent Guest, who invited to some neighbourly meeting,
would not only come himself, but brought a whole rablement of Cormorants with
him: so Spain must not only condition for a daughter, but the Papists through
the Kingdom have liberty of Conscience, Mass in their houses, Priests within
their doors, penalties remitted, and the Purseuants and Officers restrained
from their privy searches, whereby the Spanish Ambassador presumed on his
meritorious service, and some Papists triumphed, as if the wiser sort knew they
were in the right. And was not this a fearful beginning, and who knows with
what strength the strong man would have increased in keeping his possession.

But was this all? No, no, the several shiers of England, worse then the Jews
that poisoned the springs of sweet water, in these days had malicious
instruments to corrupt the youth of the Country, and the Priests, Jesuits and
Friars ran from house to house, and made them all amazed with crying out;
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

But now Papistry shall be suppressed, and the Priests and Jesuits banished.
Oh blessed alteration: oh blessed King: oh blessed Parliament. The Ambassadors
houses were so many hiues to which the drones resorted, who not only fed upon
the honey of the Bees, but presumed to kill and beat them away which preserved
them: Thus these unconstant people, not only despised the Pastors of their own
Congregations, and under protection of the Prerogative of Kings, rayled on the
Lord and his anointed. The Streets swarmed with ruffianly apparitions, Priests
in disguised apparel, and Jesuits in Courtly vestments. And what did they?
Not only watch the outward behavior of men, and government of the City, but
took advantage of the weak carnal Gospeller, and set upon them with the
outward glory of a vissible Church.

The Cathedral of Paul's had her walks mingled with a number of peremptory
and audatious Romanists, who not only brandeth us for lukewarmness and
unjustifiable actions, but boasted both of and in their disputations, that they
had put the true and learned servants of God to silence, as if Zedchiah should
strike Michaiah on the face, and peremptorily ask him, when the Spirit of God
departed from him, to be infused into such an underling.

The Court has not only every corner, but public walks filled with
Papists, and Hispaniolized temporisers. And what did they? appear in several
disguised forms, and their corrupt hearts taught their tongues to vent forth
blasphemy, and notori-abuses: For as you read how Jeremy was taken by his
enemies, and brought before the Princes and Priests for weakening the hands of
the men of war, and daunted their hearts that wished well to the peace of
Zion: So played these imposturing spirits, charming all men with such
subtilties. What? the house Austria to be checked, and the Emperor of Germany
to be affronted with petty rebels? believe it not it is impossible, take heed,
how you adventure in such a business; you see how he preuailes, and no forces
can resist him. What? the Arch-Dutches to be mated with such inferiors,
traitors, rebels, and mechanicke vpstarts? Never speak it for shame: For at
this instant they are no less then four mighty armies, 60000 men ready to
devour these one night Mushrumps, and setting upon their territories in four
places at once, make a fatal ruin of all their fortunes and hopes in a moment.

What? Spain to be threatened with war, and intrusions of hostillity? Who is
able to cover the Viena, as Xerxes once did the Hellespont, with a numberless,
and invincible Armado, to set upon the Island of Brittany as a Conqueror: to
trouble Ireland with an army of 20000: to infest Scotland, and ouerrun it at
pleasure, and to make England to tremble with the multitude of his forces, and
yet dare you talk of war and assisting the Low Countries? But now God be
thanked, Papistry shall be suppressed, the Priests and Jesuits banished, and
these mighty Bulls of Bassan either have their horns sawed off, or their chaps
mufled, and what an alteration is here?

Oh let us then give thanks unto God, and confess his mercy is beyond our
apprehension, and his benefits are an Ocean in comparison of our duty, standing
poole of deserving. And seeing the King is so gracious to look upon us like a
fair moving Planet, in a conspicuous Orb, from whose influence can proceed
nothing but sweet presages: Seeing our Parliament is so religiously Honorable,
to sound the foord of Spaines proiects, and their funtries hassard by
collusion, and halting between two opinions: with the plummets of true
Wisdom, and Zeal to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Seeing our Clergy are so
indulgent over Gods Church, that they will not suffer either the wild Bore of
the Forest to trample down the hedges, or little Foxes to destroy the Grapes,
but are willing that Iehoydas filthy garments may be taken away, and a crown
of pure Gold set upon his head, seeing the people are prepared to call and
hasten one another to go up to the Temple of the Lord; and rather then Ruben
shall raise a heap of stones like an Alter, to put the people in fear of
Idolatry, they are ready to arm with their brethren, and examine how the
matter stands, let every man exhillerat himself, and cry out: Why art thou
cast down o my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God,
for I shall yet praise him, he is the health of my countenance, and my God: So
then if Papistry shall be suppressed, the Priests and Jesuits banished, and
our enemies, both Foreign and Domesticke ouer-reached: let God have the glory,
the Prince the honor, the Parliament the commendation, the people the comfort,
the Country the benefit, and every true hearted Christian sing Iopaean, and
Epithalamians to Jehovah.

Mark the difference between flourishing Kingdoms through the blessing of
reformation, and advise of good governors, and the fearful distraction of
Commonwealths, where irreligion and indirect courses ouer-maister: While the
ambition of Athalia was predominant over her affection, and drive her headlong
to al voscenity and tyranny, she committed idolatry, she neglected the house of
God, she defiled the Alter, she destroyed the seed-royal, she usurped the
Diadem, and disturbed the peace of Judah and Israel: But when Iehoas was
miraculously preserved and instructed by Iehoiada: Athalia is slain: Iehoash
does that which is right in sight of God, the Priests repair the Temple, the
Alters are cleansed, the Commonwealth reformed, and the whole Country resetled
in order; and was not this a great alteration?

In the story of Manasses, and Ammon his son, you shall find these
imputations of wickedness cast upon them by the Holy Ghost: He did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, he lived after the abominations of the
Heathen, he reared up Alters for Baal, he offered incense to the Host of
Heaven, he made his son pass through the fire, he used enchauntments,
obserue^ times, and dealt with familiar spirits, and wrought much wickedness
before the Lord: But when Josiah came to rain, and was instructed how? he
feared God, and lived uprightly, he cleansed and repaired the Temple: he
commanded the book of God to be read, he rent his clothes as stricken with
compunction of soul, he made a covenant with God to observe his testimonies,
he put down all the offices of Baal, and the groves dedicated unto him: He
slew his Priests, he solemnized the Passover, and he performed the words of
the Law, which were written in the Book; and was not this a great alteration?

Thus is it between the government of Spain and England, especially the
contrariety of Religion, and diversity of serving God, between Papists and
Protestants: the Papists both in Spain and in England, commit blasphemous
idolatry, are poluted with incests and fornication, derogate from the Honor of
God, to attribute adoration to creatures, passifieth himself in the Laborynth
of aequiuocation: Dissemble with God, their own souls, and all that deal
with them, care not by what means or treachery they compass their own ends,
deny Christ's presence in Heaven, a maine article of Faith, extenuate the power
of the Godhead, by allowing a dyety to Creatures, and an invocation to
Devils. First, they have made many Saints that are passed down to Hell: Allow
of murder and monstrous impiety, and in a word, are poisoned with the dregs of
abomination, wherewith the whore of Babylon has filled her cup.

The true Protestant and zealous Christian allows God the pre-eminence of all
adoration, will by ^o means blaspheme with idolatrous exorcismes, detesteth
whoredom, and all incestuous Leprosy, defieth the participation of Gods glory
to murder, simply and plainly contriueth his affairs, and keeps his word,
though it be to his own hinderance, intermeddles not with matters of state,
except he be called to place of eminency, is with Anna praying in the Temple,
and continually rejoices in the conversation of Gods servants, and makes the
Church the sanctuary of his soul, in a word, is ruled by the directory of Gods
word, and neither dare abuse the Majesty of Princes by inter-iecting a
jealousy and suspicion between the Prince and the subject, nor run away
with the deceit of his own heart, in presuming to be more holy then his
brethren, or preiudging others either maliciously, or foolishly: And is not
this a great alteration? And is not this cause enough to compel us to thank
God, and acknowledge his mercy and kindness, that our King and Parliament
would go and buy eye-salue without money, perspicuously to look into the
enormities of the Church and Commonwealth, and not only with Nehemiah,
abridged the extremity of usury: compelled a relaxation of debts and
oppression, kept and sanctified the Sabbath, Nehemiah 13.
drove the Merchants and sellers of meat out of the City, and at last put away
their idolatrous wives: but also would not suffer the Ammonites and Moabites to
come into Gods Temple, but enforced them to banishment out of Jerusalem.

For as you read how Jacob after his return from Laban cleansed his house of
the idols: so did Nehemiah in despite of Eliashib the Priest, who had allied
himself to Tobiah a stranger and idolater, put him from his lodging, and cast
out all the stuff out of his chamber, which in the text is likewise called
cleansing, and thus thanks be to God, our great Nehemiah dealt with the
Papists, he has not only thought them as pricks and thorns in the sides of
good Christians: but now found them as noisome and infectious weeds in the
Commonwealth, to choke and eat up the sweeter Flowers, and springing grass;
and thus has the Church of God example enough in Scripture to be an enemy to
Gods enemies, and fall to reformation with courage and magnamity.

Shall such a man as I fly, (says Nehemiah) shall such a King as I, (says
King James), that have been trained up from my infancy to deny Popery, and for
my Kingdom of Scotland, a very nursery of zealous professors, and mirror of
purity and piety, suffer England to be defiled and contaminated with the poison
of superstition; and now I have recollected my self, shall I give way to
rotten and filthy policy, to eat upon the heart of true Religion, or suffer
private ends to thicken themselves, like some obscure and dangerous cloud, to
stand as an interposition between the Sunny splendour of Gods word, and the
fair progress of government: No, No? I will now be my self, and therefore if
either the Pope or Spain deride me with Michol for dancing before the Arc,
and bringing it in into Gods house: I will answer with David, I will yet be
more vilde and zealous for the Lord; and as he told his wife, that therefore
God had taken the Kingdom from her father, and invested him with the Diadem,
so may King James answer Spain, that therefore God will make him mighty in
his Provinces, in despite of malignant opposition, and England shall not be
only able to stand firm, like an impregnable rock in all honor, riches, and
prosperity: but of sufficiency to protect distressed neighbors, and recover
unfortunate and surrepted Provinces: Therefore away ye Priests and Jesuits,
pack hence for your lives; and let me not hear any further of your daring
impostures, and you that will remain Papists, and with the Adder stop your
ears, that charm the Charmer never so cunningly, he shall not prevail to
remove you, take heed and be warned, that you live modestly in your
wilfulness, neither daring to break our statutes against those Locusts of
Rome, nor to insult your selves, or be offensive to any civil conuersasion by
the wrong defense and supportation of Romes corrupted Doctrine: For I protest
unto you by the faith of a Religious King, I take a pleasure in hearing, what
God said to Abraham: For I know him, that he will command his children, Genesis
18.19
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do
justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken unto him: And therefore as I am Gods substitute in the supreme royalty,
so will I be his instrument in the practice of this reformation, neither
suffering any Papist whatsoever to have the use of Idolatrous masses, nor to
bring up their own Children in the eimerian darkness of ignorance, and
devilish devotion: For the Apostle tells us plainly, Colos. 2.
that the tormenting the body, worshipping of Angels, observing of Days, and
many foolish humiliations, likewise denying of lawful marriage, and forbidding
of meats, and cellebrating of superstitious times, are all the doctrines of
the Devil: and is not this joy to England, and how are our hearts cheered, as
you read of the Israelites, that in the time of Solomon rejoiced with one
another, and made merry eating and drinking under there own Vines.

Thus shall we see the backs of our adversaries, and by Gods special favor
and grace the banishment of Priests, and Jesuits: But ye Maiestrates of the
Commonwealth? let them not immitate the Israelites in this, Exodus 40.
to rob the Egyptians in their departure out of Egypt? Let them not exporte our
treasures, nor enrich other Countries with our spoils: Let not your Ladies
bestow their jewels and ornaments upon them: For though they could be contented
to love them with gratuities and presents, yet must the Commonwealth reserve
some secrets of State, not to be impouerished by the lavish gifts of those,
that understand not the Mystery of carrying wealth out of the Land, or consuming
our silver in trifles, let none of their houses be furnished with those
remnants of gew-gawes, wherein the ancient idolaters excelled them in be
decking their idols, I mean their meduies, crucifixes, relickes of saints, the
wood of the Cross, the milk of our Lady, and a thousand such like trumperies
fit for nothing but toys to play with all, as Apes do with Nut-shells: For as
you read how the children of Israel were tainted with the gross superstition
of Egypt: so must needs the tender hearts of your women be captiuated with the
reservation of these things: Let your Purseuants and Officers a Gods name be
the researchers of suspected places, that the very children, which as yet, know
no harm, may be sent to the Schools of the children of the Prophets, and by
that means learn to live in the fear of God, and dye in his favor: Let the
potent men be disarmed a Gods name, not to give them cause to think the better
of themselves, as if they were to be feared, or reputed dangerous and
polliticke: but as you take knives and other hurtful things from mad men to
prevent mischief, that they neither endanger others, nor themselves: In a
word, let all good orders be observed, and a fashionable body of a religious
Commonwealth erected, that his Majesty's person may be secured, the Prince
and his Sister protected and pleased, the honest neighbors subtenated with
care and diligence, out own Country flourishing with prosperity and
confidence, the poor relieved, the trades restored, the City repaired, the
Merchant countenanced, the soldiers esteemed, the Clergyman beloved, the well
deserved reverenced, the weak supported, the obstinate sinner punished, the
offender through frailty remitted, and all justifiable actions practiced to the
glory of God, and comfort of our own souls.

Then if there be cause of war, Exodus 15.1.
and so success fallen, Moses and Israel shall sing a song of Triumph to the
Lord; and Miriam the Prophetess shall take a Timbrell in her hand, and all the
women go after her with Timbrels and Dances: Then if there be the flourishes
of peace, and that Solomon has finished the Temple of God, and his own house,
he will present himself before the Lord, 1 Kings 8.22.9
and kneel to his prayers, spredding forth his hands toward Heaven: And then
to conclude both in war and peace shall England confess to the Lord. What is
man, that thou should think upon him, or the son of man, that thou will
remember him? and so praise the Lord in his Sanctuary, and in the firmament of
his power: praise him in his mighty acts, and according to the excellency of
his greatness, praise him for thinking upon us, even in this particular of
suppressing Papistry, and banishing the Priests and Jesuits.

I will meddle with no matter of State, nor adventure traducing for self love,
or aduising others more wiser then my self, but keep close to the shore of
this one special observation: Let the adversaries of religion say what they
can to accuse a Protestant of one murder, whereas God and the World knows,
that not only the turbulencies of Europe have been blown up with popish
breath, and sufflation of Consistorian Cardinals: but the fearful slaughters
of Princes have been audaciously prosecuted, either by Friars and Priests, or
such instruments, whom the pestilent Jesuits have seduced: what state then in
the world (especially our reformed Churches, if there were no other cause then
this affrighting, would endure then in the government, and therefore now this
must needs be a happiness to England, that at this instant such a mercy
flows toward us, as a Proclamation against them.

How Geneua has continued, and groaned under the pressure of many
difficulties, yea, endured diverse assaults of whole armies, and volleies of
shot, from the mounted Cannons against her; and yet was never any attempt made
upon the Duke of Sauoy, and her adversaries by her procurement, or suggestion,
is well known to the world.

In all those bloody massacres of France, and terrors of the ciuell war, what
one mischief was ever conceived against the persons of their Kings, and who
durst lay hands on the Lords Anointed? In that fiery trial in the days of
Queen Mary, when the rages of Papists made them more furious, then a Bear
robbed of her Whelpe: What one Protestant slipped out of the circle of
obedience, to put her in suspicion of her life, yea it is well known, that the
Protestants of Suffolk advanced her to the Crown though they were the first
that felt the effect of her ingratitude: In all the troubles of Germany, and
exactions upon the free Cities, how securely did the Emperors go on concerning
their own persons, and when did you read of a Pope slain, but as they
poisoned one another. I will name but one thing in the Low Countries, and that
is the pride and cruelty of the Duke of Alua; so that if ever an excuse might
have been made for taking away a Tyrants life, it might here in some action or
other have received a justifiable form, and yet Alua lived without touch, and
practiced all manner of wickedness without control: whereas on the contrary
side in these Countries formerly mentioned, there has bin a 1000 several
murders committed upon the bodies of public and private persons, or at least
prosecuted with resolution to be actuated upon advantage by popish Priests,
Jesuits, and their Official, and Ministers: Is it not high time then to
banish them our Commonwealth, or do as we have done (and so it shall be no
new matter or devise of punishment) even hang them up at Tyborne, or detrude
them into the house of slaughter, where Justice is predominant.

Mark for Gods sake, mark the secrets of good husbandry, he that means to
till and manure a woddy ground, must leave no stumps within touch, least he
break his plow in the labor, and see fresh sciences and sprigs to sprout up
to choke the corn: the best way then is to stock up root and tinde, and
follow the picke-axe with a spade, that the ground may be thoroughly searched
indeed; and so must England do with this brood of Vipers, either pull out
their stings, or chap them in pieces: For so were the Priests of Baal served at
several times, and in several places by Gedeon, John, Elias, Josias, and
other godly Priests and Princes: but seeing this good beginning of our gracious
and judicious King, in the quenching the smoke of these firebrarnds, which in
time would either have blinded our eyes, or put them clean out, has cheered
our hearts, and powered the balm of Gilead into our wounds, let him have the
glory of his own handy-worke, and England the joy, and so both he, England,
and every true Christian retribute all possible thanks to the ancient of
days, whose hairs are as white as wool, and eyes as a flame of fire; and to
the voice that commands us out of Babylon, least we be destroyed in her
abominations: For Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City; because she
made all the nations drink of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication.

FINIS.

