QVI NON CREDIT CONDEMNABITVR MARC. 16.

OR A discourse proving, that a man who believes in the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Passion etc. and yet believes not all other inferior
articles of Christian faith, cannot be saved.

AND Consequently, that both the Catholic, and the Protestant (seeing the one
necessarily wants true faith) cannot be saved.

Written by WILLIAM SMITH, Priest.

He that believes not, shall be condemned. Marc. 16.

Without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.

AT S. OMERS For John Heigham, with permission, Anno 1625.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE READER.
GOod Reader, such are the lamentable times, wherein we live, as that they not
only bring forth men, who with great contention, and heat of dispute, do
undertake to maintain particular Error, directly repugnant to the Scripture,
and the judgment of Christ his Church; but also, they affoard some others who
(as if wickedness would strive to raise it self to its highest pitch) are not
afraid to entertain all Religions with such a cold indifferency, as that they
would, that salvation may be obtained in any Religion; so that the professors
thereof do believe in the Trinity, the Incarnation, and other such fundamental
points of Christianity, whether they be Papists, Protestants, Anabaptists,
Brownists, or any other of these later Sects: They hereupon further do teach,
that we are not obliged (under the pain of any spiritual loss) to embrace
any one of these Religions before another, scornefully traducing in their
conceits all others, who exact a more strict and articulate belief of our
Christian mysteries: which later kind of men is far more dangerous and
hurtful, then the former; since those our of a preposterous zeal (their
understanding being blinded and misinformed) do only defend falsehoods for
verityes, so running themselves upon that rock of Tertullian: Haeresis est,
probata non credere, non probata praesumere. It is the propriety of Heresy, not
to believe points proved, and to presume or take for granted, things not
proved. Whereas these Adiaphorists (whose secret pulse does indeed beat upon
Atheism) disclaim from all necessity of truth, iustifyinge the defense of
errors even under the title of errors, and houlding only this one maine
controversy in Christian Religion, to wit, that in Christian Religion there are
no maine controversies. Against these ambidexter Protestants (so to call them)
who draw their souls perdition in the ropes of a supine and careless security,
I have thought good to undergo the writing of this short ensuing Treatise. The
subject of which discourse I find most necessary even from my own experience,
who for the space of thirty years and above (with infinite thanks to God)
have been a Priest of the Catholic Roman Church, during which long compass
of time, I have dealt with many souls here in England; and have found infinite
of them openly professing Protestancy, yet inwardly persuaded (as is above
touched) that men of most contrary fayths (so that in gross they believe in
Christ) may be saved; as if salvation were a Center, indifferently extending
its lines, to the circumference of all Religions: yea diverse of these men were
not ashamed to contest with me in the open defense of this wicked opinion; and
fortifying themselves principally with this following reason.

2. God (say they) is most merciful, and therefore it would be much repugnant
to his infinite mercy, to damme for all eternity, any man that beleiueth in
him, and in Jesus Christ, as his Redeemer; so that withal he forbear doing
of all wrong, but lead a virtuous (or at least, a moral) life, though in
other articles of less importance he may err. To this I answer, with the
Apostle. Romans cap. 11.
O altitudo diuitiarum sapientiae and scientiae Dei! Gods judgments are
inscrutable, and to be admired, not to be ouercuriously pried into. If it was
his divine pleasure, for many ages to make choice only of the Iewishe Nation (a
very handful to the whole earth) for his elected people, and to suffer all the
rest of the world (generaly speaking) to ly drowned in Idolatry, and therefore
to be damned. And if also after our Saviors Incarnation, he vouchafed not, for
the space of many ages, to enlighten whole Countries with the Ghospel of
Christ, but permitted them to continue (to their souls eternal perdition) in
their former Idolatry and Heathenisme; yea suffering even to this very day (and
how long yet after, his divine Majesty only knows) diverse vast Countries to
persevere in their foresaid Infidelity, if (I say) this proceeding in God is
best liking to himself, and that for the same he cannot be truly chardged with
Injustice or cruelty, seeing he gave them sufficient means of salvation by the
law of Nature, and did not withdraw from them grace sufficient leaving them
thereby without excuse. Then much less can any man expostulate God of
injustice or want of mercy (for his divine goodness is nothing but justice and
mercy it self) if he suffer men to perish eternally, and damn them for want
of an entire, complete, and perfect faith in all the articles of Christianity;
especially in these times, when no Christian can pretend for excuse any
invincible ignorance in matters of faith by reason that the true articles of
Christian Religion, are sufficiently propounded and diuulged by Gods Church, to
all Christians whatsoever; therefore touching Gods secret judgments and
disposales herein, we will conclude with Cap. 30
Esaias: Deus iudicij Dominus.

3. This then being thus, from hence it appears, how much the Protestants
wrong the Catholics in charging them with want of charity, for houlding that
Protestants dying Protestants, cannot be saved, whereas on the contrary part,
diverse learned Protestants do (say they) grant the hope of salvation to
Catholics or Papists, dying Papists. To this we reply, that here is no want of
Charity, but rather a Seraphicall and burning Charity; for what greater charity
can there be, then (seeing it is an indisputable verity, that men dying in a
false and heretical faith cannot be saved) to premonishe and forwarne withal
convenient sedulity and endeavor, opportune, importune, their Christian
Brethren of so great a danger, as the perdition of their souls comes unto?
Noe, the souls interminable and endless weal or woe, is not a matter of
complement, that so for ceremony sake it is to be forborne to be inculcated and
often spoaken of, especially where the most certanie truth of the matter
insisted upon, and the charitable conscience of the speaker, do warrant the
discourse. And if Catholics must be accounted uncharitable for these their
admonitions, then by the same reason they must insimulate the Apostle of the
said fault of want of Charity, who Tit. c. 3. 2. Thessal 3.
severely charge us to fly the company and society of an Heretic; and who
rangeth Gall. cap. 5. and Romans 16.
schisms and heresies among those sins, the workers whereof shall not obtain
the kingdom of God. But to return more particulerly to the subject of this
Treatise: I have thought good to entitle it with the words of our Savior: Qui
non credit, condemnabitur. Marc. 16.
He that beleiueth not, shall be condemned; as being a sentence, which best
sorteth to the matter here handled, and which indeed really (though briefly)
inuolueth in it self the truth here discussed. The sourse, from whence this
Libertinisme belief did take its first emanation and flowing, is the contempt
of the authority of the Catholic Church: for thus reasons our Newtralist in
Doctrine.

4. Both Papists and Protestants do agree in beleiuing the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Paession etc. but they mainly dissent touching Purgatory,
Praying to Saints, Freewill, the sacrifice of the Mass, Justification etc.
therefore I will embrace and follow that doctrine (meaning the doctrine of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, Passion etc. and hold it necessary to salvation, in
which all sides do agree. But since the dissentions and disagreements in
Religion, are of these secondary and less principal points, to wit,
Purgatory, Praying to Saints etc. and since it is impossible, that both the
Papist and Protestant, should teach truly in the said articles, (for they teach
mere contrary doctrines therein.) And further seeing I have no more reason to
believe the one side then the other (and it is impossible for me to believe
both) therefore my resolution is (contemning the authority of Gods Church in its
definitions of these articles) peremptorily to stand to neither, but will hold
the doctrine of Purgatory, Praying to Saints, and all other controuerted points
of faith at this day, between Papists and Protestants, matters merely of
indifferency, and of that nature, as that neither the true nor false belief of
them, can either further or hinder a man's salvation. Thus disputes our
Newtralist. And thus whilst he will be of all Religions, he will be of no
Religion. Then which (as if Religion were only, but an intentionall, and no
real name or word) what can be invented more impious and Atheistical in it
self, more repugnant to sacred scriptures, more cross to the practice of all
antiquity, and (as herafter shall be proved) more adueise to all natural reason?
so dangerous it is for a Christian once to dismember himself by pertinacy of
judgment from the Church of Christ; and so truly is verified of such a man,
that sentence of Optatus: Deserta Lib. contra Parmentan.
matre Catholica impij filij, dum for as excurrunt and se separant and errando
rebels abscedunt. Our mother the Catholic Church being once forsaken, her
wicked children do go out and depart from her, and thus being become Rebels
through erring, do hyde themselves. Thus we see, how these all reconciling
Omnifidians, do carry themselves, who through the pretended immensity of their
pretended charity (forsooth) can promise saluations to al Religions, and who
seek to introduce a peace into Gods Church (by compounding al controversies of
faith) far more dangerous, then are the wars and contentions of Heretics.

5. Now seeing all such men make no more account of diversity of Religions,
then others do of wearing suits of apparel of different colors; and seeing
by such their lukewamenes in matters of faith, they seem to be all
Laodiceans, therefore we may asure our selves, that the commination and threat
denounced against the Church of Laodicea registered by the Apoc. cap. 3.
Evangelist shall (without final repentance) fall upon them: Because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold, nor hot, I will vomit thee out of my mouth. But
(good Reader) as unwilling to transgress the accustomed limits of a preface, I
will detain thee noe longer; only I have thought good to put thee in mind (and
so to end) with the sentence and judgment of Saint Augustine passed upon the
Pelagians (as for some delibation and taste of the subject herafter handled) who
believed in the Trinity, in Christ, and his Passion, were men of moral and
honest conversation; yet for houlding that only by the force of nature, without
the assistaunce of Gods grace, a man was able to exercise virtue and fly vice,
(a point no more fundamental the^ most of the controversies between the
Catholics and the Protestants) they are registered for Heretics by the said
S. Augustine, and consequently not to be in state of Salvation: his words
Epist. 129.^37.
are these: Nec tales sunt Pelagiani, quos facile contemnas, sed continenter
viuentes, atque in bonis operibus laudabiles; nec falsum Christum, sed vnum
verum equalemque patri and coeter number, veraciterque hominem factum, and venisse
credentes, and venturum expectantes: sed tamen ignorantes Dei iustitiam, suam
co^stituere volentes, Heretici sunt. In English thus: Neither are the Pelagians
such men, as are easily to be contemned for they do live continently, and are
laudable for their good works. They further do believe, not in a false
Christ, but in one true Christ who is equal and coeternall with his father,
and who was truly made man, They believe, that he is already come, and they
expect him hereafter to come; yet because they are ignorant of the justice of
God, and would make it their own justice, (meaning, because they taught it
might be obtained by their own natural force) therefore they are Heretics.
Thus far Saint Augustine, with whom I end; leaving thee (Good Reader) to
the deliberate and studious perusal of these ensuing leaves, and entreating
most earnestly the prayers of all good Catholics for the remission of my
manifould and infinite sins, and for an happy hour of the dissolution of my
old and decayed body.

Your souls well-wishing friend William Smith.

QVI NON CREDIT CONDEMNABITVR MARC. 16.
That a man, who belieueth in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc.
and yet believes not all other articles of Christian Faith, cannot be saved.
And first of the definition of Heresy and an Heretic. CHAP. I.
BEFORE we come (Good Reader) to dispute particulerly of the subject of this
discourse, I hold it most convenient, in place of a short Prologomenon, or
Preface, to prefixe and set down, the true definition of Heresy, or an
Heretic; since this method will give light to the whole ensuing Treatise, and
will best manifest, what opinions be Heresies, and what men Heretics; and
consequently (seeing heresy is incompatible with salvation, and cannot stand
with the purchase of heaven) will demonstrate, that not any one Religion
professinge the name of Christians, though it maintains but one heresy, can
justly promise to it self, the hope of salvation or eternal life. Well then
Heresy, or Heresis (as we term it in latin) is a greek word, signifying as
much as Electio, Election or choice, coming of the greek Verb aireo, in latin
Eligo, to choose or make choice of. So as this word Haeresis, originally and
primatiuely, signifies election or choice (as is said) in general; yet
because they, who divide themselves by maintayning false opinions from the
Church of Christ, do make choice of these their new opinions, and so thereby do
separate themselves from the Church; therefore this word Haeresis (loosing its
former general signification) is restrained by the Apostles, and the ancient
Fathers, through an Ecclesiastical use and acceptance (which course we find
houlden in diverse other words, as the words Apostolus, Christus, Baptisma,
and many other now taken by the Church in a secondary acceptio^) to signify any
false and new opinion, or Religion, of which a man makes choice, and
pertinaciously defends it against the Church of God; and the maintainours
thereof, are commonly stilled Heretics. Thus Heresy (in its true and
Ecclesiastical definition) is any false opinion touching faith and Religion,
contumaciously defended against God, and his Church. This definition (I mean
in taking the word Haeresis and Haereticus, in this restrained sense) is
warranted by the Apostle, by the ancient Fathers. And lastly (to omit the like
acknowledgement of the Catholics) by the learned Protestants. By the Apostle;
for thus we find him to say: There must be Heresies among you, that they which
are approved among you, may be known 1. Cor. 11. As also: A man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid. Tit. 3. And finally:
Those which were of the heresy of the Sadduces, laid hands upon the Apostles.
Act. 5.

2. By the ancient Fathers. For S. Hierome in cap. 3. ad Tit. showing the
difference between heresy and schism, thus defines heresy: Haeresis est, quae
peruersum dogma habet. Heresy is that which contains a perverse and froward
opinion. And S. Augustine in like manner lib. de fide and simbolo cap. 10.
defines heresy in these words: Haeretici sunt, qui de Deo falsa sentiendo
fidem violant: Heretics are those, who do violate their faith by houlding
false opinions touching God. By the Protestants: for to name one or two among
many, M. Ormerod (a most forward Protestant) thus defines an Heretic: He is
an Heretic, who so swarueth from the wholesome doctrine, as contemning the
judgment of God and the Church, persisteth in his opinion, Dialog. 2. with
whom conspireth D. Couell, saying: Heretics are they, who directly gainsay
some article of our faith. Exam. p. 199.

3. Now out of this former definition of heresy, I am to premonish thee good
Reader of two points. first, that every heresy is maintained with obstinacy
against the Church of God, and therefore the maintainours thereof are said by
the Apostle, that they went out of us, 1. Joan. 2. that is, out of Gods Church;
and for the same reason the Apostle pronounces an Heretic to be condemned by
his own judgment. Tit. 3. because he prefers his judgment before the
judgment of the whole Church; from which consideration it follows, that what
man soever houldeth any erroneous opinion touching faith, and being advertised
thereof by Gods Church, and not yealding his judgment in all humility thereto,
is thereby become an Heretic. And such is the state of Catholics and
Protestants, since the one does ever reciprocally charge and condemn the other
with false doctrine, and therefore seeing the church of Christ must be with one
of them, it follows, that the other not submitting their judgments to it, are
proclaimed thereby Heretics. And thus it may sometimes fall out, that the
first inuentor of a false opinion may be no Heretic, as maintaining it before
it be condemned by the church; whereas the Professors of it, after its
condemnation, are become Heretics, according to that of Vincentius Lyrinensis,
in his worthy book against the profane innovation of the heresies of his
time. O admirable change of things, the authors of one and the same opinion
are esteemed Catholics; and their followers Heretics! Thus we see that
pertinacity of judgment, does consumate an Heresy.

4. The second is, that the aforesaid definition of heresy (being the only true
definition, and acknowledged for such by all sides) is not restrained, either
in it self, or by the meaning of the Apostle (as by his words set down in
the next chapter following, may more easily appear) only to the most
principal and (as they are called) fundamental points of christian faith, as
of the Trinity, the Incarnacion of Christ, his Passion, the Decalogue and the
articles of the creed, but it is extended in its own Nature (considering to
Logic the definition, and the thing defined, ought to be of an equal
latitude or lardgnes) to any erroneous opinion whatsoever, frowardly defended
by a man, and gainsayed by the Church of God: So as, it is as perfect an Heresy
(and the believers thereof are as true Heretics) to deny, that there is a
Purgatory, or to deny Freewill, Prayer to Saints, the doctrine of Indulgences,
the necessity of Baptism, or any other article approved by the Catholic
Church (granting the doctrine of the Catholics in these articles to be true)
as to deny the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, his Death or Passion etc.
And a man shall be as well damned in hell for denying these former, as for these
other; though the denial of these later, do exceed the other in malice; since
the Heresies of them are more wicked and blasphemous. And thus much touching
the definition of Heresy, or an Heretic, which being justly premised, we will
now come to the maine controversy handled in this Treatise.

That every Christian, though believing in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Passion etc. cannot be saved in his own Religion, proved from holy scripture.
CHAP. II.
NOw then to begin to fortify and warrant this undoubted truth, that every
Christian, though beleiuing in the Trinity etc. cannot be saved in his own
Religion, I will draw my first kind of proofs, from the sacred words of
holy scripture. And these testimonies shall be of three sorts. One concerning
Heretics, which texts are not restrained to any particular Heresies, but
delivered of Heresy in general. The second branche of authorityes shall touch
Heretics even for certain particular Heresies, different from denying the
Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, the Passion, and other like principal
and fundamental points and articles of Christian Religion. The third shall
contain the necessity of faith, without any restriction, to the points or
articles, which are to be believed.

2. And first to begin with the first, we read the Epist. ad Tit. c. 3.
Apostle thus to speak of an Heretik in general: A man, that is an Heretic,
after the first or second admonition avoid, knowing that he, that is such, is
subverted, and sins, being condemned by his own judgment. Where the Apostle
commands us to avoid an Heretik, which he would not have done, if the said
Heretic had been in state of salvation: the Apostle further adding this
reason, in that (says he) such a man (as being a pertinatious and wilful
Heretic) is condemned by his own proper judgment: that is, because he
aduanceth his own judgment, above the judgment of Gods Church, and because he
needs not that public condemnation of the Church, which upon other offenders
by way of excommunication is inflicted. The Apostle in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 3.
coniureth (as it were) in the name of Christ, that all should avoid all false
belieuers, in these words: We denounce unto you, Brethren, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Chirst, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother walking
inordinately, and not according to the tradition, which they have received of
us. This place concerns faith and doctrine (as the whole chapter shows) but
if these men here to be eschewed were in state of salvation, they ought not
then to be eschewed: Again this text cannot have reference to those, who deny
the Trinity, the Incarnation, and Passion, seeing the deniers of these high
articles, are not Brethren in Christ; and yet the Apostle styleth them
Brethren, whom he here reprehendeth.

3. Again, the Apostle in another place thus forewarneth: The Epist. ad Gall.
cap. 5.
works of the flesh be manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness, impurity or
dissentions, sects etc. They which do these things, shall not obtain the
kingdom of God: Where we see is express mention made of Sects, and that
maintainours of any sects in opinion of faith (much more of any Heresy, which
is ever auerred with greater contumacy and frowardnes, and with neglect of the
Churches authority shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: from which
Testimonies we may further conclude, that as one only act of fornication,
barreth a man from the kingdom of God, so also one Heresy excludes him from
the same.

4. A fourth place is this: I desire Epist. ad Romans cap. 16.
you Brethren to mark them, that make dissentions and scandalls contrary to
the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them, for such do not serve
Christ our Lord: But if such men be to be avoided, and do not serve Christ,
then no doubt they continuing in that state, cannot be saved. Again 1. Tim. 1.
the Apostle speaks of certain men, and says of them, that Quidam circa 1.
Timoth. 2.
fidem naufragauerunt: Certain men made shipwreck about the faith. Where the
Apostle uses the metaphor of shipwreck, thereby to express more fully, that
Heretics once falling out of the ship of Christ's church, are cast into the
sea of eternal damnation. To conclude, the Evangelist Saint John speaks of
all Heretics in general, not embracing the doctrine of Christ (within which
all secondary questions of christian Religion are contained) in this sort: If
any man come 2. Joan.
unto you, and bring not the doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your
house, nor say, God save you unto him. But a man is bound in charity to suffer
any one, who is in state of salvation, to come into his house, and to salute
him, or say: God save him.

5. Now what can be replied against these former Texts? It cannot be said, that
they are meant only of such Heretics, as deny the mysteryes of the Trinity,
the Incarnation of Christ, his Passion, and such like supreme and cardinal
points of Christian Religion: this (I say) cannot be auerred for these reasons
following. First, because those, who in the Apostles times, denied these
principal points of Christianity, could not be truly termed Heretics
(seeing he is truly an Heretic, who was once a member of Christ's church by
faith, but after cease to be thereof) no more then all the Jews or Gentiles
could not be accounted or styled Heretics, because they never believed the
foresaid mysteryes of christianity. Secondly by reason, that according to the
former definition of Heresy or Heretics above set down, the former Texts have
a necessary reference, to all Heresy and heretics whatsoever, whether the
subject of the said false opinion be small or great. Thirdly, because that in
the former Texts of Scripture, there is no restriction of the word Haereticus
or Haeresis, to the chief or highest points of Christian Religion, but it is
extended to all kind of Heretics or Heresies whatsoever, even by the Apostle
without exception, who (no doubt) if he had understood Heresies, or Heretics
only in the greatest points (at least in some one Text or other, among so many)
would accordingly have restrained his words, only to those kind of Heretics;
and the rather seeing the denial of those great points only (not of others) do
in our Libertines opinion, make the denyers thereof Heretics. But not to leave
the least show of refuge or evasion, heerin I will produce some passages of
holy Scripture, in which the maintenours of particular errors, even in lesser
points, then the highest articles of Christianity, are censured by Christ's
Apostles, to be deprived of eternal salvation.

6. And first we find S. Paul thus to prophesy. In 1 Timothy c. 4.
the later times certain shall depart from the faith, attending to spirits of
error, and doctrine of Devils, forbidding to mary, and to abstain from
meats. Here the Apostle prophesies (according to the judgment of Hom. 12. in
Timot.
Saint Chrysostom, In hunc locu^
Ambrose, Lib. contra Iouin. c. 7.
Hierome, and S. Her. 25. and 40.
Augustine) of the Heretics, Eucratites, Marcionists, Ebionists, and such
like, who denied Matrimony, as a thing altogether unlawful, and prohibited
absolutely at al times, and the eating of certain meats, as creatures impure:
Now these Heretics believed in the Trinity, and might in the Incarnation, etc.
and yet even for these two former Heresies touching marriage, and eating of
meats, and not for the Trinity, or Incarnation, they are said by the Apostle
to depart from the faith of Christ, and to attend to the doctrine of Devils.
But such, as leave the faith of Christ, and attend to the doctrine of Devils,
are not in state of salvation. In my judgment this one authority alone is
sufficient to overthrow this phantasy of our Newtralists; since the words are
divine scripture, the heresies reprehended no fundamental points of Religion;
but of as little or lesser consequence, then the Controversies between the
Catholics and the Protestants; and yet the maintainers of them are accounted
to depart from the faith of Christ, and to attend to the doctrine of Devils.

7. A second place shall be that of the former Apostle, who writing of certain
Heretics erring touching the Resurrection of the body, says thus: Their 2.
Timoth. 2.
speech spreads like a Canker, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus, who have
erred from the truth, saying that the Resurrection is already past, and have
subverted the faith of some. These men believed all the mysteryes of the
Trinity, Incarnation etc. (seeing otherwise the Apostle would have reprehended
them for want or belief therein, as for the article of the Resurrection) yet
for erring only touching the resurrection of the body, they are said to err
from the truth, to subvert the faith of some: and that, as a Canker never
leaves the body, till by little and little it wastes it away; so their
speeches by degrees, poison and kill the souls of the hearers. From which it
evidently follows, that these Heretics continuing and dying in the foresaid
heresy, could not be saved; since that faith, which erreth from the truth, and
which subuerteth the true faith of others, and which in killing and destroying
the soul, resembles a Canker, cannot afford salvation to its Professors.

8. Another passage, which here I will urge, is that of S. John, who calls
certain Heretics, Antichrists, saying: Now 1. Joan. c. 2.
there ate become many Antichrists, who went out of us, but were not of us;
for if they had been of us, they had remained with us. These Heretics
believed in the Trinity, in the Incarnation of Christ, that he dyed for the
salvation of the whole world, only they erred touching the person and natures
of Christ, and yet they are figuratively styled Antichrists, and are said to
depart out of the church of Christ. But no salvation is reserved for
Antichrists, and such as depart from the Church of God. And thus much out of
Gods holy writ expressly touching Heretics in general, and in particular.

9. To these Texts I will adioyne (though not immediately and directly ranged
under the former head) a place in S. Peter in my judgment most unanswerable,
and by necessary inference euicting the point here undertaken. The place is
those words in the 2. epistle. of S. Peter, cap. 3. where he says thus: In
the Epistles of Paul there are certain things hard to be understood, which
the unlearned and unstable do pervert unto their own destruction. Now here I
thus argue. But these things hard to be understood in S. Paul's epistle, do not
concern the doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. and yet
the misunderstanding of them does cause (as the Text says) the destruction,
that is, the damnation of these, who misunderstand them; therefore far lesser
points, then the denial of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. do
justly threaten to the false belieuers of them, damnation; and consequently
that a bare belief of those supreme points, are not only necessary to
salvation.

10. That those difficulties in S. Paul's epistles, intimated by Saint Peter,
do not concern the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, etc. I prove
several ways: first because S. Peter makes no such mention, which no doubt
he would have done, if the subject of them had touched only those supreme
mysteries, and were not to be extended to other inferior points.

11. Secondly it is acknowledged by the commentaries and writings of all the
fathers (besides that the epistles themselves show no less) that Saint Paul
is most evident and clear in all his epistles touching the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Passion etc. and therefore there is no reason, why the
difficultyes in them should be applied to those articles, muchlesse restrained
to them alone.

12. Thirdly, the Fathers do understand those difficultyes in Saint Paul's
epistles insinuated by Saint Peter, chiefly touching Justification; as
appears by the testimony even of S. Augustine himself in his book: de fide
and operibus lib. 12. who particulerly instanceth in that place 1. Cor. 3. If
any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver etc. Which Text treats of
Justification, and works, and expressly says Lib. de fide and operibus, cap.
15, and 16.
that this is one of the difficult passages intended and meant by Saint Peter.
With whom Saint Hierome may seem well to agree, who in those worden, Epistola
ad Romanos: Nimijs Epist. ad Algasiain quest. 8. and in epist. ad Romans
obscuritatibus inuoluta est. Intimates no less; for it is found, that the
epistle to the Romans most entreats of Justification and of faith and works.
Fourthly and lastly, the Protestants themselves do understand the said
obscurities of Saint Paul's epistles touching Justification, as appears (to
omit the testimonies of all others herin) from the words and comment of M.
Doctor Fulke against the Rhemists Testament upon the foresaid place of S.
Peter: and thus far of this text; where we find by an inevitable deduction,
that a false faith touching Justification only cannot stand with salvation.

13. The same is proved from the definition and propriety of faith. In this
place we will take into our consideration, the definition of faith set down by
S. Paul; secondly the dignity and worth of faith much celebrated by diverse of
the Apostles; thirdly, the inseparable propriety of faith, which is unity; for
so does the Scripture delineate and describe faith: from all which it will
ineuitably follow, that the faith, which saves man, is not to be restrained
only to the Trinity, the Incarnation, and other such sublime points of
Christian Religion (though in other points it be erroneous) but is extended to
all other points whatsoever, which the Church of God propounds to be
believed.

14. And to begin with the definition of faith given by the Apostle, he the^
defines faith thus: Faith Heb. cap. 11.
is the substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not
appearing: The sense whereof is this: first that faith through an infallible
certainty causes those things to subsist, and have a being in the mind of
man, which things are yet to come, being but hoped and looked for: secondly,
that faith causes the understanding to give assent to those points, which it
understands not, acknowledging them to be more certain, then any things
whatsoever, according to those words of S. Thomas: Multo magis ^ 2. q. 4. a. 8.
homo certior est de eo, quod audiuit a Deo, qui falli non potest, quam de eo,
quod videt propria ratione, quae falli potest. Now here (I trust) no man will
deny, but the Apostle defines that faith of a Christian, which saves him.
This being granted (for to deny it, were both impious in the denyer, and most
injurious to the Apostle) we are to remember, the nature of every true
definition set down by the Logitians, to wit (as is above mentioned) that the
thing defined, and the definition, be of one and the same extent and latitude;
so as whatsoever is comprehended under the definition, the same is also
contained under the thing defined. This then being presupposed by force of all
reason (for Logic is but an artificial and serviceable handmayd unto reason)
we find that this definition of faith compriseth in it self, not only the
doctrine of the Incarnation, the Trinity, and the like, and this not
articulately, but only by way of deduction; but also it contains al secondary
points of Religion, seeing the former definition does predicate, or may be
said, of all the said secondary and less principal points of Religion,
controuerted between Christians at any time.

15. Therefore the thing here defined, which is the saving faith of a
Christian, is in like sort to extend it self to all the said secondary points
of Religion, how indifferent soever they seem in man's judgment. This inference
is so demonstratiue (being taken from the former definition of faith) as that
the Apostle himself presently after the former words, beginning to instance
in the several objects of faith (among diverse other examples) sets down,
that to believe Noas flood or the deluge of the world by water for sin, is an
article of faith: for thus he says: By faith Noah having received an answer
concerning those things, which as yet were not seen, fearing, framed the Arc
for the saving of his house.

16. But to proceed further; if the articles of the Trinity, the Incarnation
and the like, be the only essential points of a true Christian faith, it is
more then wounderfull, that the Apostle undertaking to set down the true
definition of an available faith, and exemplifying it, in several objects,
should wholely and silently omit the said articles of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Passion, etc. he in that chapter not expressly speaking one word of them. And
thus much touching the definition of faith given by the Apostle: from which
definition we conclude, that who seeks to have a true faith necessary to
salvation, (besides the mysteryes of the Trinity, the Incarnation etc.) must
believe diverse other dogmaticall articles of Christian Religion. And therefore
answearably heerto, we assure our selves, that when our Savior said: He Marc
16.
that believes not, shall be condemned. He did speak of the believing (at least
implicitly) of the whole corpse of Christian faith and doctrine, and not only of
any one part thereof; for so in this latter manner it would be both false and
absurd. In like sort where our Blessed Savior in the same chapter says to his
Apostles: Preach the Gospel to all Creatures. He did understand the whole
Gospel; which contains many other points besides the Trinity, Incarnation,
Passion, etc.

17. In this next place we will descend to those passages of holy Scripture,
which do much magnify the efficacy and virtue of faith. And accordingly
hereunto we find it is said: He Mare vltimo.
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
condemned. Again our Savior said to the blind men, praying to receive their
sight: According Mat. 9.
to your faith, be it unto you. And further: Without Heb. 11.
faith it is impossible to please God. And more: Our faith is the victory,
which overcomes the world. 1. Joan. 1.5. Now in these and many other such
texts, for breuity omitted, I demand what faith is understood or meant? If it
be answered a true, entyre, and perfect faith, believing al points of Christian
Religion proposed by Gods Church, it is true, and that which I seek here to
prove: if an imperfect and mungrill faith, believing some point of Christian
Religion, and rejecting others; and so an erroneous faith, being partly false
and partly true, I say, it can never deserve these praises given by the
Evangelists, and Apostles, neither can it produce such supernatural effects
above specifyed, no more then darkness can produce light; since Truth himself
has taught us, that Luc. 6^
we cannot gather figs of thorns, nor grapes of bushes.

18. Now in this third place, we will touch that inseparable attribute of true
Christian faith, which is unity in faith and doctrine. This mark is so
indissolubly annexed to the true faith of Christ, as that we find his Apostles
ever ready most seriously, to inculcate the same to their disciples. Thus
accordingly the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, saying: Be you Ephe 4.
careful to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace. And immediately
again: There (z) is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism. Where we see that unity
in faith is expressly set down. As also in another place: I beseech 1. Cor. ^.
you, that you all speak one thing: be you knit together in one mind, and
one judgment: and as this was the exhortation of the Apostle, so we read that
the first belieuers followed the same, of who^ S. Luke. Acts c. 4. thus says:
The multitude, that believed, were of one heart and one soul. And hence it
proceeds, that the Church of Christ (which comprehends the professors of
this unanimous faith) is styled by Gods holy writ to be, one Romans 12. Cant. 6.
Joan. 10.
body, one spouse, and one flock of sheep, a truth so evident, as that
(besides the frequent testimonies of Atha. orat. 1. con. Aria. Chrysostom. op.
imperf. in Mat. ho. 20. Tert. de praescript. Irenaeus d. 1. c. 5.
confirming the same) even the Protestants do subscribe in judgment hereunto.
For thus Luther himself (to omit others) writteth. A Tom. 3. Witte^. in psalm.
5. fol. 166.
kingdom divided in it self, shall not stand, neither have any Heretics at
any time been overcome by force or subtilty, but by mutual dissension;
neither does Christ fight with them otherwise, then with a spirit of giddines
and disagreement.

19. Now then this unity of faith is so to be understood, as that it is not
repugnant thereto, that one and the same point should at one time not be
houlden, as necessarily to be believed, the which, after it has undergone a
definitive and sententionall decree of Gods Church, is necessarily to be
believed: As for example, it was not necessary in the beginning of Christianity
to believe, that the book of the Machabees, the Epistle of S. James, S. Jude,
the second epistle of S. Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. John, to be Canonical
Scripture, till they were defined so to be by the third Council of Carthage,
Can. 47. at which S. Augustine was present. But after this Council had by the
assistance of the holy Ghost, defined them to be Canonical, then it was, and
is heresy to deny them to be Cononical. And the reason of this disparity is,
because it is Gods good pleasure and wisdom, not to reveal to his Church al
articles of faith in the beginning and at one time, but at several times, and
upon several occasions, as to his divine majesty best seems expedient. Thus
the faith of a Christian is capable of dilatation, and of a more lardge
unfolding or exposition, but not of any contrariety in belief, change, or
alteration. And thus (to insist in the former example) it may well stand with
Christian faith in the beginning, not to accept the former books for
canonical, till the authority of the Church had pronounced them for such; but
it stands not with true faith, that one man should positiuely believe as an
articie of faith, that the Machabees and the rest of the books above specifyed
are not canonical Scripture, but the profane writtinges of man. And another
man should at the same time believe, as an article of faith, that they are
canonical Scripture; since the one of these contrary beliefes, must be
Heretical.

20. This verity then of the unity of faith, being warranted by the word, both
of God, and man, as is above said, we will take into our consideration, the
Catholic, and Protestants Religions, all who jointly do profess to believe in
general, in the Trinity, in Christ his Incarnation, his Passion, and the creed
of the Apostles; and so we shall discern, whether the faith of all these
several professors, does enjoy the foresaid mark of unity in doctrine or no.
But seeing this subject is most ample and lardge, I will therefore sepose this
ensuing Chapter, for the more full and exact discovery of the many and great
disagreements between Catholics and the Protestants in their faith and
Religion.

The same proved from want of unity in Faith between Catholics and
Protestants, touching the Articles of the Creed: and from that, that the
Catholic and Protestant do agree in the belief of diverse articles necessarily
to be believed, and yet not expressed in the Creed. CHAP. IIII.
Undertaking in this place to set down, the multiplicity of doctrines between
Catholics and Protestants, though they all jointly believe in the Trinity, the
Incarnation of Christ, his Passion, and the like; and consequently to show,
that this their general belief, wants that true unity of faith, which out
of the holy Scriptures, Fathers, and the Protestants I have above showed, to be
most necessary to salvation. I will first examine, how the Catholics and the
Protestants, do differ touching their belief of the creed, made by the
Apostles. Next I will demonstrate, that supposing all Professors of both
Religions, should agree in the true sense and meaning of the creed; yet there
are diverse other dogmaticall points, necessarily to be believed, (and are at
this instant believed both by Protestants and Catholics) which are not
expressed or mentioned in the Creed at al; or by any immediate inference to be
drawn from thence. Lastly I will set down the great difference between
Catholics and Protestants in other points of faith, of which the Creed makes
no intimation or mention at all, and yet the belief of them is houlden
necessary to salvation, both by Catholic and Protestant: from all which it
shall appear, how far distant the Catholic and Protestant Religion are from
that unity in doctrine, so necessarily required to that faith, whereby a
Christian is to be saved.

2. I do here begin with the Apostles creed, first because the articles of the
Trinity, the Incartion, the Passion etc. are included in the creed; Secondly,
by reason there are many Adiaphorists in Religion (as I may term them) who
seem to deal more lardgly and liberally herein, seeinge they are content to
extend the necessary object of faith, not only to the articles of the Trinity,
the Incarnation, and Passion, but to all points set down in the creed, who
assure themselves, that God exacteth not at our hands the belief of any other
articles, then what are contained in the creed. Now here aforehand we are to
conceive, that true faith rests in that true sense and meaning of the words
of the Creed, which was intended by the Apostles, and not in the words
themselves, seeing both in the judgment of all learned Catholics and
Protestants, to believe the words of the creed, in a sense different from the
intended sense of the Apostles (and consequently in a false sense) is no
better, then not to believe at all: And the reason hereof is, because a false
construction drawn from the creed (no less then from the Scripture) is not
the word of God, but the word of man, and consequently the said letter of the
creed, so interpreted, is subject to the same censure, whereunto the word of
man is liable; from whence it follows, that whosoever belieueth the words of
the creed in another sense, then was intended by the holy Ghost, and the
Apostles, does not believe the creed at all, but only believes the word of
man, which ever stands subject to error and mistaking. So as the sentence of
Saint Hierome delivered only of the Scripture, may justly be applied of the
creed: Scripturae In ep. ad Paulinum.
non in legendo, sed in intelligendo consistunt. The Scripture (or Creed) does
not consist in the letter, but in the sense, and true understanding of the
letter.

3. This then being truly presupposed, let us begin to examine the articles of
the creed, and see how we Catholics and Protestants do differ in the
construction and understanding thereof. And first touching the first article of
our Belief in God, observe how different it is. The Catholics do believe, that
their God no way cooperateth or wills sin in man; that he has but one
simple and expressed will touching sin, and this in detesting and hating of
it; that he will not punish us for not keeping of such precepts, the which is
not in our power to keep; that he imputes sins to every man, that
commits sin; briefly that he gives to all men, ordinary and sufficient
grace to save their souls, and desires, that all men may be saved; whereas
the Protestants believe the mere contrary to al these points: for they believe
that their God Beza in his display of popish practice page 202. says: God
exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill another. See Zuinglius tom. 2 de
proui. c. 6. fol. 365. Calvin instit. l. 2. c. 18. sect. 1.
cooperateth, forces, and wills a man to sin; that he has a double Luther
tom. 2. Wittemburg. de cap. Babil. fol. 74. D. VVhitakerus de Eccles. cont.
Bell. controuersia 2. quest. 5. page 301.
will, (and therefore a dissembling will) the one expressed in Scripture,
according to which he forbideth man to sin; the other concealed to himself,
by the which he impelleth man to sin; that he will punish Reynolds in his 2.
conclusion annexed to his conference. page 697.
us transgressing the ten commandme^ts, it not being in our power to keep the
said commandments; that to the Luth. tomo 2. Wittemb de capt. Babyl. fol 74.
and Whitak. vt supra.
faithful sinning never so wickedly no sin shall be imputed. Finally, that to
certain Call. instit. l. 3. c. 23. says, God does ordain co^silio nutuque, by
his Council and pleasure, that among me^ some be borne to certain damnation
from their mothers womb. See D. Willets synopsi p. 554. affirming the same.
men, he gives not sufficient means of salvation, but purposes and decrees
from all eternity, that some men (living in the eye of the world, and in their
own conscience never so virtuously) shall be damned and cast into sempiternall
perdition. Thus we see how great a difference there is between the Catholics
and Protestants, in believing the first article of the creed, and how
ineuitably it follows, that either the Catholics or protestants, do stand
subject and obnoxious to that saying of S. Augustine quest. 29. sup. Iosue. who
imagines God such, as God is not, he carries every where another God, to wit
a false God in his mind.

4. Touching the 2. article, which is, And in Jesus Christ his only Son: we
Con. Trident.
Catholics believe in Christ, who is God of God, and equal with his Father; a
Savior, who suffered death (quoad sufficentiam) for all mankind, and who
accomplished the function of his Sauiourship, only according to his humanity; a
Savior who dyed only in body, and not in soul; finally a Savior, who from
his first conception was endued with all knowledge, wisdom, and providence,
and exempt from all ignorance, passion and perturbation: whereas the Protestants
do believe in Christ, as their Savior, who according to their faith, is God
of D. Whitak. approves this opinion, alleging Calvin in proof thereof,
cont. Ca^p p. 121.
himself and Mela^. in loc. com. edit. 1561. p. 41.
inferior to the Father, who dyed only for the D. Willet in his synops printed
1600. p. 780. as also Calvin and Beza in whole treatises.
elect; who performed his mediation not only according to his humanity, but
also according to his Mela^. supra and D Fulk.
divinity (though in the judgment of all learned men, true divinity is
impassible) who in the time of his Passion, besides the death of the body (as
insufficient for our salvation) suffered in soul the Call. instit. l. 2. c. 16
sect 10. and D. Whitak. cont. Duraeum l. 8. p. 556.
Beza in respon. ad acta Colloquij Montisb. part. 1. page 147. D. Willet in his
synopsis p. 599. and 600. D. Sutliffe in his reueu of D. Kellisons suruay
printed 1606. p. 55.
torments of hell: briefly, who labored with (n) ignorance, passion, and even
desperation it self.

5. Touching the article of Christ's descending into hell, the Catholics do
believe hereby, that Christ descended in soul after his passion, into that
part of hell, which is called lymbus Patrum, to deliver from thence the souls
of the just there detayned, till his coming: of which judgment are also some
learned D. Bilson in his suruay of Christ's sufferings and descent to hell p.
650. 651. 652. and the Lutherans are generally of the same opinion.
Protestants; but the greatest part of Protestants do interpret this article,
of Christ descending into his D. Willet in lymbomastix. D. Fulke so alleged
by Willet in synopsi page 605. 606.
grave, so by the word hell: understanding the grave: but Lib. 2. instit.
cap. 16.. 20.
Calvin teaches, that by Christ's descending into hell is understood, that
Christ apprehended God to be most angry and offended with him for our sakes,
and that thereupon Christ suffered great anxiety and grief of soul; and which
is more, most blasphemously Calvin teaches, that Christ uttered words of
desperation in saying: my God, why have thou forsaken me? Touching the article
of Christ's ascending into heaven, we Catholics and the Caluinists do believe
hereby, that Christ truly in body ascended up into heaven; whereas Luth: l. de
sacr. Coenae Domini tom. 2. f. 112. saying: credimus quod Christus iuxta
humanitate^ est vbique presens. Brentius in Apolog. pro cons. VVittem.
Illyricus l. de asce^. Domini. and finally by all Luthera^s
Lutherans do teach, that Christ's body is in all places, with the divinity;
and that therefore it did not really after his passion, ascend up into heaven,
it being there both before and after his passion; thus the Lutherans both in
ours and the Protestants judgments do destroy by this their construction, the
whole creed, and particulerly Christ's incarnation, nativity, passion, death,
ascending into heaven, and his coming to judgment; seeing, supposing Christ's
body to be in all places, all these articles were but apparently or
phantastically, and not truly or really performed.

6. Touching the article of Christ's judging the quick and dead: we Catholics
do believe, that Christ at his coming to judgment, will so judge man, as that
his good works, receiving all their force from our Saviors passion, shall be
rewarded; whereas the Protestants, denying all Call. l. 3. instit; c. 5.. 2.
Bucer. in actis collo quij Ratisb. Beza Zuingli. and most other Protestants.
merit of works (as injurious and derogatory to his death and passion) do
hold, that Christ shall then reward only a bare and Calu. in Antid. Council.
Trident. Kemnitius in exam. Con. Trid. and most other Protestants.
special faith.

7. Concerning the Article: I believe in the Holy Ghost. Whereas all Catholics
and many Protestants do believe, that the Holy Ghost is the third person in the
most Blessed Trinity. Calvin (howsoever he was persuaded of the truth or
falsehood thereof) much lamenteth notwithstanding, to avoid the force of
arguments drawn from the chiefest places of Scripture, and usually alleged
by all Antiquity in proof of the holy Ghost, being the third person in the
Trinity. Thus we find that Just. l. 1. c. 13.. 15.
Calvin will not have (contrary to all Antiquity) that passage of Scripture
Psalm. 33. By the word of the Lord, the heavens were made, and all the host of
them by the spirit of his mouth, to be understood of the divinity of the holy
Ghost. In like sort he rejects the argument See of this subject against the
Trinity, Iluumus a Protestant in l. Calvin. Iudaiza^s
drawn from that other most remarkable Text, 1. Joan. 5. There be three, that
give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these
three be one. Calvin upon this place thus saying (thereby to take away from
thence the proof of the Holy Ghost) Quod dicit tres esse vnum, ad essentiam
non refertur, Luth. in l. contra Iacobum Latomu^ ^omo 2. Wittem, (...) di^^
anno 1552.
sed ad consensum potius. Finally, Luther was so far from acknowledging the
Holy Ghost, to be the third person in the Trinity, or to acknowledge the
Trinity it self, that thus he writteth: Anima mea odit hoc verbum, homousion,
vel consubstantialis. My very soul does hate the word, homousion, or
consubstantial.

8. Concerning the article: I believe the holy Catholic Church. The Catholics
do believe this to be a visible company of me^ professing the present Roman
Catholic faith, of which some are predestined, others reprobated. The
Protestants do believe this Church to consist only of the elect and Confess.
Aug. act. 5. Luther l. de Concilijs and eccles. Call. l. 4. inst. c. 1.. 2.
predestined.

9. Touching the article: The Communion of Saints. The Catholics do hereby
believe, such a communion to be between the Saints in Heaven, the souls in
Purgatory, and men upon earth, that the one part does help the other with
their most available prayers, and intercessions. The Protestants deny all such
intercourse of benefits between these several parts of the Church of
Christ, accounting Calvin l. 3. inst. c. 5. 6. Conturiatore^ Ce^^. 1. lib. 2.
c. 4. col. 460. Brentius in conses. Wittenberg. c. de Purgatorio.
the Catholic doctrine herein superstitious and sacrilegious.

10. Lastly touching the article of, Forgiveness of sins, we Catholics do
believe, that this remission of sins is performed, when the soul by a true
and inherent justice, and by infused gifts of God, enjoys a renouation of
her self, and thereby becomes truly just in the sight of God: the Protestants
disallowing all inherent justice, do only acknowledge an imputative Kemnitius
in exam. Council. trid. Calvin l. 3. instit. c. 11.
justice or righteousness, which consists in that the justice of Christ is (as
they teach) only imputed unto sinners; so as we remain still sinners, though
sins be not imputed unto us through the justice of Christ: a doctrine most
injurious to the most meritorious passion and death of Christ. Thus have we
run over the articles of the creed, from whence we collect, that seeing (as
is above intimated) he only belieueth auaileably and truly the creed, who
belieueth it in that sense, in which the Apostles did write it, and seeing
there are mere different or rather contrary constructions of each article
given by the Catholics and Protestants, so that if that construction of the
Catholics be true, it follows necessarily that the other of the Protestants
befalse, or contrariwise; We may therefore ineuitably conclude, that it is not
sufficient to salvation for any one to say, that he belieueth the creed, who
belieueth the words of it in general, without restrayning them to any peculier
construction given either by the Catholics or Protestants, except he believe
it in that one particular sense (and none other) which was intended by the holy
Ghost, when it was first framed by the Apostles.

11. Now in this next place, we are to demonstrate, that granting for a time,
by an Hypotesis or supposall, that a man did believe the articles of the creed
in their true sense or construction, yet follows it not, that this belief
(though it be necessary) were sufficient alone for a man to obtain his
salvation thereby; and the reason heerof is, because it is most certain, that
there are diverse points of Christian Religion, houlden necessarily to be
believed in the judgment both of Catholics and Protestants (and accordingly
are believed jointly both by Catholics and Protestants) and yet the said
points are not contained or expressed in the Creed. Among others, I will insist
in these following.

12. First, That there are certain divine wrytinges of infallible authority,
penned by the holy Ghost, which we commonly call, the Scriptures of the oulde
and new Testament, of which Testament we find no mention in the Creed, and yet
all men are bound under pain of damnation to believe, that such wrytinges
there are: since otherwise (abstracting from the authority of the Church)
there were not sufficient means left to believe, that it were a sin to
break any of the ten Commandments, or (which is more) that Christ Jesus was
the true Savior of the world.

13. Secondly, That there are spiritual substances, which we call, Angels,
which now enjoy the most happy sight of God, and that many thousands of them,
did fall presently after their creation, and are become those malignant
spirits, which usually are termed Devils.

14. Thirdly, That there is any material place of Hell, where the wicked are
tormented, of which we find nothing in the Creed in the judgment of
Protestants; for although the word, Hell, be mentioned in that article: He
descended into Hell: yet by the word Hell, the Grave is understood by most of
the Protestants.

15. Fourthly, That the pains of the damned, shall be for all eternity, and not
for a certain time only.

16. Fifthly, That Adam did presently upon his creation fall from the grace of
God, and thereby transferred Original sin upon all mankind: So as by reason
of his fall, all men are borne in Original sin.

17. Sixthly, That the world was once drowned for sin, which innundation is
commonly called, Noes floode.

18. Seueanthly, That our Savior whilst he conuersed here upon earth, did
many miracles.

19. Eighthly, That S. John Baptist was our Saviors Precursor or forerunner,
and that our Savior did chose to him certain men for his Apostles, which did
first preach and plant the Christian faith, through out the whole world.

20. Ninthly, That Circomcision is now forbidden, as a thing most unlawful and
ungodly.

21. Tenthly, That there are any sacraments of the new Testament instituted by
Christ, for the spiritual good of man's soul.

22. Eleuenthly, That before the ending of the world, Antichrist shall come,
who shallbe a designed ennemy of Christ, so as he shall labor to subvert, and
overthrow all Christian Religion.

23. These points (besides some others) all Christians (as well Protestants as
Catholics) do believe, and do hold that the belief of these points is
necessary to salvation, and yet not any one of all these articles, is expressed
or set down in the Apostles Creed; whence I conclude, that the Apostles Creed,
cannot be a sufficient boundary to contain and limit an available faith. For
what hope can that man have of his salvation, who believes, that there are
neither any divine Scripture, nor any Decalogue commonly called the ten
Commandments, nor that Christ did work any miracles, nor that he instituted
any Sacraments, nor that there is any place of hell for the damned, nor finally
(to omit the rest) that there is any eternity of punishment?

24. And here I am to premonish the Reader, that it is no sufficient answer
to reply, that most of all the foresaid points are expressed in the Scripture,
and therefore are to be believed; this I say, avails not, seeing here I
dispute against those, who maintain with wounderfull pertinacity of judgment,
that it is sufficient to salvation, to believe only the articles (and nothing
else) which are contained in the Creed; but not any of the former articles are
contained therein. Again, seeing to believe, that there are any divine
Scriptures, is not expressed in the Creed, it conduces nothing to the
answering of this our argument, to say that the forementioned articles are
proved out of Scripture, and therefore are to be believed.

25. Neither secondly, can the force of our said argument be avoided, in
replying that all the former articles are implicitly comprehended in that
article: I believe the holy Church: because the Church teaches, that all these
articles are to be believed: this is no warrantable answer, by reason, that as
these may be reduced to this article of the Creed, so also may al other points
controuerted between the Catholics and the Protestants, be in like manner
reduced to the said article, seeing the Church of God sets down, what is
the truth, and what is to be believed in the said Controuersyes, binding her
children under pain of damnation, as well to believe the truth in the
Co^trouersyes of our days, as to believe the former articles mentioned, which
are not expressed in the Creed. And yet these our Newtralists in Religion, who
make the creed, the sole square of their faith, do not think, that those
questions of Religion insisted upon between Catholics and the Protestants,
are in believing or not believing of them, any way hurtefull to their salvation.

CHAP. V. The same proved from the want of unity in faith between Catholics
and Protestants, in articles necessary to be believed, and yet not expressed in
the Creed.
IN this third and last place we will insist in certain controuersyes of
Religion, so differently maintained by Catholics and Protestants, as that
granting the maintaynours of the one side, to hold the truth, it follows,
that the other party vphouldeth falsehood and heresy. Now for the more
dangerous wounding of our Newtralizing Protestants herein, I will omit here to
speak of the Controversies, touching Purgatory, Praying to Saints, Free Will,
Monachisme, and diverse others such like; and will restrain my self, only to
these Controversies, the subject of which Co^trouersyes, are taught by the one
side, to be (under Christ) the immediate means, of our grace and salvation;
and denied by the other party, to be of any such force and efficacy, for the
souls everlasting good: and consequently in regard of their subject, are one
way necessarily to be believed. So as if it be showed, that the Protestants and
the Catholics do mainly dissent in the means of obtaining grace, and
purchasing of salvation; it must of necessity be inferred, that both the
Protestants and the Catholics continuing in such their state, cannot obtain
grace and salvation: since not only Philosophy, but even natural reason
teaches us, that he never shall attain the end, who uses either not the same
means, which are only and necessarily instituted to the gayning of the said
end.

1. But to procced to these points First, Concerning the sacraments in
general; the Catholics do believe, that all of them (where no just
impediment is) do confer grace into the soul of man, by the help and
continuance of which grace, the soul in the end, obtayneth its salvation. The
Protestants do not ascribe any such supernatural effect or operation of grace
to them.

2. And to come more particulerly to the Sacraments. Touching Baptism: the
Catholics believe, That children being borne in Original sin, cannot be
saved, except they be baptized with water, according to those words of S.
John. 3. Unless a man be borne again of water, and the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. The Protestants Willet in his meditat, in Psalm.
122. and Calu. and Beza frequently.
believe, that infa^ts dying unbaptized, may be saved.

3. Touching the Sacrament of Penance or Confession, the Catholics believe,
That after a Christian has committed any one mortal sin, that sin cannot
be forgiven him, but (at least in voto) by means of confessing the said sin
to a Priest, of the new Testament, and receiving absolution thereof from him:
answerably to that of S. John. 20. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them: and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained. The
Protestants believe, that neither the confession of sins to man, nor the
absolution of man, is necessary for the remitting of them; but that it is
sufficient to confess them only to God. And thus according to the diversity of
doctrine, either the Protestant for want of this sacrament (after he has
mortally sinned) cannot be saved, or Catholics for wrongfully imposing this
yoke upon Christians, do loose their salvation.

4. Touching the most Blessed Eucharist, the Catholics believe, That the very
body and blood does lie ineffably and latently, under the forms of bread and
wine, according to that: This is my body, This is my blood. Math. 26. That
unless we eat his body, and drink his blood, we shall not have life
everlasting. John. 6. Lastly, That we are to adore Christ his body, being
accompanied with his divinity in the said Sacraments. The Protestants do
believe, that Christ's true body, as never leaving heaven, cannot possibly be
truly and really under the form of Bread and Wine; and consequently they
believe, that the eating of his body, and drinkinge of his blood, is not
necessary to salvation. Finally they hold our adoration of the Sacrament to be
open Idolatry; and term Catholics Idolaters, for adoring of it. And thus
either the Protestants, as not feeding upon this celestial food, shall not
have life everlasting, if the Catholics doctrine herein be true; or else
Catholics (suppose (which God forbid) they should err) for teaching and
practicing idolatry herein, should incur damnation.

5. Touching the means of our Justification. The Catholics believe, That not
only faith, but works also do justify. The Protestants reject al works from
Justification; teachinge that only faith does justify man: yea they further
proceed, affirming that who once has true faith, is most assured and certain
Calu. in instit. passim. Kemnit. in exam: Conc. Tri
of his salvation, whereas the Catholics reputing this as a mere presumption,
are willing according to the Apostle, Phil. 2. To work their salvation with
fear and tremblinge. To be short the Protestants do teach, that a man by
thinking himself to be just, is by this means become just; whereas the
Catholics do hold this doctrine not only to be fantastical, but also Bella.
l. 3. de Iustificatione.
in reason most absurd.

6. Touching Grace, without which a man cannot be saved, the catholics believe,
That God out of the Abyss and deapth of his infinite mercy, offers to every
Christian sufficient grace, whereby he may be saved, and therefore they do
encourage every one to endeavor to seek their salvation. The Calu. and Beza
in whole treatises. D. Willet sinopsi 1600. p. 789.
Protestants teach, that God gives not this sufficiency of grace, to every
one, but to certain men only; and that diverse there are, who notwithstanding
al their endeavor to believe truly, and live virtuously, yet they cannot, nor
shall not be saved.

7. Touching the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, the Catholics believe, That
except a Christian do keep them, he cannot be saved, according to our Savior:
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Math. 19. The The
impossibility of the commandments is taught by D. Reynolds 2. conclus. annexed
to his conference p. 697. D. Willet in synopsi p. 564.
Protestants do absolutely teach an impossibility of keeping them. And thereupon
Luther thus affirms: The ten Commandments Ser. de Moyse.
appertain not unto us.

8. Lastly, touching the Pope or Bishop of Rome, the Catholics do believe,
That he is under Christ, the supreme Pastor upon earth; that who does not
communicate with him, in sacraments and doctrine, not yielding him all true
obedience, in subiecting their judgments in matters of faith to his judgment
and sentential definitions, cannot be saved. The Protestants do teach, that
the Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist which is deciphred by the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Apoc. 13 and 17.
Apostle, and which is the designed ennemy of Christ, and that whosoever
embraces his doctrine, or enthralleth (as they write) their assents to his
cathedral decrees, in points of Religion, cannot obtain salvation.

9. Thus far of these points, of which I have made particular choice to
insist upon (omitting some others of like nature) because we see, that most or
all of them, do immediately and principally (as is above said) touch the means
of purchasing of grace, of remission of our sins, and obtaining of salvation,
being maintained for such by the Catholics, but utterly denied and rejected by
Protestants. And here I now urge two things. First, if these former doctrines,
as they are believed by the Catholics, do immediately concern salvation, and
become necessary means thereof, then cannot the Protestants (as rejecting all
such doctrines, and such means both in belief and practice) be saved. But if
(by a supposall) they be not of that nature, but false in themselves, and the
contrary doctrines true, then cannot the Catholics (as believing false
doctrines immediately touching man's salvation, and accordingly practicing them)
be saved. From which forked argument, it may most demonstratiuely be inferred,
that it is impossible, that both the Catholics and the Protestants (the one
part believing, the other part not believing the foresaid doctrines) should
both be saved; for who neglects necessary means, shall never attain to the
designed end of the said means. Secondly, I urge, that a false belief, not
only in these articles, but also in any other Controuersyes, between the
Catholics and the Protestants, is plain Heresy. And this, because every false
belief, is comprehended within the definition of heresy, as being in it self
an election and choice of a new or false doctrine, wilfully maintained against
the Church of God; and therefore it follows, that either the Catholics or
Protestants for their persisting in this false belief, or heresy, shall be
damned.

10. But here I will stay my self; wading no further in the disquisition and
search of the great dissentions between Catholics and Protestants, touching
Faith and belief; only I will reflect a little upon the premises of the two
last Chapters. And here, since it is made most evident, first, that the
Protestants and Catholics, do mainly differ in the sense and construction of
the articles of the Creed, and consequently (seeing the sense and not the
words make the creed) that they both do not believe one and the same Creed,
but have to themselves several Creedes. From whence sufficiently is
discovered, that want of unity in faith, among them both; which unity is so
necessarily required to man's salvation, as in the precedent Chapter is
demonstrated. Secondly, that though by supposition, they did believe the Creed,
and the sense thereof with an unanimous consent, yet it is proved, that there
are diverse other articles not contained in the Creed, which are indifferently
believed (as necessary to salvation) both by Catholic and Protestant. Thirdly,
seeing also there are sundry Controversies in Religion (as is above
exemplifyed) which immediately concern salvation, being houlden as necessary
means thereof, by the catholics, but disclaymed from and abandoned by
Protestants, as main errors and false doctrines, that therefore it is a
manifest error to make the Creed, the sole rule of faith.

11. Therefore from all the former premises, I do auerre, that he, who
maintayneth, that both Catholics and Protestants, and consequently men of any
Religion (notwithstanding that the one side does necessarily believe and
maintain Heresy, can be saved, or that every Christian can obtain heaven, is
wholly deprived of all true judgment, reason and discourse, and for want
thereof, may deservedly be ranged among them, of whom the Psalmist speaks:
Nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus, quibus non est intellectus. Do not become
as Horse and Mule, which have no understanding.

CHAP. VI. The same proved from the authority and privileges of the Church, in
not erring in her definitions, and condemnation of Heresies; and first by
Counsels.
FROM the inviolable unity of Faith, we will next descend to the privileges of
Gods true church, of which privileges, I will at this time take only one into
my consideration; which, is that the church of God is endued with a supreme
prerogative, in not erring in her definition of faith or condemnation of
heresy. This point is warranted by innumerable texts of holy Scripture, as
where it is said: Upon thy wales, O Jerusalem, I have set watchmen, all the
day, and all the night they shall not be sile^t. Isai. 72. But God did not set
watchmen over his Church to teach errors. And again, the 1. Tim. 3.
Church of God, is the pillar and foundation of truth; what more perspicuous?
And further, whereas each man is commanded to repair in difficulties, even of
lesser consequences, to the Church, it is threatened by Christ himself, that
who will not hear the Church, shall be accounted, as an heathen or publican,
according to that his condemnation: Si Ecclesiam non audierit, Matt. 18.
sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus: where we find no restriction, but that
in all things we are to hear the Church. Again Christ himself speaks to
his Apostles, and in them to the whole Church: Luc. 10.
He that hears you, hears me. But if the Church, could err, neither would
Christ refer us to the Church (especially under so great a penalty) neither
by hearing the Church, could we be justly said to hear Christ. Finally, the
Church is so governed by Christ, as its head, or spouse, and by the holy Ghost
as its soul, as therefore we find the Apostle thus to write Ephesians. ^.
thereof. God has made him head. (speaking of Christ) over all the Church,
which is his body: And again one Ephesians. 4.
body, and one spirit, and yet more: The Ephesians. 5.
man is the head of the Church. From which Texts it follows, that if the
Church should err in its definition, or resolution of Faith, and condemnation
of Heresy, this erring must justly be ascribed to Christ and to the holy Ghost:
and consequently it follows, that the Apostles in making the Creed, would
have omitted that Article. I believe the holy Catholic Church. For why should
we be bound to believe the Church, if the Church could err?

2. This truth, (I mean that the Church of Christ cannot err in her
sententionall decrees) is so illustrious and evident, that Tertullian speaking
of certain Heretics of his time, obiecting the erring of the whole church,
thus figuratively or Ironically writes: Age Lib. de preser.
omnes errauerunt, nullam respexit Spiritus sanctus: that is, go to, belike,
all the Churches have erred; and the holy Ghost has respected or looked upon
no one Church. And S. Augustine. Disputare Epist. 118.
contra id quod Ecclesia vniuersa sentit, insolentissimae insaniae est: To
dispute against any point, maintained by the whole Church, is extreme madness.
To whose judgment herein most of the more sober and learned Protestants do
indisputably subscribe; since diverse of D. Ba^croft in ser. 1588 Fox. act. Mon.
464 h. art. 4. the deuines of Geneua in their propositions and principles,
disputed page 141. and diverse others.
them do with all seruour and earnestnes maintain, that the church of Christ
cannot err, and that, what she defines, for truth, is most true, or what for
Heresy or falsehood, is heretical, and to be condemned.

3. This basis or foundation of the Churches not erring, being thus firmly
laid, we are hereupon to conclude, that what points of Religion, the Catholic
Church of Christ has condemned for heresies, the same are by us to be reputed
for heresies (since the Churches condemnation or approbation is most
infallible) and the maintainours of the said heresies, for heretics; and
consequently that such heretics, as departing out of the Church of God, by
their houlding of the said heretical opinions, cannot be saved. Now because
the judgment of the Church in matters of faith is (by the aknowledgment of all
sides) discovered two ways; first by the sentence of general Counsels;
secondly by the frequent attestations of the chief doctors of the Church in
every age, in their particular writings, they not being contradicted therein,
by any other orthodoxall Fathers, or doctors of the same age; I will therefore
distributiuely handle both these ways, showing that both by general Councels,
and also by the particular judgment of the learned Fathers, many opinions,
though not touching the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, or the express
articles of the Apostles Creed, have bine condemned for plain heresies, and
the belieuers of them anathematized for Heretics.

4. And first, to begin with Counsels, the infallible authority of which, even
Christ himself, has by his own words often ratifyed: as where he says: Where
Math. 18.
two or three (much more when many hundred venerable Bishops) are gathered
together in my name, I am in the midst of the^. And again, speaking to his
Church, and in it to the assembled Doctors and Pastors thereof: I am Math. 28.
with you all days, even to the consumation of the world. Which councels are
ever directed, and governed by the holy Ghost: according to those words in the
Acts: Visum est c. 15
Spiritui sancto and nobis. It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us. And
therefore are worthily received and admitted, for the supremest sentence of
Gods Church, not only by the ancient Atha. epist ad Epictetu^. Aug. epi. 162.
Nazianz oratione in Athanasium. Cyrill l. de Trinitate etc.
Fathers, but even by the more learned Protestants; since to omit others, one
of the most remarkable of them thus writes: Synods D. Bilson in his perpetual
gouerme^t page 370.
are an external judicial means to discern error; and the supremest means
to decyde doubts. But to proceed. The Council of Nice was celebrated (though
principally for the repressing of the heresy of Arrius, denying the divinity of
Christ) yet withal touching the Controversy of keeping the feast of Easter, as
is apparent out of D. Bilson supra page 374.
Eusebius, Lib. 3. de vita Constantini.
Athanasius, and De synodis Ariminis and Seleuciae.
Epiphanius. Now this Council pronounces Anathema, to al those, who (besides
their denying of the divinity of Christ) shall deny that the feast of Easter,
was not to be kept according to the custom of the church, but according to the
custom of the Jews. And these heretics were called Quartodecimani, Here Is.
70. Andianoru^.
of whom see Tertul. l. de prescrip. Augustine heresis 29. And here we are to
understand, that the word: Anathema, used and pronounced by this Council
(which word is also almost every where used in all their general Cou^cells)
signifies as much, as accursed, and in this sense we find this word, Anathema,
to be used by the Apostle, in several Epist. ad Romans 9.1. Cor. 12. etc.
places, so as when a Council pronounces Anathema, to any for believing such
and such heresies, or not believing such and such true doctrines, it intends
to say, that those men so doing, are to be accursed and abandoned from God, But
no man is to be accursed or abandoned from God, for believing, or not believing
points of indifferency, but for believing of such errors, as cannot stand with
his souls salvation.

5. Also you shall read Act. 15. of the Council assembled in the Apostles
time, the occasion and reason thereof was, for that certain contentious men,
maintaining that the Gentiles, converted to the Christian faith, might eat
meats offered up to Idols, and blood and strangled beasts, contrary to the
custom of the Jews; the Apostles being assembled, and bearing with the
weakness of the Jews, in the infancy of the Church, decreed the prohibition of
eating blood and strangled meats. After, which decree once established, it is
certain, that it had bine a mortal sin immediately to have eaten of blood,
and strangled meats; so as before it being a point of indifferency, is now
made necessary. This appears from the text: first from those words; Certain
going forth from us, have troubled you with words, subuerting your souls. But
men do neither depart out of the Church, by maintaintng certain opinions, nor
by their example therein can they subvert other men's souls, if their doctrine
and practice thereof, do still remain, about things indifferent; Secondly from
that other passage. It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us, to lay, no
further burden upon you, then these necessary things: where we find, that the
prohibition of such meats, is ranged by the Apostles, in regard of those
times, amoung those things, which are necessary; Again neither would the
Apostles have gathered themselves so solemly, neither would they have ascribed,
the decreeing of it to the work of the holy Ghost, if the subject of the
question, and difficulty then discussed of by them, had concerned matters only
of indifferency.

6. Now from the example of this Council, I do gather, that if a Council by
its own authority may decree, that the eating of certain meats (being
otherwise of their own nature indifferently to be eaten without sin) shall be
unlawful, and shall repute and hold the impugners thereof for men departed
from out of the Church of Christ; then a fortiori, what doctrine soever a
Council shall condemn of its own nature for heresy, the same is to be
reputed, by all good Christians for heresy, and the defendours thereof for
Heretics.

7. The third Council of Cau. 47.
Carthage (whereat S. Augustine was present) decreed, that the book of the
Maccabees with some other books, should be acknowledged as canonical; and
pronounces an Anathema, and condemnation to all those, who should not believe
them, as canonical scripture: from whence it may be concluded, that seeing the
book of the Machabees, teaches prayer for the dead, that therefore this
Council allows this doctrine, and condemns the contrary doctrine for
heresy.

8. The doctrine of the Nouatians (who taught, that there was not power in the
Church, to reconcile men to God, but only by Baptism; excluding and denying
thereby the sacrament of Penance) was condemned with the thunderbolt of
Anathema. In the Council of Rome houlden under Pope Cornelius, as lib. 6.
hist. c. 33.
Eusebius reports, was condemned for heresy, the error of Anabaptisme, as
the same l. 7. hist. c. 2. 1.
Eusebius relates.

9. The Council of Chalcedon condemned the heresy of Eutiches, who taught,
that there was but one vt patet in act. 1. Conc.
Nature in Christ, after the Incarnation. In like sort the first Council of
Ephesus, condemned the heresy of Nestorius, teaching two persons to be in
Christ, as appears out of In Chronico.
Prosper, and Lib. 7. c. 3^.
Socrates. Now touching both these last heresies, we are to understand, that
both Nestorius, and Eutiches, did believe in Christ Jesus our Savior, as the
Redeemer of the world, yet they were registered and bra^ded for heretics only
for their pertinacious erring, touching the Person and Natures of Christ; as
now the Protestants may be reputed Heretics, for their ascribing of ignorance,
Passion, and desperation to Christ.

10. The Council of Chalcedon also decreed, that vowed virgins and monks could
not marry, condemning those with an Anathema, and for heretics, that should
hold and maintain the contrary, as is to be seen out of the Council it
self. The fourth Council of Carthage (whereat S. Augustine was present)
pronounced, that the Can. 79.
doctrine of prayer and Sacrifice for the dead, was according to the true faith
of Christ's Church; and condemned the contrary opinion for heresy and the
maintainers of them for Heretics. The Council of Constantinople, under Pope
Vigilius, condemned Origin for his heresy, in which he taught that the devils
should in the end be saved; as In rita Iustiniani.
Zonaras and Lib. 17. c. 27.
Nichephorus relate. Finally the seventh synod or 2. council of Nice,
condemned all them for Heretics, who taught, that the Images of Christ, and of
his Saints, were to be deprived of all due respect and reverence, and to be
condemned and broaken: of this point, see Paulus Lib. 23. reri^^ Roman.
Diaconus and In compe^diu historius.
Cedrenus.

11. Thus far concerning Counsels, condemning for heresy false opinions
touching faith and Religion, where I have restrained my self, only to those
Councels (this last only excepted) which were within the first five hundred
years, or little more, because those times are more prized, and esteemed, then
the now later times. The like course was continued by Counsels, for condemning
and resisting of Innouations, and false doctrines (though not concerning the
Trinity, the Incarnation, or the Apostles Creed) in the succeeding Ages; which
I purposely omit.

12. But now I here demand, first how can it stand with the infallible
authority of Gods Church, in not erring in matters of faith (of which
privilege I have entreated in the beginning of this Chapter) if so she shall
define the former errors, for condemned heresies, and Anathematize, and curse
the maintaynors of them, for branded Heretics, if the doctrines are but only,
matters of indifferency; and such as may stand with salvation? Secondly, I
ask, how both the deffendours and impugners of the said doctrines, can be
freed from the brand of Heresy? Seeinge the true definition of Heresy,
necessarily agrees to the doctrines, maintained by the one side; for it is
certain, that either the Catholics, or the Protestants, do make choice of new
opinions herin, and do stubbornely maintain these their Innouations against
the Church of God.

The same proved from the authority of the Church, condemning heresies,
manifested by the writings of particular Fathers. CHAP. VII.
NOW to come to the second way, of discovering the Churches sentence, in the
foresaid point, which is by the particular judgment, of the ancient learned
Fathers, which were in their several ages, the shyning lamps of Gods Church,
whose authorityes that all succeeding ages, are to reverence, is easily euicted
from Gods holy writ; for answearably heerto we read in Deutronom. 32. Remember
the old days, think upon every generation, ask thy father, and he will
declare unto thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee. And the Protestant
confession of Bohemia conspireth thereunto, saying: The Harmonia confess. p. 400.
ancient Church, is the true and best mistress of posterity, and going before
leads us the way. Coming then to the Fathers, I will first insist in the
particular errors (not touching either the Trinity, the Incarnation, and
Passion of our Savior, or the articles of the Creed, but points seeming of
more indifferency) condemned by them, for open and damnable heresies. And here
I have purposely made particular choice of diverse Controversies of this time,
handled between the Catholics and the Protestants, to the end that our
Adiaphorists (who maintain, that both Protestants and Catholics may be saved)
may see, that the denial of those very articles of faith, were reputed by the
Fathers of the primitive Church, for heresies, and the denyers of them for
Heretics, and consequently in the Fathers judgment, not capable of salvation.
Next I will set down, diverse of the Fathers sayings, and sentences,
pronounced of heresy, and Heretics in general.

2. But before we come to the condemnation of particular heresies, we must
conceive, that reason it self, and reverence due to the chief Doctors and
Fathers of the primative Church, must presuppose, that in those times, all
those opinions, were generally acknowledged for damnable heresies, which are
placed in the Catalogue of heresies, by Irenaeus, Hierome, Epiphanius,
Philastrius, Augustine, Theodoret, and other approved Authors, of those days.
This by drift of reason is to be acknowledged, for two respects: First, because
we cannot find any Doctor, or Writer of the same ages, who contradicted the
foresaid Fathers, for planting in their Catalogues, any opinion as heresy,
which was not heresy. Secondly, in that the forenamed Fathers, and Authors of
the Catalogues of heresies, were godly and learned men, and therefore neither
would, nor durst, brand any opinion with the note and mark of heresy, which
the whole Church of God did not then take as heresy. All this then justly and
truly presupposed; let us proceed to the particular heresies, so registered for
such, by some of the foresaid Fathers, where (for the fuller conuincing of our
Newtralists in Religion) my greatest choice (some few only excepted) shall be of
the Controversies, remaining still at this day, between the Catholics and
Protestants.

3. First then, That God was the author of sin, was maintained by Florinus,
and condemned for heresy, or rather blasphemy by Eusebius l. 5. hist. cap. 20.
Irenieus, and In co^monitorio
Vincentius Lyrinensis.

4. The opinion touching the impossibility of the Commandments, was maintained
by certain Nouelists of those times, and condemned for heresy by In explan.
simbol. ad Damas.
S. Hierome in these words: Execramus etc. We do execrate, and abhor the
blasphemy of those, who say that any impossible thing is commanded by God, to
be kept and observed by man. See also the like condemnation hereof given by
Sermon. de temp. cap. 101
S. Augustine.

5. That man had not Free Will, is auerred by the Manichees, and condemned for
a manifest heresy by In praesat. dial. cont. Pelagia.
Hierome in these words: Manichaeoru^ est hominis damnare Naturam, and liberum
auferre arbitrium. The Manichees do condemn man's nature, and do take away
Free Will. As also by S. Augustine Lib. de haeres. c. 46.
saying: Peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaei libero arbitrio. The
Manichees does not ascribe the beginning of sin to Freewill.

6. That faith does only justify, was condemned for an heresy in the Eunomians
by Lib. de haeres. c. 54.
S. Augustine, who further Lib. de fide and operib. c. 14.
says, that it first proceeded from the false understanding of S. Paul in his
epistles.

7. That prayer or sacrifice, could not be offered up for the dead, is
maintained by Aerius, and his followers, who also taught, that set
fasting-dayes are not to be appointed by the Church: yet were these two
opinions condemned for heresies by Hares. 75.
Epiphanius, and Lib. de here is. cap 33.
S. Austine, who thus writteth: Aeriani haeretici docent, non oportere orare,
aut offerre sacrificium pro mortuis, nec statuta solemniter celebranda esse
ieiunia, sed cum quisque voluerit ieiuna^dum, ne videatis esse sub lege. The
Heretic Aerians do teach, that we ought not to pray or offer sacrifice for the
dead: that solemn fasting days are not to be celebrated, but that every one
is to fast, when it pleases himself, least otherwise he might seem to live
under the law. Thus far S. Augustine.

8. That Virgins might marry, was condemned in Vigilantius for heresy by S.
Hierome, who against the same Vigilantius, thus writes: Quid faciunt Orientis
Ecclesiae? etc. What do the Churches of the East in this point? What the
Church of Egypt? And the Apostolical Sea? They admit for Priests, men, who are
either Virgins, or continent, or if they have wives, do cease to become
husbands.

9. That marriage and virginity was of equal dignity, was defended by Iouinian,
who also absolutely denied, all diversity of merits, yet was this his error
condemned for heresy by Lib. 1. aduer. Iouin. c. 2
S. Hierome, and De te^pore ser. 191.
S. Augustine thus writing thereof: Iouiniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit
nullam in futuro meritorum distantiam. We condemn the error of Iouinia^, who
teaches, that there is no disparity, or difference of merits in time to come.

10. That the Church was not ever visible, was taught by the Donatists, but
condemned for a most wicked heresy, by S. Augustine, who thus discourses
thereof: Donatistae Lib. de unit. Ecc. c. 12. and epist. 170 ad Seuerum.
detorquent scripturas, in Ecclesiam Dei, vt tanquam defecisse, and perijsse de
toto orb videatis. The Donatists do detort the Scripture, and apply it against
the Church of God, that the Church thereby may seem to have suffered defect,
or perished out of the whole world.

11. That Baptism of children was not necessary, was taught by the Pelagians,
but condemned for a manifest heresy by In rescripto ad Mileuitanum Council.
Innocentius, by Haeres. 88.
S. Augustine, and In ep. 86. ad Episcopum Aquetletensem.
S. Leo.

12. The Religious use of the images of Christ and his Saints, was
sacrilegiously denied be Zenaias Persa, as Nicephorus (s) witnesses, thus
writing: Zenaias iste primus (o audacem animam and os impudens) voce^ illam
euomuit, Christi, and eorum qui illi placueru^t, imagines venerandas non esse,
that is. This Zenayas was the first, that vomited forth this word (to bold
soul, and impudent mouth) that the Images of Christ, and his Saints, were not
to be worshipped.

12. That we ought not to pray to Saints, or to worship their Relikes, was
maintained by Vigilantius, but condemned for heresy by Lib. cont. Vigilant. c.
^. and 3.
Saint Hierome, and by Lib. de Eccles. ^og. c. ^3
S. Augustine, who of this later branche thus writes. Sanctorum corporum, and
praecipue Beatorum veliquias, a^si Christi membra, sincerissime honoranda
credimus; si quis contra sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed Eunomianus
aut Vigila^tianus creditur. We believe that the Relics of holy bodies (but
especially of Martyrs) as the members of Christ, are to be honored most
sincerely: and who shall come to impugn this doctrine, is to be accounted no
Christian, but either an Eunomian or a Vigilantian.

13. The overthrowing of Altars, and casting away of holy Chrisme, was taught
and practiced by the Donatists, yet was this their sacrilegious proceedings
condemned, and themselves branded for Heretics by Lib. 2. contra Petilianu^ c.
52. and l. 3. c. 40 and epist. 163.
S. Augustine, and by Optatus, who speaking to the Donatists, discourses
thereof in this manner: Quid Lib. 6. contra Donatist.
est tam sacrilegum, quam altaria Dei, in quibus and vos aliquando obtulistis,
frangere, radere, remouere? Quid enim est altar, nisi seeds corporis and
sanguinis Christi? Quid vos offenderit Christus, cuius illic per certa momenta,
corpus and sanguis habitabant? What is so sacrilegious (O you Donatists) as to
break, deface, cast down the altars of God, whereupon your selves have
sometimes offered up sacrifice? What other thing is an Altar, then the seat of
the body and blood of Christ? In what has Christ so offended you, whose body
and blood, for certain moments or short times, did dwell and remain upon the
Altars?

14. To be short, I pass over (as less pertinent to the Controversies of
these times) how the error of Origin touching the salvation of Devils was
condemned for heresy, by Haer. 43. and de ciuit. Dei l. 21. cap. 17.
S. Augustine; the error of Tertullian denying second marriages, was in like
sort mightily reprehended and condemned by Haer. 86.
S. Augustine, though both these Doctors (I mean Tertullian, and Origin) had
otherwise by their learned writings, deserved well of the Church of God.

15. Thus far touchnig the foresaid controversies condemned for heresies, by
the Fathers of the primative Church; though the subject of the said heresies,
was neither touching the Trinity, the Incarnation, the passion of our Savior,
or the articles of the Creed; a-point so evident, and confessed even by the
Protestants, as that many of the foresaid examples, are collected out of the
Fathers, and confessed so to be condemned, by learned Protestants, as by the
Centurists in their first chapter of every several Century, by Osiander, in
his several centuries, as also by Pantaleon in his Chronology. Besides which
condemnation of the Church, either these doctrines, or the contrary to them,
are necessarily proved to be heresies, even from the very definition of heresy
above set down; and therefore it follows, that both the Catholics and
Protestants (the one beleiuing them, the other not) cannot be saved, seeing
Heretics, dying Heretics, cannot be saved.

16. Now to come to the sentences of the Fathers powered out in great heat, and
fervor of zeal against Heretics and Heresies in general. And to begin
with S. Ihon the Evangelist. S. Irenaeus Lib. ^ c. 3. and apud Eusebius. l. 4. c.
13.
relates (to set down Irenaeus own words) that Policarpus the martyr (who
was scholar to the Apostles) was wont to tell, how that Saint John the Apostle
of our Savior, being at a certain time in Ephesus, and going into a public
bath, and finding Cerinthus the Heretic to be within the bath, ran presently
out of the bath, saying to them who were with him: Let us flee from hence, for
fear least the bath fall upon us, and kill us, in which the ennemy of God
Cerinthus abides.

17. The said author Vbi supra.
Irenaeus, in like sort relates in these words following, how that the
foresaid Policarpus meeting at Rome by chance, Marcion the Heretic, and being
demanded of Policarpus, whether he knew him or not? answered: Yea, I know thee
for the chief child of Satan. To conclude with the testimony of this Father,
the said Irenaeus, writing to Florinus an heretic, who once was scholar to S.
Policarpe with him, thus says: These opinions Iren. in epist. ad Flori.
of thine (O Florinus) to speak friendly, are not true nor wholesome. These
opinions are repugnant to the Church etc. I may truly protest, that if the
holy and Apostolical Priest Policarpus, had heard of such opinions, as thou
defendest, be would have stopped his ears, and cried out (according to his
fashion) O good God, unto what miserable times, have thou reserved me, to hear
these things? And presently would have run out of the place, where he had
been standing or sitting, where such doctrine had been uttered. But now to
reflect a little upon the premises: Cerinthus, Marcion, and Florinus, did all
believe in the Trinity, the Incarnation of our Savior, and received the
Apostles Creed; and erred only in lesser points, and yet we see what sharp
reprehensions, were used toward them, by S. John, and S. Policarpe his
scholar, As to fly out of their company, to acknowledge one of them to be the
child of the Devil, to stop their own ears, for not hearing of their
errors etc. All which speeches had been over much, aggrauated, and
transcended the bounds of Charity, if their errors had rested upon matters
only of indifferency, and had been compatible with man's salvation.

18. But to proceed to the sentences of other Fathers in this point. Athanasius
says in his creed (to use his words) Whosoever does not hold the Catholic
faith, whole and inviolable, he shall perish for ever. And S. Hierome
expressly thus writteth. For Lib. 3 Apol. co^t. Ruffinu^.
one word or two, contrary to the faith, many have been cast out of the
Church. Yea he proceeds further thus writting: Haeretici Dial. contra Lucif.
c. 1
quicumque, Christiani non sunt. Whosoever are Heretics, these men are not
Christians. S. Basil was wount to say, as Theodoret records: Those Lib. 4.
hist. c. 17.
who are truly instructed in the divine doctrine, will not suffer any syllable
of the divine decrees to be corrupted, but for the defense thereof (if necessity
forces them) will undergo any kind of death. Tertullian Lib. de preser-
that ancient Father has a sentence, not much different from that of the
former Father. S. Augustine says: Imagine a Lib. 4. contra Donatist. c. 8.
man to be chaste, continent, not covetous, not serving Idols, ministering
hospitality to the poor, ennemy to none, malicing no body, sober, frugall etc.
but yet if he be an Heretic, certainly no man doubts, but for this alone,
that he is an heretic, he shall not possess the kingdom of God. A dreadful
saying of so learned and godly a Father. The Donatists for disagreeing from S.
Augustine in some traditions, not specifyed in the Scripture (much less in the
creed) are thus reprehended by him. In In explicat. Psalm. 54.
these points those Heretics were with me, and yet not altogether with me, in
schism not with me, in heresy not with me, in many things with me, in few not
with me. These few in which they were not with me, the many could not help
them, in which they were with me. And yet these Donatists believed with S.
Augustine, the Trinity, the Incarnation, and recyted with him the Apostles
Creed. Briefly S. Augustine in quest. 11. in Matthew. thus defines an Heretic:
Haereticus est, qui de aliqua part doctrinae falsum credit. He is an heretic,
who believes any false thing touching any point of Christian faith. Within
which definition, it necessarily follows, that either the Protestants for not
believing Purgatory, Prayers to Saints, Freewill, Merit of works, or the
Catholic for believing of them are to be included. S. Gregory Nazianzen in
Oratione 37. Vnum vni cohoeret etc. One point of faith agrees with another, so
as of them altogether there is made a certain golden and wholesome chain;
therefore if but one opinion or article be taken away, or made doubtful, the
whole chain of faith will be come broken. And S. Cyprian: Cum Lib. 1 epi. 6.
ad Magnu^.
Dominus noster Jesus Christus etc. When our Lord Jesus Christ, did testify in
the Gospel, that those were his enemies, who were not with him, he noted not
any one heresy, but manifestly shows, that all Heretics whosoever, are his
enemies; saying: He that is not with me, is against me, and he that does not
gather with me, disperseth. Luc. 11. And S. Chrysostom: Quemadmodu^ In ep ad
Gal. c. 10.
in mone^a regia etc. Even as who pareth away a little of the Kings silver,
makes the whole piece thereof, to be adulterate; Even so, who overthrows, the
least part or bra^che of true faith, may be said, to corrupt the whole; he
proceeding from this small beginning to worser courses.

19. To come to an end of the Fathers judgment in this point, S. Ambrose Lib. 6
in Luc. c. 9.
shall conclude all, who thus plainly writes thereof: Si vnum horum
retraxeris etc. If thou shall recall or deny any of these points, thou have
retracted thy own salvation; for even Heretics seem to challenge Christ to
them, for no man will deny the name of Christ; nevertheless, he indeed denies
Christ, who does not confess all points of faith, instituted by Christ. Thus
far of the Fathers judgment in this matter, where I am to advertise the
Reader. First (as above I have touched in the Councels) that if all false
doctrines whatsoever pertinaciously defended against the Church of God, be
heresies, as the definition of heresy above explicated, proves them to be, and
as the Fathers of the Primitive Church, and in them the whole Church of God,
have maintained, then either the Protestants or Catholics for their disentions
and houlding of contrary doctrines, touching freewill, Purgatory, Prayer to
Saints, sacrifice etc. are to be accounted heretics; and consequently both
cannot be saved in their Religon. For that Heretics, continuing Heretics,
cannot be saved, is demonstrated; first, from those fearful threats and
comminations of the Apostles thundered out against Heretics (of which point I
have discoursed above) Secondly, from the authority of Christ's church, which
excludes all Heretics (as I have showed) from all hope of salvation: And
lastly (to omit many other reasons) from that principle, That Heretics are no
members of Christ's church, of which point we are to dispute in the next place.
Now if the said false doctrines, be not heresies, then have the Fathers of the
primitive church, generally erred in defyning them for heresies, and
consequently the whole Church of God represented in the Fathers, as in her
Pastors and Doctors, has also therein erred, which is repugnant to the holy
Math 18. Joan. 16. 3. Ephesians. 1.
Scripture, and our Saviors promise.

20. The second thing to be advertised is, that of the former authorityes of
the Fathers against heresy, not any of them are restrained by them to be
heresies, touching the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, his Passion, the
Articles of the creed (for of these here is made no mention or intimation in
their authorityes) within which compass our Formalists in Religion, seek to
co^taine their faith; but they are implicitly by the Fathers extended, to all
heresies whatsoever, whether they concern the supreme and fundamental points
of Christian Religion, or any other secondary, and less principal point of
the same Religion.

The same proved from that principle, that neither Heretics nor Schismatikes,
are members of Christ's Church. CHAP. VIII.
IN this last place concerning the Church, we will set down, another principle
of Christian faith, and after will deduce from thence by way of most necessary
inference, our conclusion here handled. The principle is this: That Heretics
houlding any heresies whatsoever, are no members of the church of Christ. The
deduction is, that Heretics therefore cannot be saved; since none can be
saved, but such as are members of Christ's church. This principle is proved (as
above is intimated) out of Gods holy word, as where it it 1. Tim. 1.
said: Certain men made shipwreck touching faith, that is, they fell out of
the ship of the Church by forging of Heresies. And again: They 1. Io. 2.
went out of us, that is, as S. Augustine expounds, out of the Church, of
which we are. The expositions of which texts are warranted, even by force of
reason: for seeing the Church is an united multitude (for it is one Spouse,
Cant. 6.
one Kingdom, and one Body) and this union chiefly consists in the
profession of one faith; it is repugnant to reason, that they should be reputed
as members of the body of the Church, who have no conjunction at all, in the
chiefest matters with the said body.

2. If we proceed to the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, we shall find them
of an unanimous judgment herein, to wit, That Heretics are no members of the
Church, and therefore cannot be saved. And first, occurreth S. Irenaeus Lib. 3
Cap. 3.
who says, that Policarpe did convert many Heretics unto the Church;
therefore it may be concluded, that those Heretics before their conversion,
were out of the Church. S. Cyprian Epist. ad Iubainum.
says: Heretics, though they be out of the Church, do challenge to themselves
the authority of the Church, after the manner of Apes, who not being men, yet
would be accounted to be men. The same Father thus plainly writes in another
place. Cum lib. de vnitate Eccles.
Deo manner non possunt, qui in Ecclesia Dei vnanimes esse noluerunt. They
cannot remain with God, who dissent in judgment from the church of God. And
yet more fully in the same place: Non peruenit ad Christi praemia etc. He
arriueth not to the rewards of Christ, who leaves the church of Christ, he is
an alien, he is profane, he is an ennemy; for he cannot have God to his
Father, who has not the Church for his Mother. And S. Hierome says: Que non
In dialog. con. Lucifer.
a Domino Jesus Christo, sed ab alio etc. Who take their denomination or name
not from our Lord Jesus Christ, but from some other (as the Marcionists,
Valentinians, Montenses, etc.) are not the Church of God, but the synagogue of
Antichrist. Finally S. Augustine (for I have already dwelled ouerlong, in the
authority of the Fathers) pronounces that: Nihil sic Trae. 27. in Ioann.
formidare debet etc. A Christian ought to fear nothing so much, as to be
separated, from the body of Christ, which is his Church, and which is one and
Catholic; for if he be separated from the body of Christ, he is not a member
of Christ; if no member of Christ, then is he not strengthened with his spirit.
But who has not this spirit of God, the same man is not of God. Thus far S.
Augustine; with whom even the Protestants do join here in judgment; for D.
Dove in his book of persuasions thus says: This proposition, that Heretics
are not to be communicated withal, is undoubtedly true. And D. Sutcliffe in his
Examen of petitions, page 9. alleges the Laodicean Council can 31. 32. 33.
in proof thereof, thus concluding: The Laodicean Council does directly
condemn, communion with Heretics, either in marriage or prayer.

3. This already alleged may serve to prove that Heretics, are no members of
the Church of Christ, and consequently cannot attain salvation; since it is
agreed among all learned men, that only the members of the church of Christ can
find salvation in Christ, we will in this place descend to Schismatikes, who if
they be neither of the Church of God, nor can justly expect any salvation
(during such their state) then a fortiori, no Heretic, can expect any
salvation; since a Schismatike believing all articles of Christian faith, does
only divide himself by disobedience, in not communicating with the Church in
prayer and Sacraments. Whereas an Heretic (as is above said) wilfully and
contumaciously maintayneth errors, and false opinions condemned by the Church.
Now that a Schismatike is not a member of Christ's Church, is first proved from
the Texts of Scripture (above in part touched) where the Church is called one
fould of sheep Joan. 10. One body. Rome 12. One spouse, and one Dove Cant. 6.
But now Schism according to its Etimology, deuideth that, which was one, into
parts; for Schisma, being a greek word, comes of the verb Schizo, which is
scindere, therefore as a member being cut off from the body, is no longer a
part of the body; so a Schismatike dividing himself by his own disobedience,
from the communion of the Church, is no longer a member of the said Church.

4. This verity, to wit, That Schismatics are not members of the Church of
Christ, is (besides the former proofs) warranted with the authorityes; and
sentences of the ancient Fathers. And first S. Cyprian thus purposely writes
of Schismatikes: Qui Lib. 4. ep 9. ad Flore^.
cum Episcopo non sunt, in Ecclesia non sunt. Those, who agree not with the
Bishop (meaning the supreme Bishop of Gods Church) are not in the Church. And
again, the said Lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae.
Father most elegantly co^pareth Schismatikes, to Beams divided from the
sun, to Boughs cut off from the tree, and to Rivers wholly separated from
their springes. Saint Chrysostom discoursing of Schismatikes thus says:
Schismatis Hom 3. in ep. 1 ad Cor.
significantia satis eos arguit etc. The very signification of this word
schism, is a sufficient and vehement condemnation of them etc. Which Father in
another Hom. 13. in ep. ad Ephesians.
place, compares a schismatike, to the hand cut off from the body, which
thereupon cease to be a member; and expressly affirms, that Schismatiks,
though they consent with the Church of Christ, in doctrine, yet are not in the
Church of Christ, but in altera Ecclesia, meaning in a Church different from
the Church of Christ. S. Hierome distinguishing schism from heresy thus
discourses: Inter In c. 3. ad Tit.
heresim and schisma hoc interesse arbitramur etc. We take this to be the
difference between heresy and schism; that heresy maintayneth a perverse and
false doctrine, whereas schism ab Ecclesia pariter separat, in like manner
separateth a man from the Church in regard of dissension and disobedience
toward our Bishop. S. Augustine thus wou^deth a Schismatike: Haeretici lib.
de side and simbol. c. ^0.
and Schismatici congregationes suas Ecclesias vocant etc. Heretics and
Schismatikes, do call their congregations the churches. But Heretics do
violate their faith, in believing falsely touching God, whereas Schismatikes,
though they believe the same points, which we believe, yet through their
dissentions, they do not keep fraternall charity, wherefore we conclude, that
neither an Heretic, belongs to the Catholic church, because he loves not
God, nor a Schismatike, because he loves not his Neighbor. To conclude,
Fulgentius lib. de fide ad Petrum cap. 38. and 39.
agrees with the former Reuer. Father in this point, saying: Firmissime tene
etc. Believe for certain, and doubt not that only Pagans, but also Jews,
Heretics, and Schismatikes, who dye out of the Catholic church, are to go to
everlasting fire.

5. And thus far touching Schismatikes, who because they be not of the Church
of Christ, cannot obtain salvation; which point being made evident, by so many
authorityes both divine and human, then much more strongely may we conclude,
that Heretics (as exceeding the Schismatikes in prauity and malice, and being
excluded in like sort with the^ out of the Church of Christ) cannot he saved.
But before I end this Chapter, give me leave, good Reader, to expatiate a
little, beyond my designed limits: O then you Schismatikes here in our own
country, whose souls are so wholly absorpt in earthy and muddy considerations,
cast your eyes upon your own states, and use some small introuersies upon your
selves. You see what a dangerous censure the ancient Church of Christ, by the
mouths of its chief Pastors and Doctors, has thundered against you. It says:
You are not of Christ's church, you are aliens and strangers thereto. It further
pronounces, That dying in such your state, you are all deprived of all hope of
salvation. Good God, what stupor and dulnes of yours is this? Are you
Christians? Prefer then Christ before the world. Fear your God more then
man. Give then to God, what is Gods, and to Caesar, what is Caesar's. Reflect
upon these ensuing principles of the Catholic, and therefore your own
Religion.

6. The one that God ordinarily deriueth his grace unto man's soul, by the
conduicts of his sacraments, and gives absolution of ones sins, particulerly
by the sacrament of Penance, and confession: you wilfully deprive your selves,
of the participation of the Sacraments, and thereby of grace and of the
remission of your sins, and are you not then as dried branches, void of that
heavenly grace, which gives life to the soul? You want the grace and
forgiveness of your sin, s where then is your hope of eternal life? Remember
the Apostles words, and be afraid: Gratia Dei vita aeeterna, and do not
disioyne those asunder, which S. Paul has so inseparably united.

7. The second, the uncertainty of any particular man's salvation, which point
is able to strike you dead through fear; and the rather, since it is noe small
sign of man's future damnation, deliberatly and wilfully, year after year,
to divide himself from the Church of Christ, and from all the spiritual
influences streaming from thence.

8. The third, that there is a Purgatory, the pains whereof, though terminable,
yet are insupportable. Suppose then the best, that is, that you finally dye
with true repentance, and reconciled to Gods Church (which yet is not in your
power, but out of the maine Ocean of Gods mercy) nevertheless your own faith
assures you, that you must suffer in that place even insufferable torments for
your former dissimulation, and that your continuance, in thus dissembling with
God, serve but as bellows the more to blow that dreadful fire. Oh how great
interest then, are you to pay in the end, for the enjoying of this your mispe^t
time? If you be Catholics (though but in heart) you believe all here said, and
therefore may the more assuredly presage of your own future misery. If you do
not believe these three former points of Catholic Religion, then are you less
damned for want of true faith, then otherwise by your unchangeable
schismatical lives, for want of due conformity to the Church of Christ;
therefore I wish you to awake, out of that schismatic letargy of the soul,
and daily meditate of that of the Apostle Romans 10. Cord creditur ad iustitiam,
ore fit confessio ad salutem. With the heart we believe unto justice: but with
the mouth confession is made to salvation. But I will stay here my pen,
remembering my undertaken subject, and will proceed to the next head.

The same proved by arguments drawn from reason. CHAP. VIIII.
TO pass from the authority of Gods sacred word, his holy Church, and the
ancient Fathers the pillars thereof, touching the nature of heresy, and of
Heretics, as also touching the unity and infalibility of the same Church, and
the persons disincorporated and separated from it; from all which heads it
has been evidently euicted, that a man obstinatly defending, any one error
in faith and Religion, cannot expect salvation. It now remains, that the same
be made evident by force of reason, that thereby all men, enjoying the faculty
of reason, may the more easily subscribe to so undeniable a verity, and say
with the Psalmist herein: Psalm. 92.
Testimonia tua credebilia sunt nimis. Well then, the first and chiefest
reason, is taken from the causes of true faith, where for the better conceauing
thereof, we are to understand, that faith is a supernatural habit, not
obtained by the force of Nature; and that who rests doubtful or staggering
of any one article, is charged by the Canon Law, with flat infidelity,
according to that: Dubious Iure Canon. c. 10. de Haeretic.
in fide, infidelis est. Therefore to the belief of any one article of faith,
two things do concur: the one, is the first revealing verity (as the
schoolmen speak) which is God himself: the second is the Church, propounding
the article to be believed. Now when we believe any point of faith, God, who is
the first revealing verity (as is said) reuealeth it to the Church, and the
Church propounds it so revealed, to us to believe; and thus we believe a
point of faith, thorough the authority of God revealing, and the Church
propounding. And this is most consonant, and agreeing, with that most admirable
and infallible rule of faith, set down by the most ancient Vincentius
Lyrinensis, in the beginning of his Commonitorium, deserving to be stamped in
characters of gold: I Initio commonitorij.
have demanded (says this Author) very many things, of many men, excelling
and renowned for learning, and sanctity of life, how, and by what way, I might
fortify my faith, in time of heresies arysing: and I ever received this answer
of all, or in manner of all, that whether I, or any other, desirous to avoid
the snares of Heretics, and to continue sound in the Catholic faith, he must
by Gods assistance, Fidem munire duplici ratione: fense his faith with a double
reason; Sacrosancti Canonis authoritate; deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae
traditione. First by authority of Gods word: secondly, by tradition of the
Catholic Church. Thus far Vincentius. Thus we see, where we believe any
thing, though it be materially true, and not through this former authority,
this is not supernatural belief in us, but only an opinion grounded upon
other reasons and inducements. Even as the Turk believes, that there is one
God, Creator of the world, yet this his belief is no true faith, but only an
opinion of a thing, which is true; since this his belief, is grounded only
upon his Alcoran, being otherwise a fabulous book, though of the being of one
God, it speaks truly.

2. Now to apply this to my purpose. This first revealing verity, which is God
(through whose authority we ought to believe every article of faith) does with
one and the like authority, reveal all articles of Christian Religion; so as
it is as forcibly to be believed, that there is (for example) a Purgatory, or
that we may pray to to Saints (suppose these articles to be true) as that there
is a Trinity, or that Christ was incarnated. From whence it ineuitably
follows, that who believes in the Trinity, and yet does not believe that
there is a Purgatory, or that we may pray to Saints, has no true and
supernatural belief of the Trinity; but only believes that there is a
Trinity, because he is persuaded thereto, only by his own reason, or through
some other humane authority. For if he did believe, that there is a Trinity, or
that Christ was incarnate through the authority of God so revealing this truth,
so to be believed, by the same authority he would have believed, that there is
a Purgatory, and that we ought to pray to Saints, seeing both the articles of
the Trinity, and of Purgatory, or praying to Saints, are equally, and
indifferently alike propounded by God, and by his Church to be believed.

3. And seeing to the same authority, ever the same reverence, affiance, and
credit is to be given, thus we may demonstratiuely conclude, that what
Protestant does believe in the Trinity, and yet does not believe, that there is
Purgatory, Praying to Saints, Freewill, the Real presence (admitting them once
to be true) or any other points controuerted, between the Catholics and the
Protestants, the same man has no true faith of the Trinity, of the
Incarnation, and consequently for want of a true, and supernatural faith
cannot be saved, since we read: Qui non Marc 16.
credit, condemnabitur. Who believes not, shall be condemned. And from this
former ground it it proceeds, that S. Thomas, 2. 2. q 5. art. 3.
and all learned schoolmen teach, that who beleiueth not only for Gods
authority, so revealing any point whatsoever, great, or small, fundamental or
not fundamental, the same man belieueth not any other article at all, with a
true and supernatural faith: And hereto accords those words of Lib. de
prescr.
Tertullia^, against Valentinus an Heretic: Some things of the law and
Prophets Valentinus approves, some thing he disaloweth, that is, he
disallowech all, whilst he disproueth some. Which sentence of Tertullian, must
of necessity be true, since who rejects the authority of God, in not
believing any one article, propounded by God to be believed, the same man
begets a suspicion or doubt of Gods authority, for the believing of any
other article how fundamental soever.

4. Another reason may be taken from a distinction of faith used by the
learned, which faith is of two sorts: the one they call Explicit faith, the
other Implicit. Explicit faith is that, which all men under pain of
damnation, are bound expressly to believe, as the Trinity, the Incarnation of
our Savior, his passion, the Decalogue, or ten Commandments etc. Implicit
faith is that which comprehends all those points, which a man is not bound
expressly and distinctly to believe in particular (though he be expressly
bound not to believe any thing contrary thereto) but is to rest in the judgment
of the Church, concerning all such points, and what the Church of Christ
houldeth therein, implicitly to believe. This distinction is warranted, not
only in the judgment of all Catholic school men, but also in the judgment of
the most learned D. Baro. l. de fide and eius ortu p. 40. Hooker in Eccles.
politia. in praefat. p. 28. by Maelanct. l. 1. epist. epist. ad Regem Angliae.
Protestants (though they forbear the phrases, of Explicit and Implicit
faith) and particulerly of D. Field, who in these words following gives the
reason thereof, saying: For seeing In his Treatise of the Church in his epist.
dedicatory to the Archbishop.
the Controversies of Religion in our time, are grown in number so many, and
in nature so intricate, that few have time, and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them, what remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out, which among all
the societyes of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that
househould of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which
is the pillar and ground of truth, that so they may embrace her communion,
follow her directions, and rest in her judgments. Thus Doctor Field.

5. Now this distinction being presupposed, I thus argue, both these kinds of
faith, are necessary to salvation. Explicit faith, because it comprehends,
all those fundamental and supreme points of Christian Religion, without the
express and articulate knowledge of which a man cannot be saved. And these be
those only, which Newtralists in Religion hold necessary to be believed:
Implicit faith, of other points also is necessary to salvation, because
otherwise then beleiuing implicitly and inuoluedly what the Church teaches
therein, we cannot (according to the former Doctors words) find out that
blessed company of holy ones, the househould of faith, the spouse of Christ,
and Church of the living God. And seeing Implicit faith, is necessary to
salvation, we must grant, that this Implicit faith has some object; the
object is not the article of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Decalogue etc.
since these are the objects of Explicit faith (as is above intimated) therefore
articles seeming of lesser importance, are the object of implicit faith; the
which as a man is bound implicitly to believe in the faith of the Church, so is
he bound not to believe any thing contrary to the said articles. Seeing then
diverse controversies between the Catholics and the Protestants, are included
under this implicit faith, and that the Church of God, houldeth but one way of
them: it follows that one side of the contrary beleiuers of those points does
err in their belief, and consequently through want of this true and necessary
implicit faith, cannot be saved.

6. A third reason, may be this. It is proper, and peculier to virtues infused
(and such be Faith, Hope, and Charity) that every such virtue is wholely
extinguished by any one act contrary to the said virtue. Thus for example, one
mortal sin, takes away al charity and grace, according that: He Jacob. cap.
2.
that offends in one, is made guilty of all. One act of despair, destroys
the whole virtue of Hope; then by the same reason, one heresy wholely
corrupts and extinguisheth all true faith. Therefore seeing Faith is a
Theological, and infused virtue, this faith is destroyed with one act of
heresy, whether it be about Purgatory, Prayer to Saints, Freewil, or any other
co^trouersy between the Catholics and the Protestants; therefore whoseuer
denies Purgatory, or any of the rest (granting their doctrins to be true) is
deprived of all infused faith touching any article of Christian Religion,
whether they concern the Trinity, or the Incarnation, or any other
fundamental point, which he may seem to believe: but without faith (that is,
without true, infused, and Theological faith) it is impossible to please God,
as the Heb. 11.
Apostle assures us.

4. Another reason may be this; These Newtralists in Religion, do not agree
even in the general grounds of Christian faith, to wit, in the Articles of one
God, of the Trinity, of Christ etc. with any other Christians. This is proved,
because as all other Christians, do believe in these general heads; so does
each of them particulerly agree, that these general principles are to be
limited and bounded to every ones particular sect, as the Protestant (for
example) believes otherwise in God, the Trinity, and Christ, then the
Catholics do (as is else where demonstrated) But now these our Newtralists,
do not limit the foresaid principles, to any particular sect, or in any
particular manner; therefore it evidently follows, that they have no true
belief, even of those general and fundamental articles.

5. A fifth reason shall be this. It is most certain, that what general
propension, Nature (or rather God himself, by nature as his instrument) has
ingrafted in all men, the same is in it self, most true, certain, and
warrantable. As for example, Nature has implanted in each man's soul, a secret
remorse of Conscience for sins and transgressions committed, as also a fear
of future punishment, to be inflicted for the said sins perpetrated:
therefore from hence it may infallibly be concluded, that sin it self is to
be avoided, and that after this life there is a retribution of punishment, for
our offenses done in this world; since otherwise it would follow, that God
should insert in the soul of man (idly, vainly and as directed to no end)
certain natural impressions and instincts, which to affirm were most
derogatory to his divine majesty and wisdom, and repugnant to that anciently
received Axiom: God, and Nature works nothing in vain. Now to apply this,
we find both by history, and by experience, that diverse zealous and fervent
Professors of all Religions whatsoever (both true and false) have been most
ready to expose their lives in defense of any impugned part, or branch of their
Religion, from which undaunted resolution of theirs, we certainly collect, that
this their constant determination of defending the least point of their
Religion, proceeds partly from a general instinct of God, impressed in man's
soul, teaching each man, that death it self is rather to be suffered, then we
are to deny any part of faith and Religion in general. And thus according
hereto, we find that the Athenians, who were Heathens (though they did err
touching the particular object herein, as worshipping false Gods) were most
cautelous, that no one point should be infringed or violated touching the
worshipping of their Gods. The like religious severity was practiced by the
Jews, as Josephus Cont. Apion.
witnesses. And God himself even in his own written word threatens, that,
Who Apo. 22.
shall either add or diminish to the book of the Apocalips, written by the
Evangelist, from him he will take away his part out of the book of life. Now
if such danger be threatened for adding to, or taking from more or less, the^
was set down by the Evangelist in this one book, how can then both the
Catholics and Protestants have their names written in the book of life? Since
it is certain and granted on all sides, that either the Catholic adds more
to the faith of Christ, then was by him instituted, or the Protestant takes
from the said faith diverse articles, which Christ and his Apostles did teach.
But to return to our former reason: From all this, we deduce, that no points of
true Religion, are of such cold indiffere^cy, as that they are not much to be
regarded, or that they may be maintained co^trarywayes by contrary spirits,
without any danger to man's salvation; but that they are of that nature, worth,
and dignity, as a man is to undergo all torments, yea death it self, before he
yeald, or suffer the least relapse in denying any of the said verityes.

6. The sixth and last reason, to prove that the maintayning of false doctrins
now questioned between the Christians of these times, are most prejudicial and
hurtful to the obtaining of our heavenly bliss, wherein at this time I will
insist, may be taken from the consideration of the different effects, which the
contrary doctrines between the Catholics and the Protestants produce in man's
soul, touching the exercising of virtue or vice: since most undoubted it is,
that the believing of such opinions which of their own nature do impel, and as
it were violently draw the soul to vice, loosenes, and impurity of manners and
conversation, cannot stand with the hope of eternal happiness. And the chief
reason hereof (besides others) is this, in that the will, which is the seat of
virtue or vice, does necessarily and irresistably work, as the understanding
(in which reside faith and all false doctrines) does dictate to the will: now
then the understanding being infected with heresies, te^ding directly to the
pla^ting of vice eradicating of all virtue in the soul, it of necessity
follweth, that the will must work and exercise it self according to those
false principles, which the understanding suggesteth to the will for true, and
that with the greater facility, in regard of the prones of man's nature (through
our first Parents fall) inclined to liberty, pleasure, and sensuality. But
because the subject of this reason is a lardge field wherein to walk, and the
truth thereof is to appear by several instances, drawn from diverse particular
doctrines, maintained at this present by the Protestants, and all breathing
nothing, but vice, dissolution, and all turpitude in manners; therefore I will
reserve the next ensuing chapter, for the fuller manifestation of the truth in
this point.

The same proved from the different effects of virtue, and vice, which
Catholic and Protestant Religion do cause in their Professors. CHAP. X.
THE first doctrine of this nature, wherein we will insist, maintained by the
Protestants, and denied by the Catholics, is the impossibility of keeping Gods
commandments. According heereto Luther says: The Ser. de Moise.
ten commandments appertain not to Christians. With whom Fox conspireth in
these words: The Act. mon. page 1335.
ten Commandments were given not to do them, but to know our damnation, and to
call for mercy to God. As also D. Willet, saying: The In sinops. Papism. page
564.
law remains still impossible to be kept by us, through the weakness of our
flesh; neither does God give us ability to keep it, but Christ has fullfilled
it for us. And finally D. Whitaker in that sentence of his: Qui Cont. Camp.
cat. 8. p. 153.
credunt, ij non sunt sub lege, sed sub gratia; Quid plura? Christiani
execratione legis liberantur. They, who believe, are not under the law, but
under grace. What more in this point is to be said? Christians are freed from
the curse of the law. Now then if Christians be freed from the curse of keeping
the law (wherein the ten commandments are contained) how can the breach of them
be any way hurtefull to the violatours of them? And if the comandments were
neither given us to keep, nor we have power to keep them, why should the
theife forbear to steal, or the homicide to commit murder? Who sees not how
this doctrine discourageth a man from living virtuously, by brideling his
unruly and sensual desires?

2. Secondly touching Chastity, the Protestants teach that Chastity is not in
our power. And hence it is, that Luther thus writes: It is Tom. 5. Witte^.
sermon. de matrim.
not in our power to be without a woman etc. It is not in our power, that it
should be stayed or omitted, but it is as necessary, as to eat, drink, purge,
make clean the nose etc. To whom (omitting all others for greater breuity) M.
Perkins subscribeth saying: The vow In his reformed Catholic page 161.
of continency, is not in the power of him, that voweth. Now this doctrine
being embraced for true, how forcibly does it inuit (or rather impell) all
people unmarried (either men or women) to satisfy their lust by their own
incontinent lives? In like sort, what great encouragement does it give to
married persons to violate the band of matrimony, when either of the persons
through absence, or long sickness, or some other sudden and accidental
impotency, cannot render the debt of matrimony? And the parties thus sinning,
either married or unmarried being expostulated and chardged with their offense
therein, may they not justly reply in excuse of them selves, that they are not
to be blamed or rebuked for their incontinency, seeing by their own doctrine
and Religion they are expresely taught that they have not the gift of
Chastity, and that it is not in their power, to live chastely and continently.

3. Thirdly, the Protestants doctrine of venial and mortal sin does
wounderfully extenuate and lessen the atrocity and malice of sin in the
believers of that doctrine. For the Protestants do teach, that there is no such
difference of sins in themselves, but that the most grievous sins
whatsoever, being committed by any one, that has true faith, are but venial;
and their reason therefore is, because in their doctrine, no sins are imputed
to such, who have true faith. De eccl. co^tra Bellarm. contro. 2. q. 5. page
301.
Thus accordingly D. VVhitakers teaches: Si quis actum fidei habet, ei peccata
non nocent. Sin is not hurtefull to him, who actually believes: who did
learn this of his graund Master Luther, who writing of this point, says: No
Luth. in his ser. englished and printed anno 1578. p. 176.
work is disallowed of God, unless the author thereof be disallowed before. All
which being granted as true doctrine, it must needs follow, that who so shall
take himself to be one of these faithful (as every Protestant is bound by his
own Religion to believe of himself) shall make small account of omitting any
sin; considering he is taught by the former doctrine to believe, that (to use
the words of one of their own Masters:) Sin Wotton in his answer to the
late popish articles page 92.
is pardoned him, as soon as it is committed.

4. The Protestants doctrine of Reprobation, and denial of Freewill, mightily
disanimateth and discourageth the believers thereof, from embracing of virtue,
and eschewing of sin; for if it be true (as this their doctrine suggesteth)
that some men are borne, even from their mothers womb, without any reference
to their works, reprobates, or thrall to eternal damnation, and cannot be
saved, to what end should they seek their own salvation, by a true faith,
avoiding of sin, and the practicing of a penitential, and virtuous life? Or
if we have not Freewill, with the concurrency of Gods grace to do well (as the
former doctrine instructs us) why should we bend our best endeauours, to
embrace virtue and to fly all vice; since it is not in our power (according
to the Protestants faith) to exercise the one, and to fly the other?

5. To this may be adjoined the Protestants like doctrine of Predestination,
and their supposed certainty of salvation: for admit, that men be predestined
to heaven without any respect or reference to their works, or lives, and that
do what wickedness they can imagine, yet certain it is, that they shall be
saved; is not this doctrine most potent and forcible, to dissuade all the
believers thereof, from exercising an austere pious, and Religious life, and to
engulfe themselves in all kinds of enormityes and sins; and the rather,
considering how precipitious and headlong man's nature is to sin, and to
decline all rigorous and exemplar courses of virtue; especially if so the case
stands, that man can neither advantage or hurt himself by any such different
manners of life. Now that by the Protestants doctrine, no sin can endanger
the predestinate, in regard of their certainty of salvation, appears.
Answearably heereto we find Doctor Fulke to say of David's Adultery: David In
his tower dispute with Edmund Ca^p. the 2. days conference.
when he committed adultery, was, and remained the child of God. And Beza
himself to the like purpose, thus writteth thereof: David In respons. ad
colloq. Mon^^^. part a^tera page 73.
by his Adultery and murder, did not loose the Holy Ghost. So powerfully do
these their positions incline men, to satisfy their desires, in all vice,
impiety, and sensuality.

6. Touching the Protestants doctrine of Justification by Faith only, which
potentially includes diverse of the other points here set down, and which
position of its own nature, excludes from Justification all works, how
virtuous, meritorious and pious soever, we find the Protestants thus to say;
Luther speaking hereof, bursteth forth with wounderfull rashness, saying: Fides
Concione 4. in ca. 21. Luc.
nisi sit sine etc. Unless faith be without the least good works, it does not
justify; nay it is no faith. That justification by faith only extinguisheth al
exercise of virtue, is justified not only by experience of these days, but
also by the acknowledgement even of some learned Protestants; for thus
Iacobus Andreas (a famous Protestant) complaining and disliking of this
doctrine, writes: A serious and Christian discipline is censured with us as a
new Papacy, and a new Monachisme: they say we have now learned to be saved, by
only faith in Christ etc. We cannot satisfy by our fasting, prayer, etc.
therefore permit, that we may give over these, seeing we may be saved
otherwise, by the only grace of God. And to the end (says this Author further)
that all the world may know they be no Papists, nor trust in good works, they
take a course to put none in practice. With whose true judgment herein M.
Stubbs an english Protestant seems to conspire, saying: The In his motive to
good works printed 1566 page 42.
Protestant trusts to be saved by a bare and naked faith (deceauing himself)
without good works, and therefore either cares not for them, or at least
sets little by them. And thus far touching good works, wholely exiled and
banished by the doctrine of Justification by faith only. Now that this doctrine
of Justification by faith only does incorporate (as it were) within it self,
and admit all kind of sins, appears no less from the frequent
acknowledgement of the learned Protestants. And first Luther thus writes
hereof: A Tom. 2. Witte^. de capt. babil. fol. 74.
Christian baptized is so rich, that Vbi supra.
although he would, he cannot loose his salvation, by any sin, how great
soever, unless he will not believe. And further in another place: As nothing
Luth. in loc. comm. class. 5. c. 27.
iustifyeth, but belief; so nothing sins but unbelief. To which doctrine
D. Whitaker (as above is showed) accords saying. Sins Vbi supra.
are not hurtful to him, that believes. And thus much now touching the
doctrine of Iustficatio^ by faith, where we see even by the confession of the
Protestants, that this doctrine preuayleth in the Professors of it, no less
for committing of all sin and iniquity; then for the expelling and banishing
away of all good works, virtue and devotion.

7. Touching the Protestants particular doctrines of Fasting, Voluntary
poverty, and Chastity or Virginity. And first of Fasting. M. Perkins teaches
thus: Fasting In his reformed Catholic page 220
in it self, is but a thing indifferent, as is eating or drinking. With whom
conspireth D. Willet in more full terms, saying: Neither In synops. p. 243.
is God better worshipped by eating, or not eating.

8. Voluntary poverty is so debased by the Protestants doctrine, as that the
foresaid Doctor Willet thus teaches hereof: He In synops. page 245.
is an ennemy to the glory of God, who changes his rich estate, wherein he
may serve God, for a poor: so contrary is he to the judgment of our Savior,
Matthew, 10. saying: If (x) thou will be perfect, go sell thy substance, and give
to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven.

9. Lastly, touching single life in comparison with marriage, Master Luther
thus says: We Tom. 5. Witte^. in exeg. ad cap. 7. 1. Cor. f. 107.
conclude, that marriage is as gould, and spiritual, or single life as dunge.
And Doctor Whitaker likewise teaches thereof in this manner, saying:
Virginity is not simply good, but after a certain manner; it is never better
then Co^t. Campia. rat. 8.
marriage, but in regard of the circumstance, that is, of the troubles
accompanying mariadge. Now I here demand with what encouragment can any man
go about to practice these foresaid virtues of fasting, voluntary poverty, and
perpetual virginity, if he be firmly and inwardely persuaded, that the
Protestants former positions, and doctrines touching the said virtues, be
true, and agreeable to Christ's sacred institutions? But to hasten to an end in
this matter, I will conclude with the Protestants doctrine touching Purgatory,
and Confession of sins.

10. Concerning Confession of sins, it is found by experience, that (besides
the first institution thereof by Christ, Matthew. 18. Joan. 20.) a man is much
deterred from sinning, through the shame that he is to endure, by confessing
his most secret sins to a Priest; as on the contrary, it much enboldeneth one
to sin, if he be fully persuaded by his own Religion, that confession of
them unto God alone, is sufficient.

11. Touching the doctrine of Purgatory, how does the denial of this doctrine
open the sluice to all liberty? And concerning Justice, it takes away all
restitution of things wrongfully detayned; since by the Protestants doctrine
teaching, that no temporal punishment remains for sin once remitted, all
satisfaction for wrongs, and for committing of former sins, and al
mortification of body and soul, are needles; and finally, this doctrine freeth
a man from all fear of suffering any punishment after this life; and this
under color, that Christ has satisfied for the sins of the whole world: by
which reason, we may as well say, that we need not to pray at all, since
Christ in the time of his passion, prayed for all. But now to cast our eyes
back upon the foresaid doctrines, if all the different opinions of faith in
Controversies, between the Catholics and the Protestants, were merely
speculatiue, without any reference to the virtuous or vicious working and
operation of the will, derived from them, then with some show of reason, in a
vulgar judgment, it might be auerred, that (supposing they touch not the
Christian faith) they might either affirmatively or negatiuely be houlden
without all danger of salvation: such were the heresies of See hereafter S.
Austin here is. 43.
Origin, teaching that the Devils in the end of the world should be saved, of
S. Cyprian touching rebaptization, and diverse such like; for the maintaining of
which points either way, the will (in respect of any external working or
operation drawn from thence) can suck no poison. But the case is far
different in the former doctrines set down, for we find, that the said
doctrines, which breath nothing but dissolution and all turpitude of manners
even in speculation, must forcibly and immediately touch the pulse of the will;
the will necessarily beating and indeed breaking out into outward actions of
vice and liberty, according as it remaynes infected with the contagion and
poison of the former doctrinall speculations; Well then, this upon necessary
inference being granted, so as forcible working, effect, force, and operation
of the said doctrines are in the will, nothing but liberty, disolution of
manners, improbity, sensuality, and sin, I refer to the judgment of any
man, whether the said doctrines be but points of indiferency, or no, and may
be defended and believed either way, without prejudice to the beleiuers true
faith, and danger to his Salvation, as our formalists do auerre. For can it
possibly be conceived, that these doctrines should be reputed indifferent to
man's salvation, or in themselves true, which (as is proved) forcibly impell the
will to all kind of vice, against which, God has thundered out such dreadful
threats, as where it is said: Psalm. 91. All they that work iniquity shall be
confounded. And again Ecclesiast. 40 Death, blood, contention, edge of
sword, oppression, hunger, contrition, which, are created for sinners. And
further Psalm. 9.10. God shall reign snares of fire upon sinners, brimstone,
with tempestuous winds, shall be the portion of their cup. And heereto I
adioyne even the acknowledgeme^t of Protestants themselves, who confess that
the lives of the Catholics, are commonly of a more virtuous and better
edification, then the lives of Protestants, who by their own confessions lie
groueling in all sensuality; for even Luther thus says heerof: When Dominica
26. post Trinitatem.
we were seduced by the Pope, every man did willingly follow good works, and
now every man neither says, nor knows any thing, but how to get all to
himself, by exaction, pillage, theft, lying, usury etc. To which Confession
(to omit diverse others) Musculus a forward Protestant subscribeth saying: Vt In
loc. com. cap. de Decal. in expla. ^e^tij precepti.
verum est fateor etc. That I may confess the truth herein, they are become so
unlike unto themselves, that whereas in the Papacy they were Religious in their
errors and superstition, now in the light of the known truth, they are more
profane etc. then the very sons of the world. Which disparity of lives and
conversation, cannot be justly ascribed to any other cause, then in that the
Protestants were ready to put in practice, what before they have learned by
speculation of their own doctrines: Which point then being thus, I mean that
the doctrines of the Protestants do depresse virtue, and blandish,
countenance, and elate vice, and that thereupon the lives of the Protestants (by
confession of themselves) and to the disedifying of their followers, are become
actually far worse and less virtuous, then the lives of the Catholics, I
here demand, how it can be warranted with any show of reason, that these
doctrines of the Protestants begetting so great a change from virtue to vice in
their professors, can be reputed, but as points of indifferency? Or that men
believing them, practicing them in their conversation, and finally dying in
them, can be saved? so contrary it is to our Saviors precept: Mat. 1^.
If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.

The same proved from the fearful deaths of the first preachers of
Protestancy. CHAP. XI.
IN this next place we will briefly take a suruay of the particular deaths of
some few of the chiefest Protestants, who have been the first sta^pers and
broachers of the Controuersyes between the Catholics and the Protestants; and
then we will leave to the judgment of others, whether those kinds of deaths do
befall (in Gods accustomed proceeding) to men, who first did set on foot, and
maintained such points and positions of Religion, as that either the believing,
or not believing of them, may well comport and stand together with man's
salvation.

2. To begin then with Luther, omitting to speak either of his vicious life,
or of the lives of others hereafter set down, though confessed, and displayed
for such by many of their own brethren. Cochlaeus in vita Lutheri.
It is certain, that Luther Gualterus in Apologia pro Zuinglio.
dyed very suddenly; for when at supper being in good health, he had daintily
fed upon great variety of meats, and entertained his guests then with him,
with witty (but dissolute) discourses, the very same night he dyed. Zuinglius
was slain in the wars in Germany undertaken for Religion only against the
Catholics, in which Carres he dyed not as a preacher, but as a warrior, and
dyed in the field; and yet in such sort, that Gualterus an earnest Protestant
says thus of him: Nostri Gualterus in Apologia pro Zuinglio.
illi etc. Diverse of us are not ashamed to pronounce Zuinglius to have dyed in
sin, and therefore to have dyed the son of hell. Oecolampadius Cochlaeus in
actis Lutheri.
(reputed Bishop of Basil, where he lies buried) and a man most forward in
spreading the points of Protestancy, went helthfull to bed, but was found by
his wife in the morning dead in his bed. Andreas Corolstadius, an In ep. de
morte Carolstadij.
eminent Protestant, and a great aduancer of the supposed Ghospel, was killed
by the Devil, as certain Ministers even of Basil do justify: Iacobus Andreas
a famous Luthera^, and in other points an earnest Protestant, lived and dyed
(as Hospinian Hosp. in histor. sacram. part. 2. fol. 389.
the Protestant writes) As if he had had no God, but Mammon, and Bacchus; he
never praying, neither going to bed, nor rising from thence. And further
says, that in the residue of his life, he showed no godliness. To conclude
Calvin (the refyner of all Protestancy, and chief supporter of all
controuerted points against Catholics) dyed being consumed with lice and
worms, extremely blaspheming against God, of whose death, Conradus
Schlussenburge (a famous Protestant) thus writteth. Deus In Theolog. Caluinis.
l. 1. f. 72.
manu sua potenti etc. God with his mighty hand, did visit Calvin, for he
despaired of his salvation, called upon the Devils, and gave up his soul
swearing and blaspheming: Calvin dyed being eaten away with lice; for they so
bred about his privy members, that none about him could endure the stench, and
smell. Thus far the foresaid Protestant.

3. Now then, seeing all these men believed all the fundamental points of
Christian Religion as the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion etc. seeing
also they were the most principal men, that first introduced and after
disseminated Protestancy throughout the world, spending their whole lives in
spreading and defending the same by their writings. Finally seeing God did cut
them off by such most miserable, calamitous, and prodigious deaths (which is to
be feared were but presages of the eternal deaths of their souls) who can
otherways be persuaded, but that all this was wrought by the just hand of God?
Not so much for their personal sins proceeding of humane frailty, (for there
were, many others, as great sinners as they, who have escaped such dreadful
ends) but for their first inue^ting maintaining, and preaching of the
Protestant faith and Religion; and infecting all countries with such their
false and sensual doctrines: which being granted, how then can it with any
touch of reason be supposed, that the positions of Protestancy, impugned by
the Catholics, should contain nothing but matters of indifferency? Or that a
man, whether he believe them, or not believe them, may alike and indifferently
be saved?

The same proved from the doctrine of Recusancy, taught by Catholics and
Protestants. CHAP. XII.
I Have thought good to draw another argument from the common taught and
approved doctrine of Recusancy in every Religion, though this head may seem to
have a special reference, to the reason above touched, and in part be therein
implicitly included, wherein is showed, that nature her self has imprinted,
in the professors of all Religions, a religious care punctually to keep and
preserve every article of their Religion both in belief and practice. Now here
we are to premonish, that if in the judgment of all learned men (both
Catholics and Protestants) it is thought an action most wicked and unlawful,
and not to be performed, but (without final repentance) under pain of
eternal damnation, that a man should communicate only in going to the Church
and to hear but a sermon, contrary to that Religion, which himself beleiueth
to be true; though this may seem to be colored under pretense of observing
the Princes commandments, and for fear of loosing our temporal estates; I
say, if this action be thought unlawful, wherein nevertheless the performers
thereof do punctually undertake, not to maintain or to believe any one
heretical or erroneous position; how then can it be reputed, as consonant to
reason, that men beleiuing different opinions of faith and promiscuously
communicating in prayer, with a contrary Religion to their own, should
neuerthesse all be saved? since the first fault consists (as some would
interpret though falsely) only in an external and material (as the schoolmen
speak) going to the Church of a different Religion, whereas the others do
directly and openly sin in defending articles of Religion, contrary to the
truth of Christian Religion; for such is the case herein, either of Catholics
or protestants.

2. Now that this kind of going to Church of a different Religion is wholely
condemned, as most unlawful and wicked, I first prove from the judgments of
the Protestants; secondly from the resolutions of the Catholics. And to begin
with the Protestants, we find this kind of Recusancy (I mean to be present at
the sermons or prayers of a different Religion) is taught by De vitandis
superstitio. extant in tract. Theolog. p. 584.
Calvin, by the Alleged by Sleydan in com. englished l. 7. f. 87.
Deuines of Germany, by In council. Theol. p. 628.
Melancthon, by In his discourse hereof recited in Melanct. treatise de council.
Theolog. pa. 934. and 635.
Peter Martyr, and finally (to omit others) by D. Willet, In synops. printed
1600. p. 612. and 613. etc.
who for the better fortifying and warranting of the said opinion, produces
his testimonies from the authorityes of Latimer, Bradford, Philpot, Ridley, and
others, diverse, of which according to this their doctrine, suffered death in
Queen Mary's time, as appears out of Foxes acts and Monuments. And thus much
for the Protestants. That the Catholics do with the like or greater fervor,
teach, and practice this recusancy, is clear by the example in our own
Country, where since Protestancy was first planted, many stores of venerable
and learned Priests have chosen rather to suffer death, then they would change
their Religion, or go once to the Protestants Church; their lives being
commonly proferred them, if so they would conform themselves, and leave their
recusancy. In like sort, many hundred of the laity pay yearly great sommes of
money for their recusancy; diverse of them enduring further oppressions,
disgraces, and imprisonement only for the same cause, through the rigor,
malice, and covetousness of subordinat Magistrates; his majesty (whose clemency
is most remarkable, and whom God long preserve in his government over us)
being herein mightily wronged, through the false and most injurious
informations of their adversaries.

3. Now that the doctrine of learned Catholics is answearable to the practice
herein, appears from the frequent testimonies of diverse learned men of the
Catholic Church of this time: yet for greater breuity I will insist in the
authorityes only of three, to wit, Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Bellarmine
(the two late lamps of Gods Church) and of Mutius Vitellescus, then but
Provincial, now General and head of the order of the Jesuits dispersed
throughout all Christendom. For some years past their judgments being
demanded, whether the Catholics of England, for the saving of their goods,
livings, and liberty, might go to the Protestant Church, or not to hear a
sermon, though otherwise they did not communicate in prayers and sacraments
with the Protestants, these three learned and holy men (besides diverse others
most eminent Doctors and writers, whom I here omit) did give their negative
sentence therein, whose particular words in latin, I have thought good here
to set down.

The judgment of Cardinal Baronius.
Visis and consideratis, quae superius diligenti peruestigatione in vtramque
partem disputata, reiectis omnino and exsufflatis, quae pro part affirmatiua
fuere proposita, quod scilicet liceret Catholicis adire Ecclesias Haereticorum,
vt superius sunt proposita, inhaeremus saniori sententiae posteriori, ab
Ecclesia Catholica antiquitus receptae, and vsu probatae; quod scilicet ita
facere pijs non liceat, quam rogo nostros Catholicos Anglos amplecti ex animo.

Caesar Card. Baronius tituli SS. Nerei and Achillei Presb.

I having seen and considered (meaning in the question of English Catholics
going to the Church) al these points which have been disputed of on both
sides, but rejecting and wholely abandoning all the reasons alleged for the
affirmative part (to wit, to prove, that it was lawful for Catholics, to go
to the Church of Heretics) I do adhere to the more sound and later opinion,
which anciently was received of the Catholic Church, and allowed by use and
custom. That is, that it is not lawful for pious and godly men so to do, and
I entreat and desire all our English Catholics, to embrace this my opinion
and judgment.

Caesar Cardinal Baronius Priest of the title of the Church of S. Nereus and
Achilleus.

The judgment of Cardinal Bellarmine.
Consideratis rationibus pro vtraque part allatis, existimo non licere viris
Catholicis in Anglia Haereticorum adire Ecclesias, multo minus concionibus
ipsorum interesse; minime autem omnium cum ipsis in praecibus vel psalmodia,
alijsque ipsorum Ecclesiasticis ritibus co^uenire. Ideo propria manu subscripsi.

Robertus Bellarminus Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Presbiter, Cardinal. tit.
Sanctae Mariae in via.

Thus in English: The reasons brought upon both sides considered (to wit,
touching the lawfullnes or vnlawfullnes of the English Catholics going to the
Protestants church) I am persuaded, that it is not lawful for English
Catholics to go to the Church of Heretics; much less to be present at their
sermons, but least of al to communicate with them in prayers or singing of
psalms, and other their Ecclesiastical rites and customs. And therefore this
my judgment heerin, I have subscribed with my own hand.

Robert Bellarmine Priest and Cardinal of the holy Roman Church of the title
of Sanctae Mariae in via.

The sentence of Mutius Vitellescus, then Provincial, now general and head of
the order of the Jesuits.
Vidi rations, quae in hoc scripto pro vtraque part afferunt, and existimo
non licere viris Catholicis in Anglia, Ecclesias Haereticorum adire etc. and
puto hoc debere esse extra conuersiam.

Mutius Vitellescus Prouincialis Romans Societatis Jesus.

In English: I have seen the reasons, which are alleged in this book or
writing on both parts (touching the going, or not going to the Protestants
church) and I am of opinion, that it is not lawful for Catholics in England
to go to the churches of Heretics. And I am persuaded, that this point ought
to be out of all controversy.

Mutius Vitellescus Provincial of the Society of Jesus in Rome.

4. And thus far touching the sentences of these three learned men, delivered
in warranting the doctrine of recusancy in Catholics. Now to turn our eye
upon the premises; if the going to the Church of another Religion, only for
avoiding of temporal losses, and but to hear a sermon of the said Religion,
be to be accounted a sin, not to be done under pain of damnation, as being
presumed to be an external conformity to a false Religion (as by all the
former testimonies above alleged is plentifully proved) though the party so
offending, may perhaps believe al points truly of Christian Religion; with what
reason the^ can it be warranted, that both Catholics and Protestants
conspiring only in the fundame^tal points of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion
etc. but differing mainly in all other points of Religion, yet nevertheless
promiscuously communicating one with another in prayers and the Sacraments, can
all jointly be saved? And the rather, seeing that both sides teaching contrary
and irreconciliable doctrines, touching Freewil, Purgatory, Praying to Saints
etc. It must needs follow, that the one part defends not matters of
indifferency (as is commonly supposed) but iniustifiable errors, or rather (to
speak as the truth is) manifest and gross heresy.

The same proved from the writings of Catholics and Protestants, wherein they
reciprocally charge one another with heresy. As also from the Insurrections,
wars, and Rebellions originally undertaken only for Religion. CHAP. XIII.
IF there were no other reason to be alleged in disprouffe and confutation of
this plurality of Religions (so to term it) then this following, it might
seem fully preuayling in all clear judgments, not wholely darkened with the
mist of earthly and temporal respects: First the wonderful and ireconcileable
booke-warrs between Catholics and Protestants, wholely undertaken in defense
of their several Religions: Secondly the pressures and calamities, with which
diverse stats and Countries do afflict other states, as also the Insurrection of
subjects against their natural Princes, only for difference of Religion, not
containing themselves, till they burst out into open hostility and arms, for
defending their own Religion, and subuerting of the others.

2. Touching the first (good God) how many learned men on all sides, since the
first Apostasy of Luther, have spent their whole time and al their serviceable
years in writing, disputing, and preaching in defense of their own Religion,
and impugning of the adversaries; accounting the maintainers and beleiuers
thereof as heretics, and pronouncing eternal damnation against their Religion?
Witnesses hereof are the libraries of all the famous Universities of
Christendom, the Stationers shoppes in all great Cities, and lastly the
yearly Mart of books returned these many years from Franckefort. And is it
possible, that so much pains, travail, and labor of writing, and otherwise
accompanied with so great charges of printing, should be undertaken for
questions only of indifferency, and such as it imports nothing at all,
touching the gayning of Heaven and avoiding of Hell, what a man beleiueth
therein, or of what side he relyeth.

3. Concermig that second point, which is the afflictions, and wars with which
one state, Country, or kingdom do persecute their neighbors, and al
originally and primatiuely for matters of Religion, as also touching the open
Rebellion of the subjects against their lawful Sovereigns, only for the said
occasion. The last threescore years, as also these very times, do give over
lamentable examples heerof. Witnesses of this matter (purposely to forbear the
presidents of our own Country) is Scotland, into which Country Knox, Goodman,
and Bocanan with other their Agents and confederats, first introduced
Protestancy by force and arms; a point so acknowledged, that Doctor Bancroft,
the late pretended Archbishop of Canterbury, as wholely inueighing against such
violent courses, made a book entituling it: Of the proceeding of the Scottishe
Ministres according to the Geneuian rules of reformation.

4. Touching France, who knows not, that for this last fifty years, there
have been always almost open wars between the Kings of France and the
Huguenots (till the last King of France became Catholic) undertaken by the
Huguenots only for Religion? And do not the Cittyes of Rochell, Mont-albons,
Montpelliers with diverse others at this very day, stand out against their King
under pretext of the defense of their Religion and Gospel? The occurences of
this nature of the low Countries, and the Hollanders are no less remarkable;
of whose first taking of arms against their lawful King only for Religion,
Osiander an earnest Protestant thus confesses: They Osian. n Epito. cent. 16.
page 94.
of the low Countries by public writings, renounced all subjection and
obedience to Philippe their Lord and King. And again: When Osian. vhi supra
page 81.
four hundred of them of good respect have sued for liberty of Religion, and
could not prevail, the impatient people stirred up with fury at Antwerpe, and
other places of Holland, Zeland, and Flandres, did throw and break down
Images. But of the proceedings and rebellions of the low Country men against
their King, only for cause of Religion, it is needles to speak further, seeing
it is to well known to all men of understanding, and that most worthy
soldier, Spinola (another Judas Machabaeus of these times) by his heroical
exploits and endeauours even at this very day, seeking to reduce the low
Countries to their former allegiance, does sufficiently proclayme to the world
the truth heerof.

5. I pass over Geneua, which city (as the whole world knows) did first
withdraw it self from the allegiance of their Leideg Lord the Duke of Sauoy,
only by reason that against his will and pleasure, they would profess the
Protestant Religion, and so accordingly to this day, they have made themselves
a state or commonwealth, wholely independent of Sauoy, of which city Doctor
Sutcliffe confessedly writes: in his answer to a certain libe supplicatory
p. 194.
They of Geneua did depose their catholic leidge Lord, and Prince from his
temporal right; albeit he was by right of succession, the temporal Lord and
owner of that city and Territory. In like sort, I pretermit the many like
examples of the commons arysing against their lawful Princes and Magistrates in
Chitraeus in chron. 1593. and 1594.
Sueueland, See heerof Fulke his acknowledgment in his answer to Farnius
declamatio^ p. 35.
Denmark, Osian. in epito. centur. 16. p. 115
Poland, Touching Heluetia or Switherland, changing their Religion by war,
see D. Bancroft in his suruay of the holy pretended discipline p. 13. and
Chrispinus of the state of the Church p. 509.
Germany, and See the acknowledgement of D. Bilson in his true difference part.
3. p. 270. and 273.
Bohemia, and of this last Country, the late and fresh revolt of the subjects
from the Emperors obedience. All which risings, Insurrections, and Rebellions
were originally undertaken only for Religion, and have no doubt since the first
breach of Luther, cost the lives in all places of a million of men, at least,
and have actually deposed and disthroned diverse Kings and Princes of their
estates and territoryes.

6. These things then for their euidency being acknowledged for true and
undeniable, many of which remain as yet fresh in our own memory, of the
nature of which Actions, I will not here dispute. Only I here urge, that it
is more then incredible, that such rebellious deuastation of Countries,
beseiging of cittyes, deposing of Princes, slaughter of many hundred thousands
of men, should be practiced almost throughout al christendom within this last
three score years, only for admitting, or not admitting the differences
between the Protestant and Catholic religion, if both the contrary parties
were not persuaded, that upon the true or false belief of these controversies
in Religion, their souls salvation or damnation for all eternity did depend.
For it is certain, that these contrary parties did agree and conspire, in the
general belief of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, death of our Savior,
and verbally reciting of the Apostles Creed.

The same proved from the Protestants mutually condemning one another of heresy
and for Heretics. CHAP. XIIII.
IF Protestants do maintain, that their different opinions severally houlden
among themselves be heresies, and that the believers of them are for such their
false belief (if so they die therein) not capable of salvation; then a fortiori
may we be bold to pronounce, that the Controversies of faith, between the
Catholics and the Protestants, are not of that middle nature; but that the
opinions and sentences of the one side, are to be reputed for manifest
heresies, and such as cannot stand with man's salvation. This inference is most
necessary, since on all sides it is acknowledged, that there is a far greater
disparity in Religion between the Catholics and the Protestants, then there is
between the Protestants among themselves.

2. Now that the Protestants do hold one another for Heretics, it cannot be
denied. For to insist first in the Controversies touching the real presence,
maintained in their sense by the Lutherans, but denied by the Sacramentaries,
we find that Luther thus writes of the Sacramentaries: We Luth. contr.
articulos Louanieses these. 27. tom. 2.
censure in earnest the Zuinglians, and all the Sacramentaryes for Heretics,
and alienated from the Church of God. And again the same Luther thus writteth:
I do Tom. 7. VVite^. fol. 381.
protest before God and the world, that I do not agree with the Zuinglians, nor
ever will whilst tht world stands, but will have my hands clean from the
blood of those sheep, which these Heretics (mark his words) do drive from
Christ, deceive and kill. And again in the former place: Cursed Vbi supra.
be the charity and concord of the Sacramentaryes, for ever and ever to all
eternity. But Heretics, and men alienated from the Church of God, and which
do kill the sheep of Christ (during such their condition) are not in state of
salvation.

3. Now of Luthers doctrine we find this bitter recriminatio^ used by the
Tigurine Divines, who were Zuinglians or Caluinists: Nos Tigurini tract. 3.
contra suprema^ Lutheri confessionem.
condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam etc. Luther calls us a damnable and
execrable sect, but let him look, that he does not declare himself an
Archeretike, seeing he will not, nor cannot have society with those, that
confess Christ. And Zuinglius thus writteth: Behold Tom. 2. ad respons.
Lutheri.
how Satan endeavors to possess this man, meaning Luther. But to proceed to
other points. Nicolaus Gallus (an eminent Protestant and superintendent at
Ratisbone) thus writes of the contentions between the Protestants themselves:
Non In thesibus and Hypothesibus.
sunt leaves etc. The dissentions, that are among us, are not light, nor of
light matters, but of the greatest articles of Christian doctrine, of the law
and the gospel, of Justification and good works, of the Sacrament and use of
Ceremonies. Conradus Slussenburg (another famous Protestant) alleges Pappus
a Protestant, thus complaining against the Caluinists: Etsi initio In theologia
Caluinist l. 1. art. 28.
de vno tantum articulo etc. Although in the beginning one only article was
called into doubt, notwithstanding the Caluinists are now so far gone, as
they call in doubt, neither few, neither the least articles of Christian
doctrine: for now we dissent from them, touching the omnipotency of God, the
personal union of two natures in Christ's etc.

4. But to come nearer home; the In their mild defense of the silenced
ministers supplication to the court of parlame^t.
Puritans here of England thus complain of the Protestants: Do we vary from
the sincere doctrine of the Scriptures? Nay rather many of them do much more
swerve from the same etc And thus answerably we find, that the Puritans hold
the Bishops of England for Antichristian, whereas the Protestants do teach,
that of necessity Bishops ought to be in the Church of God. Doctor Willet
speaking of diverse opinions taught by the more moderate Protestant, as M.
Hooker, D. Couell and others, thus writes: From In medit. in psalm. 122
this fountain has spronge forth these and other such whirle pooles and
bubbles of new doctrine, as that Christ is not originally God etc. And then
after he thus concludes: Thus have some been bold to teach and write, who as
some Schismatiks (mening herby the Purita^s) have disturbed the peace of the
Church, one way in external matters, concerning discipline, they have troubled
the Church, another way in opposing themselves by new quirkes and devises, to
the soundnes of doctrine among Protestants. M. Parkes in his book dedicated to
the then pretended Archbishop D. Bancroft, thus writes of the proceedings of
some Puritans here in England: They Epist dedic.
are headstronge and hardened in error, they stricke at the maine points of
Faith, shaking the very foundation it self, Heaven and Hell, the divinity and
humanity, yea the very soul and salvation of our Savior himself. And again
more plainly in the former place he says thus: They have pestilent heresies.
And yet more: They are heretical and sacrilegious.

5. To conclude this point of their particular sayings and redargutions heerin,
D. Couell repeating and registring the positions of the Puritans here in
England, In his defense of Hooker ^ 65. and 74. and 75
among other of their positions sets down these following: The statute
Congregations of England, are no true Church, And again: The Protestant church
of England has no form of a Church. Now that all these dissentions among
English Protestants, cannot be interpreted only about ceremonies, or about
government, as some Protestants do answer, Vbi supra.
when they are chardged herewith by the Catholics) the foresaid M. Parkes
plainly and truly confesses the contrary, saying: The Protestants deceive the
world, and make men believe, there is agreement in all substantial points;
They affirm that there is no questions among them of the truth. Now the former
point is furthermore made evident by the reciprocal deportment and demeanor
of Protestants among themselves. For first (besides the chardging one another
with flatt heresy, as is above showed) they do not only prohibit the reading
So Hospinia^ a Protestant witnesses in histor. sacrament. part altera fol.
693.
of each others books; but they also set down articles of visitation for the
inquiry Hospinia^ vbi supra.
and apprehending of such their adversaries, and being apprehended do imprison
Hosp. vbi supra
them; yea further they proceed, not allowing the trauailers so relates
Osiander in Epitom.
of either party, common entertainment, due in all Nations to strangers.
Finally their dissentions are so implacable among them (though all be
Protestants) as that in defense of their several doctrine, they have with
great hostility taken This is showed and exemplifyed by Hospinia^ vbi supra fol
395. and 397. In like sort by Osiander in epitom. cent. 16. page 735.
arms, one against another, as appears by the late memorable example in
Holland of the Arminians and Gomarists, who only for some difference touching
Freewill and Predestination between them, did rise in hostile manner against
their adversaries, and ceased not that course till Barnauille the chief of one
side and faction, was beheaded. All which violences and extremityes, would
never have been undertaken, if their diversity of doctrine (which is the cause
of such and so great exhorbitancies) did consist only in articles indifferent
of themselves, and such as did not concern the necessity of salvation.

6. The foresaid point touching the Protestants dissentions in essential
points of faith, is most clearly manifested, by taking a view of their books,
written one against another (though this method is partly inuolued in the
displaying of their particular sentences and writings above alleged). The
number heerof, amounts to diverse hundreds; yet as desirous to be short and
compendious, I will set down the titles only of twenty of them, even from
which titles the indifferent Reader may judge, whether the authors of them
(being al eminent Protestants) did maintain the subjects of the said books to
be matters of indifferency, and such as may be either way houlden without
breach of that true faith, which is necessary to man's salvation. And here I
will forbear to reckon within this number, any book written only either for,
or against the real presence, maintained by the Lutherans, because herein
they conspire partly with us Catholics, and consequently the controversy
heerin rests, not only between the Protestants themselves, but also between
them and us.

7. First then may be reckoned that book entitled: Oration de incarnatione
filij Dei, contra impios and blasphemos errores Zuinglianorum and
Caluinistarum: printed Tubingae, Anno Domini 1586.

Secondly, Alberti Graueri bellum Ioannis Caluini and Jesus Christi, Brapiae
1598.

Thirdly, Antipeus, hoc est, refutatio venenati scripti a Dauide Pareo editi,
in defensionem Stropharum and corruptelarum, quibus Ioannes Caluinus
illustrissima scripturae testimonia de mysterio Trinitatis, nec non oracula
Prophetarum de Christo detestandum in modum corrupit. Francofurti 1598.

Fourth. Aegidij Hunnij, Caluinus Iudaizans, hoc est, Iudaicae glossae and
corruptelae, quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima scripturae sacrae loca and
testimonia de gloriosa Trinitate, deitate Christi, and Spiritus Sancti, cum
primis autem vaticinia Prophetarum de aduentu Messiae, and natiuitate eius,
Passione, Resurrectione, Ascensione ad caelos, and sessione ad dexteram Dei,
detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruerit. VVittenbergae. 1593

Fifth, Conradi Schlussenburgij Theologiae Caluinisticae libri tres, in quibus,
seu in tabula quadam, quasi ad oculum, plusquam ex ducentis viginti tribus
sacramentariorum publicis scriptis, pagellis, verbis proprijs, and authorum
nominibus indicatis demonstratur, eos de nullo fere Christianae fidei articulo
recte sentire etc. Francofurtae 1594.

Sixth, Pia defensio aduersus Ioannis Caluini, Petri Boquini, Theodori Bezae,
VVillelmi Clebitij etc. and similium calumnias; Item Refutatio Pelagiani seu,
Anabaptistici, Caluinistarum erroris de baptismo and peccato originali.
Adduntur collectanea plurimorum Caluini contra Deum, eiusque prouidentiam and
praedestinationem. Effordiae 1583.

Seventh, Demonstratio imposturarum ac fraudu^, quibus Aegidius Hunnius
Ecclesiae orthodoxae doctrinam petulanter corrumpere pergit. Bremae 1592.

Eight, Argumentorum and obiectorum, de precipuis articulis doctrinae
christianae cum responsionibus, quae sunt collectae ex scriptis Philippi
Melancthonis, additis scholijs illustrantibus vsum singularum responsionum,
parts septem. Neapoli 1578.

Ninth, Gulielmi Zepperi Dillenbergensis Ecclesia Pastoris institutio, de
tribus Religionis summis capitibus, quae inter Euangelicos in Controuersiam
vocantur. Hannoniae. 1596.

Tenth, Responsio triplex ad fratres Tubingenses, and triplex eorum scriptum,
de tribus grauissimis questionibus, de coena Domini, de maiestate hominis
Christi, and de non damnandis Ecclesijs Dei, nec auditis nec vocatis: Geneuae.
1582.

Eleventh, Ad Ioannis Brentij argumenta, and Iacobi Andreae theses, quibus
carnis Christi omnipresentiam nituntur confirmare; id est aduersum renouatos
Nestorij and Eutichetis errores responsum. Geneuae. 1570.

Twelueth, Apologia ad omnes Germaniae Ecclesias reformatas quae sub Zuingliani
and Caluiniani nominis inuidiae vim and iniuriam patiuntur, Tiguri 1578

Thirteen, Christophori Pezelij Apologia verae doctrinae de definitione
Euangelij, apposita thrasonicis praestigijs Ioannis VVigandi, VVittenbergae.
1572.

Fourteen, Colloquij Montisbelgartensis inter Iacobum Andreae and Theodorum
Bezam, Acta Tubingae 1584.

Fifteen, Veritatis victoria, and ruina papatus Saxonici. Losannae 1563.

Sixteen, Hamelmannia, sieve Aries Theologizans dialogus oppositus duabus
narrationibus historicis. Hermani Hamelmanni, Neostadij 1582,

Seauenteene, Christiani Kittelmani december graves and perniciosi errores
Zuinglianorum in doctrina de peccatis, and Baptismo, ex proprijs ipsorum libris
collecti and refutati, Madelburg. 1592.

Eighteen, Ioannis Mosellani praeseruatiua contra venenum Zuinglianorum,
Tubingae 1586.

Ninteene, Responsio ad scriptum, quod Theologi Bremenses aduersus collectores
Apologiae formulae concordiae publicarunt. Lipsiae 1585.

Twenty, Hieremiae Victoris vera and dilucida demonstratio, quod Zuingliani and
Caluinistae, numqua^ se subiecerunt confessioni Augustanae, exhibitae Carolo
quinto, anno 1530. Germ. Francofurti 1591. And thus much of the titles of
Protestants books, written one against another.

8. Now from all the former premises above set down, I here conclude, that if
the several opinions and doctrines among the Protestants themselves be not in
their own judgments, matters of Indifferency; but are by themselves truly
reputed for Heresies, and the maintayners of them not houlden to be in state of
Salvation, but accounted branded Heretics; then with much more reason may the
same sentence be pronounced, touching the maine irreconcitiable Controversies,
differently believed and houlden by the Catholics and Protestants; and the
rather since (as it is above said) there is a far greater difference of
doctrine between the Catholic and the Protestant, then between the
Protestant and the Protestant.

The truth of the former doctrine proved from the many absurdityes, necessarily
accompanying the contrary doctrine. CHAP. XV.
SVCH is the sweet providence of the divine majesty in the disposal of things,
as that he ever causes truth to be warranted with many irrefragable reasons,
and falsehood to be attended on with diverse gross absurdities; that so the
judgment of men may the better be secured, for the embracing of truth, and
remain the less excusable, if in place of truth it entertaineth falsehood and
error. Of the reasons conuincing the infallible truth of our doctrine
maintained in this treatise, I have already discussed above in the ninth
chapter: now here I will a little insist, in displaying the many and palpable
absurdities accompanying the contrary doctrine, which point will chiefly rest
(besides some other short insertions) in a recapitulation of most of the former
heads or branches, above handled. For if this doctrine were true, that every
one might be saved in his own Religion, or that the belief only of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion, and the Creed, were sufficient thereto,
notwithstanding the belief of other erroneous opinions and heresies; then
would it follow: first, that the holy scriptures of Christ and his Apostles,
were most false, which have inueighed so much against heresies, and has
denounced the heavy judgment of damnation against the professors of them, as
above is showed, which comminations and threats the scripture in some places,
not only extends to all heresy and Heretics in general without any Epist.
ad Titu^. cap 3. Galat ^. 5. Romans c. 16.1. ad Tim. 1.
limitation; but also in some other texts, they are particulerly restrained,
even to certain heresies of far smaller importance, then the denial of the
Trinity, the Incarnation, the passion, the Creed are, as is evident, touching
the denying of 1. Tim c. 4. 2. ad Tim. c. 2. 1. Joan. cap. 2
mariadge, of eating certain meats, and touching the nature of Christ. Now
that the denial of other inferior articls of faith then of the Trinity,
Incarnation, etc. is plain Heresy, is demonstrated above, both from the
definition of Heresy, and from the judgment of the primitive Church.

2. Secondly, the foresaid doctrine of our Newtralists, impugneth vt supra.
the definition of faith given by the Apostle, which definition of faith,
comprehends a general belief of all articles of Christian Religion, Heb.
cap. 11.
and is not therefore to be restrained to any one kind of them.

3. In like sort it destroys the privileges, and dignityes of faith, set
down by the foresaid Apostles, who Matt. vltim. and Hebr. 11.
promises salvation to him, who has faith, as also affirms, That without
faith, we cannot please Ephesians. 4. Act. 4. Romans 12.
God; but such excellencyes cannot be ascribed to a mungrill faith, which
believes somethings true, other false: they are therefore to be given, to a
true, entire, and perfect faith in all points, or else the Apostle grossly
erred in assigning to faith the foresaid privileges; seeing a false faith is
no better then no faith at all.

4. Again it depriueth Christian faith of its true mark or Character of
Unity, so much celebrated by the Apostle. Now then if unity of faith be
necessary to Salvation, how can both Catholics and Protestants, expect
salvation? Seeing there is no greater distance between the opposite parts of a
Diameter, then there is repugnancy between both their beleifes. And thus if
both them (though wanting this unity) can be saved, then has the Apostle
falsely and erroneously described and delineated the faith of a Christian. But
to reflect upon the former passages; is any man so stupid, as to dream, that
that doctrine should be true, which gives so open a lie to so many
unanswerable texts of Gods holy writ, touching the condemning of Heretics in
general, as also touching the definition, excellency, and propriety of true
faith? It is impossible, it is not to be imagined; Gods word is like himself,
most true, sacred, and inviolable, and therefore it justly witnesses of it
self, that Sriptura Matt. 24.
non potest solui. And again: Coelum and terra transibunt, verba autem mea non
transibunt. Math. 24
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass.

5. But to proceed further touching the foresaid want of unity and
disagreements; if every Christian might be saved in his own Religion, then
might those be saved, which believe the articles of the Creed in a most
different sense and manner, then which, what can be more rashly and
exorbita^tly spoken? For seeing there is but one true intended sense by the
Apostles of the Creed, which if we attain not, then do we believe, that
which is false; but to believe the Creed in a false sense is no better, then
not to believe it at all, as is above said, and therefore it would follow by
way of inference, that he might be saved, who believed not any one article of
the Creed at all. Now that the Catholics and Protestants do believe the
articles of the Creed in different (or rather contrary) senses, (and
consequently that the one side beleiueth it in a false and erroneous sense) is
above proved in the fourth chapter.

6. If it be here replied, that the maintainers of this doctrine do so far
yeald, that they only are to be saved, which in a true sense believe the Creed;
yet by this their restrainct they condemn all those others, which believe it
in any other sense different from that, intended by the Holy Ghost and the
Apostles; and consequently, they condemn in their judgment and deprive of
salvation, either the Catholics or the Protestants; since of necessity, the
one of these do believe the Creed, not in its true sense, but in a false and
heretical sense and construction, different from that of the Apostles.

7. But granting that the Catholics and Protestants believe the Creed, in one
true sense intended by the holy Ghost; yet if our Newtralists would have the
Creed the square or rule, thereby to measure our faith, then mark the
absurdityes following: For by this doctrine one might be saved, who believed 1.
Not that there were any Scriptures at all written by the Prophets and Apostles
(since the Creed makes no mention of any such divine writings.) 2. In like
sort he might be saved, who did not believe, there were any Angels or Devils.
3. Or that there is a material place of Hell. 4. Or that the pains thereof
are eternal. 5. Or that Adam did presently upon his creation fall from grace,
and thereby transported original sin upon all his posterity. 6. Or that our
Savior whilst he conuersed here upon earth, wrought any miracles. 7. Or made
choice of certain men to be his Apostles, to preach the Christian faith
throughout the whole world. 8. Or that Circumsicion is now forbidden and
antiquated. 9. Or that there are any Sacraments of the new testament, as
Baptism, the Eucharist etc. 10. Or that finally before the dissolution of the
world, a designed ennemy of Christ shall come, who is termed Antichrist. I say
by our Newtralists Religion, he should be saved, who believed none of the
foresaid articles, seeing not any one of them is expressed or set down in the
Apostles creed; and yet the belief of the said articles, is necessarily
exacted and required to salvation both in the judgments of the Catholics and
the Protestants, both which parties do with an unanimous consent, teach the
necessity of believing the said articles.

8. But to proceed further, and to come to the different articles of faith,
differently believed by the Catholics and Protestants; and yet not expressed
in the Creed, and articles of such nature, as that they are houlden by the
Catholics to be instituted by our Savior, as subordinate (yet necessary)
means of the grace of God, and of salvation; whereas the Protestants, as not
believing at all the said articles, do wholely disclayme from acknowledging all
such means. These articles I have recited above, to wit, 1. That Sacraments in
general do confer grace. 2. That a child dying without baptism, cannot be
saved. 3. That mortal sin is not remitted without the sacrament of Penance
and confession. 4. That we are to adore with supreme honor the Blessed
Sacrament. 5. That not only faith, but also works do justify man. 6. That a
Christian, by thinking himself to be just, is not thereby become just. 7. That
every Christian has sufficient grace offered by God to save his soul, and
that therefore God on his part would have all men saved. 8. That without
keeping the ten commandments a man cannot be saved. 9. Finally, that all
Christians, ought upon pain of eternal damnation to communicate in sacraments
and doctrine with the church of Rome, and to submit themselves in all due
obedience to the supreme pastor of Gods church. In all which points the
Protestants do believe directly the contrary, condemning us of heresy,
superstition, yea idolatry, for our believing the foresaid points. Now I say,
seeing the former articles do immediately touch and concern either remission of
our sins, or grace of our soul, or our justification, or our due honor
adoration to our Saviors body being accompanied with his divinity, or lastly
our communion with Christ his church, and the head thereof, in any of which (as
concerning so nearely our eternal happiness) who erreth, cannot possibly be
saved.

9. And seeing the Protestants (as is said) do in all the said points maintain
the just contrary to the Catholics, and thereby do abandone the Catholics
acknowledged means of their salvation; I hear ask in all sobernes of
judgment, what can be reputed for a greater absurdity, then to affirm with our
Newtralists, that the Catholics and Protestants (notwithstanding their so
different and contrary belief, and answearble practice in the former articles,
so nearly touching man's salvation) may both be saved? Seeing it must needs be,
that either the Catholics shall be damned for setting down certain means of
our salvation, contrary to Christ's mind and institution (supposing the said
means to be false) or that the Protestants shall be damned for rejecting the
former means of Salvation instituted by Christ, admitting them to be true.

10. But to pass forward: If every Christian might be saved in his Religion,
in believing only the fundamental points of the Trinity, the Incarnation, etc.
then has the Church of Christ even in her primitive days (at what time the
Protestants themselves See of this acknowledgement the defense of the Apology
of England written by Doctor Jewel, Kemnit. in exam. Council. Trid. par. 1. p.
74. the co^fess. of Bohemia in the harmony of confess. page 400. besides diverse
others.
do exempt her from error) most fondly and intollerably erred in condemning
certain opinions (which are not fundamental) for Heresies, and the
maintayners for Heretics; and consequently the scripture, and Christ himself
have deceived us, by ascribing unto the Church, an infallibility Math. 18. Luc.
10.2. Tim. 3.
of erring in her definitions of Faith, and condemnation of heresies, and by
commanding us to obey the churches authority and sentence, in all things, as
stiling her the pillar, and foundation of truth. And further it should follow,
that the Church should thus insufferably err, both in general Counsels, as
also in the private authorities and sentences of all the learned Fathers in the
first times.

11. And thus for example, the Council of the Apostles should have erred, Act.
15.
in decreeing it unlawful to eat in those times blood and strangled meats.
In like sort the first Council of Nice Eusebius. l. 6 hist. c. 33.
should have erred, in condemning the Quartodecimani for heretics, because
they would not keep Easter day, according to the custom of the church. The
council of Rome under Cornelius for condemning the heresy of the Nouatians;
who rejected the Sacrament of Penance, as also for condemning the error of
Anabaptisme. The council Vt patet in act. 2.
of Calchedon, for condemning the Heresy of Eutiches, and for prohibiting the
marriages of Monks, and Virgins; and the first Council of Ephesus Socra. l. 7.
c. 34.
for condemning the heresy of Nestorius; both which Heretics believed in the
most holy Trinity, and acknowledged Christ for their Redeemer. The fourth
council of Carthage Can. 79.
for sententionally decreeing, that prayer and sacrifice for the dead, was
according to the true faith of Chirst, and for pronouncing the denyers thereof
for Heretics. And finally (to omit other Councils) the council of
Constantinople Zonaras in vita Constantini and Nicephorus l. 17. c. 27
should have erred, for condemning the Heresy of Origin, who taught that the
Devils in the end should be saved. And thus far of councels condemning points
of seeming indifferency, for open and wicked heresies.

12. But now granting that the said points as they were houlden by the
maintainers of the^) were not Heresies, and that the beleiuers of them might be
saved, then two maine absurdityes do ineuitably follow. The first is, the
erring of the whole Church of God in condemning them for heresies, they being
not Heresies, but true doctrines, as is said. The second, the inconsiderate
carriadge of the church in these matters: For to what purpose or end, were all
these counsels (consisting of many hundreds of the most grave and Reverend men
of all christendom) celebrated with such labor and travail out of all
countries, and infinite chardges, if the doctrines (for the impugning,
resisting, and condemning whereof they were gathered) might be indifferently
maintained and defended on all sides, without breach of true faith, or danger
of salvation? The erring of the Church is no less manifested in the sentences
and condemnation given by many of the most ancient, famous, and learned Fathers
in the primitive Church (not any one orthodoxall Father contradicting them
therein) against diverse, maintayning opinions, that seem, in (regard or the
Trinity, the Incarnation etc) of small importance; if so these opinions be not
heresies, nor the beleiuers of them Heretics, but men in state of salvation.

13. And thus according hereto Florinus, though he taught God to be the author
of sin, might be saved. In like sort the Heretics, who in S. Hieromes days,
denied the possibility of the Commandments, the Manichees, who denied
Freewill, the Eunomians, who taught that only faith did justify. The Aerians,
who denied prayer and sacrifice for the dead, and took away all fasting-dayes.
Vigilantius, who taught that Priests might marry, and that we ought not pray to
Saints. Iouinian, who held mariadge to be better then virginity; The
Donatists, who taught the inuisibility of the Church. And finally (to omit many
others for breuity sake). The Pelagians, who denied the necessity of Baptism
in Children. All these men (I say) might be saved, notwithstanding the former
doctrines, if so every one might expect salvation in their Religion. And yet we
find, that the foresaid men, were branded for wicked Heretics, and their
doctrines for damnable Heresies (as in the seventh chapter above is showed) by
S. Irenaeus, S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, Philastrius, S. Augustine, Theodoret,
and others; diverse of these holy Fathers writing Catalogues of Heresies, did
place the foresaid doctrines and their authors within the said Catalogues, and
this they did without any reluctation or gainesaying of any other ancient and
learned Father of their times.

14. From which consideration I do gather, that if those opinions were not
justly condemned for heresies, and their authors for Heretics; then not only
the Church did fondly err in so great a matter, but also the aforesaid
alleged Fathers (to wit) S. Irenaeus, S. Hierome, Epiphanius, S. Augustine
with many such others, should deservedly be reputed for Heretics, for their
condemning of true doctrines for heresies, and the believers of them for
heretics; and on the contrary side Florinus, the Maniches, the Eunomians,
Vigilantius, Iouinian, the Donatists, Pelagius, and many other such, should be
accounted for their teaching of true doctrins, orthodoxall Fathers and
authors, and might have justly complained of their insupportable wrongs, and
indignityes proceeding from the pens of the foresaid Fathers: an absurdity,
which I think no man, enjoying the benefit of his five senses, will allow: And
yet the admittance of our Newtralists paradox, inauoydably draws on this
inference.

15. Another absurdity accompanying the former doctrine, is, that Heretics
should be true members of Christ's church. This I deduce. For seeing by the
consent of all learned men, none can be saved, but such as be members of
Christ's Church (for otherwise Turks and Jews dying in that state might be
saved) and seeing the foresaid registered doctrines, and the authors are
condemned for heresies and Heretics, both by the authority of Gods Church, and
according to the true definition of heresy above set down (for the foresaid
Heretics made choice of those their heresies, and did maintain them most
frowardly against the whole Church of God, not submitting their judgments to
it) it must of necessity follow, that if those men could be saved, then
Heretics continuing Heretics, are members of Christ his Church; then which,
what paradox in it self can be accounted more absurd, or in the judgment of
learned men more incredible? Considering with what acerbity of comportement,
the Apostles and all the orthodoxall, learned, and pious Fathers, both in their
writings and otherwise, have in all ages entertained Heretics, as above I have
manifested in the sixth Chapter.

16. Again, supposing the truth of the doctrine of the Omnifidians (as I may
term the^) yet observe how repugnant it is to all reason, and otherwise
absurd even in its own nature. I will here pass over diverse reasons
alleged in the precedent chapter, and insist a little in some few of them.
The first: It is certain, that that faith which belieueth some articls, and
yet belieueth not others, which are no less true (and such is the faith of our
Newtralists) is no true supernatural faith; seeing it believes nothing
thorough the authority of God and his Church, both which reveal and propound
all articles alike and indifferently to al men to be believed. Now what more
cross to reason, then that a bare opinion (not relying upon any supernatural
grounds, as having neither God for its Reuealer, nor the Church for its
propounder) conceived only through moral inducements (and therefore ever
standing obnoxious to error and mistaking) should be able to purchase eternal
salvation to man's soul?

17. Again how adverse is it to all true judgment, to auerre, that it is no
prejudice or hinderance to man's salvation, to believe those principle of
Religion, which teach and advance all liberty and sensuality in conversation
and manners, and do depresse and disparadge all chastity, fasting voluntary
poverty, keeping of the commandments, all rigorous and painful works, and
labors of virtue, piety, and mortification? For it is most contradictory in
the very terms, and no less repugnant to Gods sacred word, that that
doctrine, which transferreth Iud^ verse. 4.
the grace of God into wantonness, should be accounted the Mat. 7. Luc. 13.
strict way, which leads unto life.

18. Furthermore, can it be conceived, as sorting to Gods most merciful
proceeding with man, that he should cut off the lives of those me^ with most
fearful, sudden, and prodigious deaths, who first broached the doctrines of
Protestancy, if the said doctrines had either been true in themselves, or at
least of that coldness or indifferency, as that they might stand with the souls
salvation? No, God is just, and withal merciful; and therefore never
extraordinarily punishes, but for extraordinary sins; poor men that these
were, who compare (as it should seem) both in the diuulging of their
mendacious and lyinge doctrines, as also in their unexpected and sudden death,
with the false Prophets of 3. Regum.
Achab.

9. But to hasten to an end in the ennumeration of the Absurdities, following
the foresaid paradox of salvation in every Religion, and to come to that which
within its own lardgnes inuolueth many improbabilities. For if Catholics and
Protestants (notwithstanding the disparity of their faith) can both attain to
Heaven, in vain then is the doctrine of recusancy taught jointly on both
sides, and in vain have so many sorts of Reverend and learned Priests and
others of the laity in our own Country (whose blessed souls, I beseech to
pray to God daily for the remission of my many sins) suffered cruel deaths in
the late Queens reign, only because they refused to present themselves to the
sermons of the Protestants; but they are gone, and most happily gone, since:
Clauis Tert. de prescr.
Paradisi, sanguis Martyrum. In vain likewise, these later years have diverse
lay persons endured (contrary to his Majesty's natural inclination, most prone
to mercy and commiseration) great losses, disgraces, and imprisonements, only
for the same cause. But who can think, that learned men should be so prodigal
of their lives, and blood; and English Catholics, so insensible of their
temporal states, children, and posterity, as that they would wilfully
precipitate, and cast themselves into those miseries, only for not believing
and exercising points of indifferency, and such as may stand with their souls
eternal happiness? In vain also then have the learned men on both sides, spent
out their whole lives, in defending (each man his own Religion) in their most
paineful and voluminous books and writtings, if so they dissented one from
another in matters of such supposed small importance. Finally in vain and
without just cause (and therefore most cruelly) have many foreign states in
Christendom, imposed proscriptions, bannishments, and other insupportable
disgraces, to such of their own subjects, as will not embrace their own
doctrine and Religion, though both sides did conspire and agree in the
fundamental points of faith. In vain also both in former times, and at this
present have there been and are such Insurrection of subjects against their
Princes; such bloody and implacable wars between absolute Princes
themselves; such deuastation and depopulation of whole Countries, such main
battles and feilds fought with loss of diverse hundred thousands lives; and
lastly such incessant and uninterrupted beseiging and taking of great Cities
and towns with effusion (for the most part) of much innocent blood of weomen
and children; and all this originally and principally for matter of Religion; I
say in vain and most injuriously have all these attempts and actions been
undertaken, if the disagreement in Religion (for which they are undertaken
between Catholics and Protestants) were of that reconcilable nature, as that
the professors on both sides (notwithstanding their diversity of faith) might
jointly be saved.

20. What can we now reply hereto in behalf of our Newtralists? Shall we say,
that the most learned men of all Religions, the Kings, Princes, States, and all
their subjects of all Christendom, were and still are actually madd, and out
of their senses, in managing these their deplorable attemptes for Religion; and
that our all reconciling and peaceable Newtralists (who through his pliable
stern of disposition in these spiritual matters, is become in kindred, as
above is touched, of the half blood with the Atheist, and who is commonly
deprehended to want learning grace, and virtue) is peculiarly enlightened by
God in setting down what articles of faith are only necessary to man's
salvation, and what are to be reputed, but as accessory, and of smaller
importance? To such straites (we see) is the defense of the former doctrine
driven unto. Seeing therefore this doctrine of our Omnifidians, or Nullifidians
(for indeed while they seem to allow all Religions, they take away all
Religion) is encompassed on all sides with so many notorious absurdityes (as
are displayed in this Chapter) and seeing it cannot be true, except there be a
retrogradation of all matters here on earth, and a turning of the world (as
they say) vpside down, that is, except the most learned become most madd, and
the most ignorant, most wise. And except truth in doctrine be necessarily to be
accompanied with infinite gross absurdityes, and error and falsehood
fortifyed and countenaunced with store of proofs both divine and humane, as if
God did purposely lay trappes to ensnare man's judgment. Therefore, since such
comportement and carriage of things, is not suitable and correspondent to Gods
providence and charity toward mankind, let every man (who thinks he has a
soul to save or loose) undoubtedly assure himself, that there is but one true
faith or religion, wherein he may auayleably expect salvation, and that this
faith of Christ, (wherewith the soul is clothed) is like to the inconsutible
garment of Christ, both being incapable of division, renting, or partition.

21. Now for the greater illustration of this point, by way of similitude, and
as tending toward the closure of this treatise. Imagine that a man pretends
right and title to certain lands, and takes advise of all the learned Lawyers
and Counsailours of the whole Realm, to whom he shows all his evidences, of
which some do carry a title only in gross and in general; others prove a more
particular and more restrained right to the said lands; Imagine further, that
upon the diligent perusal of the evidences, the joint consent and judgments of
all the said Lawyers, should after their long and serious demurs, conspire in
this one point, to wit, that for the recovering and obtaining of the said
lands, the foreshewed evidences in general are not only sufficient; seeing
diverse other me^ not having any true interest in the lands, may nevertheless
insist and urge their like general claim; but that with the help of the said
common evidences, he must more punctually rely (for the gayning of his presumed
inheritance) upon other more particular and personal evidences, and
assignements. Now all these learned Counsailours agreeing in this sentence, and
fortifying their judgments herein with their own experience in the like case;
with the new Reports warranting the same; with the authorityes of all the
ancient, learned, and reverend Judges before them; and lastly with the
co^formity of reason confirming no less. If here now some one Emperick
Attorney, or other (skillful only by a little experience, in making a Nouerint
vniuersi etc. should step forth (armed only with impudency and ignorance) and
should pronounce the foresaid sentence of all these learned sages to be false,
and that the party pretending right to the said lands, were sure by his
general title and evidences only to obtain the same; all other his more
particular evidences, being but unnecessary and needless thereto, who might not
justly contemn, and reject the censure of such a fellow? Or could not the
party clayming the foresaid inheritance, be worthily reprehended, if by
abandoning the grave counsel of the learned Lawyers, and following the advice
of this ignorant man, he should finally loose all claim, title, and
possibility to his said inheritance?

22. Our case is here the same. We all pretend right to the inheritance of the
Kingdom of heaven (for we read: Coronam vitae preparauit Dominus diligentibus
se) Our title in general thereto, is our belief in the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Passion etc. (the belief whereof is necessary, but not
sufficient) All eminent men for learning (both Catholics and Protestants) do
prove from the Scriptures; from the authority of Gods Church; from the nature
of heresy; from the definition of true faith, and from diverse other reasons and
principles above expressed, that no man can attain to this heavenly
inheritance, by believing only the former fundamental points of Christianity,
if so he have not (at least implicitly) a true and particular faith of all
other less principal points of Christian Religion. Now comes here a
dissolute, gamnelesse, and left handed fellow, not practiced in any kind of
good literature (for it is observed, that al our most forward Newtralists are
men for the most part void of learning, virtue, and conscience) who
peremptorily out of his Pithagorian chair (that is, without proof) teaches,
that a belief in general of the articles of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Passion, etc. does only necessarily conduce to man's salvation, and that the
doctrines of Purgatory, Freewill, Real presence, and other contouersies
between the Catholics and Protestants, are not in any sort necessary to the
purchasing of our eternal inheritance and well fare; but are to be reputed
(with reference to that end) points indifferent, vnauayleable, needelesse, and
as the greek phrase is: Pareria, or by-matters. Who would not here commiserate
the folly and ignorance of such a man, but especially pity the poor souls
seduced by so blind a guide?

THE CONCLUSION. CHAP. XVI.
HITHERTO, good Reader it is sufficiently, I hope, demonstrated, that every
Religion, though professing the name of Christ, and believing in the Trinity,
the Incarnation, and the like fundamental points of Christian Faith, if their
belief in other secondary and less principal points be erroneous, cannot
promise to it self any security of salvation; and consequently that the
controuerted articles at this day between Catholics and Protestants touching
Purgatory, Freewill, Praying to Saints, Sacrifice etc. are of that great
importance, as that the professors of both sides (to use the phrase of a
Blessed Martyr in the same case) Vnum caelum capere non potest. One heaven
cannot contain. It now remains to show, that seeing at this day there are
originally, but two different religions among Christians, to wit, the Catholic
Religion and the Protestant, (within which is included all its branches and
descendents) whether the Catholic or Protestant Religion is that wherein a man
may be saved: But seeing this subject is most learnedly and painefully
entreated of by many Catholic writers, who from all authorityes both divine
and humane, have irrefragably euicted the truth of their own religion, and
falsehood of the Protestants profession; and consequently that in the
Catholic, not in the Protestant faith, the souls eternal salvation is to be
purchased: therefore I do remit the Reader for his greater satisfaction therein,
to the perusal of the said books, and particulerly to the studying (rather
then to the reading) of that most elaborate, learned, vnanswereable, and
gauling work of the protestants Apology of the Roman Church.

2. Only before I here end, I must make bold to put him in remembrance, with
what the Protestant Religion in this treatise (though but casually and
incidently) is most truly chardged; to wit, first with particular condemnations
passed upon diverse of its chiefest articles, even by the several sentences and
judgments of the primitive Church, and that therefore those doctrines so
condemned, and yet after defended with all froward pertinacity against the
Church of God, are not only thereby discovered for plain, and manifest
heresies, but furthermore both implicitly by the testimony of holy scripture,
as also by the definition of Heresy above expressed. Secondly, that the
doctrinall speculations and positions of the Protestants faith do forceibly
impell the wills of such as believe them, to all vice, liberty and sensuality.
Thirdly, that God out of the infinite abyss of his Justice, has punished even
in this world, (as earnest given of far greater punishment in the world to
come) with most fearful, unnatural and prodigions deaths, the first
inuentours in our age and promulgatours of the said doctrines; and such deaths,
as his divine majesty is accustomed to send to his professed ennemies.
Fourthly, that Protestancy is torn a sunder with intestine diuisio^s, diverse
professors of it, chardging their brethren professors with Heresy, and
dispayring of their future salvation.

25. From all which we may infalliby conclude, that except Heresy, dissolution
of manners, most infamous and miserable deaths and disagreements in doctrine
between one and the same sect, be good dispsitions and means to purchase
heaven, the Protestant Religion can never bring her beleiuers thereto. What then
remains, but that, who will expect salvation, should seek it only in the
Catholic Church? It being that Arc, erected by our second Noe within which
who virtuously live, are exempted from that universal deluge of eternal
damnation. For only in this Church is professed and taught that faith, to which
by long prescription and a continued hand of time, is peculierly ascribed the
name Catholic: Catholicum Pacianus epis. ad Sympronianu^, quae est de nomine
catholico.
istud nec Marcionem, nec Apellem, nec Montanum sumit anthores. That faith is,
which was prophesied to be of that dilating and spreading nature, as that, to
it all Isa. 2. and expounded in the English bibles a^no 1576 of the
universality of the Church, or faith of Christ.
Nations shall flow, and which shall have the Psalm. 2. and expounded of the
Churches universality by the foresaid English Bibles. 1576.
end of the earth for its possession from sea Psalm. 72.
to sea; beginning Luc. 24.
at Jerusalem among al Nations. That faith, the Professors whereof shall be a
Dan. 2. in which is included the continuance of the church without
interruption.
Kingdom, that shall never be destroyed, but shall stand for ever, contrary to
the short currents of all heresies. Of which S. Augustine thus writteth: Many
heresies are already dead, they have continued their stream, as long as they
were able; Now they are run out, and their rivers are dried up; The memory of
them, that ever they were, is scarce extant: That faith, the members whereof in
regard of their ever visible eminency, are styled by the holy Ghost, A Psalm. 57.
mountain prepared in the top of mountains, and exalted above all Hills;
with reference whereto (to wit, in respect of the Churches continual Isa. 2.
whereby is proved the churches ever visibility.
visibility) the aforesaid S. Augustine co^pareth it to a tabernacle placed in
the sun. Tom. 9. in ep. Joan. tra. 2.
That faith, whose union in doctrine both among the members thereof, and with
their head, is even celebrated by Gods holy writ; since the Church of God is
therefore called, One Romans 17. Cant 6. Joan. 10. which places ^o^ prove the
Churches unity.
body, one spouse, and one sheepe-fould: which preuiledge S. Hierome
acknowledges by his own submission in these words: I Epist. ad Damae sum.
do consotiate or unite my self in communion with the chair of Peter; I know
the Church to be builded upon that Rock; whosoever does eat the lamb out of
this house, is become profane: That faith for the greater confirmation whereof,
God has vouchsafed to disioint the settled course of nature, by working of
diverse stupendous and astonishing miracles; according to those words of our
Savior: Go Mat. 10. in which words our Savior makes miracls a mark of true
faith or the Church.
preach you, cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the leapers, cast out
Devils. A prerogative so powerful and efficacious with S. Augustine, that he
expressly thus confesses of himself: Miracles Tom. 6. contra epist. Manich
c. 4.
are amongst those other things, which most justly have houlden me in the
Churches bosom. To conclude (omitting diverse other characters (as I may term
them) or signs of the true faith) that faith, which is of that force, as to
extort testimony and warrant for it self, even from its capital and designed
enemies, answerably to that: Our Deuteronomy. 32. which words include the confession
of the adversary to be a note of truth.
God is not as their Gods are, our enemies an even witnesses. Whereunto the
Protestants herein seem to yeald, since no less from their own This is
proved in that Protestants do not rebaptize infants or children of Catholic
Parents before baptized. Now these Infants are baptized, in the faith of their
parents (as all children are by the doctrine of all learned Protestants) But if
this faith of Catholic parents be sufficient, for the salvation of their
children dying baptized therein; then much more is it sufficient for the
salvation of the Parents themselves, since it is most absurd to say, that the
Catholic faith of parents, should be available for their children or infants
dying baptized therein, and yet not auayleable for the Parents.
practice, then from their acknowledgement See thereof D. Some in his defense
against Penry page 182. and D. Couell in his defense of M. Hookers five books
of Ecclesiastical policy page 77.
in words, they ascribe to our Roman faith, the hope of salvation. To this
faith then, good Reader, with an indubious assent, adhere thou both living and
dying. Fly Newtralisme in doctrine, as the bane of all Religion; Fly
Protestancy, as the bane of Christ's true Religion, and say with Epist. ad
Symphronianum.
Pacianus: Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero cognomen: Illud me
nuncupat, istud me ostendit. A Christian is my name, a Catholic my surname:
that does denominate me, this does demonstrate me.

The contents of the Chapters.
THat a man, who beleiueth in the Trinity, the Incarnation, the passion etc.
and yet beleiueth not al other articles of Christian faith, cannot be saved:
And first of the definition of Heresy, and of an Heretic. Page 9. 2 The
foresaid verity proved from the holy Scripture. p. 15 3 The same proved from
the definition, nature and propriety or unity of faith. page 29. 4. The same
proved from the want of unity in faith, between the Catholics and the
Protestants, touching the Articles of the Creed. And from that, that the
Catholic and Protestant, do agree in the belief of diverse articles
necessarily to be believed, and yet not expressed in the creed. page 33. 5. The
same made evident from the like want of unity in faith between the Catholic
and the Protestant, in articles necessary to be believed, and yet not expressed
in the creed. page 48. 6. The same proved from the authority or privilege of
Gods church in not erring, either in her definitions of faith, or condemnation
of Heresies, and first by counsels. page 56..7 The same proved from the like
infallible authority of the church in not erring, mainfested from the
testimonies of particular Fathers. page 67. 8. The foresaid truth euicted from
that principle, that neither Heretics, nor Schismatikes, are members of the
church of God. page 81. 9. The same proved from arguments drawn from reason.
page 90. 10. The same proved from the different effects of catholic Religion
and protestancy touching virtue and vice. page 102. 11. The same verity proved
from the fearful deaths of the first broachers of protestancy. page 115. 12.
The same confirmed from the doctrine of recusancy, taught by catholics and
Protestants. page 118. 13. The same manifested from the writings of the
Catholics and Protestants, reciprocally chardging one another with heresy. And
from the insurrections, wars, and rebellions begun only for Religion. page
126. 14. The same proved from the Protestants, mutually conde^ning one another
of heresy. page 13. 15. Lastly the same demonstrated from the many absurditye*
necessarily accompanying the contrary doctrine. page 142. 16. The conclusion.
page 165.
FINIS.

