A bouclier of the catholic faith of Christ's church, conteynyng diverse
matters now of late called into controversy, by the new gospellers. Made by
Richard Smith, doctor of diuinitee, and the Queen's hyghnes Reader of the same
i^ her graces university of oxford.

The Contents of this book.
THat a man may by gods grace keep his commandments. The first leaf. Of
voluntarye works called in Latin, opera supererogationis. Fol. ix. Of
purgatory. Fol. xxii. The sign of the cross and crucifyxe. Fol. l.


The faulten to be corrected here in his book. The leaf. The page. The line.
2. 2 14. says not god 5. 1. 14. sin shall not 5. 1. 16. said he not 6. 2.
6. enforce our 7. 1. 4. peccatireum 7. 1. 12. man can not 7. 1..17 stultum esse
12. 1. 1. not to forsake 15. 1. 6. have done 59. 1. in the merge^t, god had not
63. 1. 22. or assemble

Many other small faults of a letter, in a word often amiss gentle reader ye
shall find which I beseech you correct with the other.

To the most gracious, and virtuous Lady our sovereign Maystres, Queen
Mary, Queen of England France. etc. and defenders of the faith Richard Smith,
her highness Chaplin, and her Reader of Divinity at Oxforde, wysheth long
health both of body and soul, increase of Honor, and Grace, from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ his son.
THe holy Prophet (most virtuous Queen) co^sidri^g Psalm. cxvii.
Gods wonderful work in the aduau^cing of christ, whom ye unkind and
unfaithful Jews, had refused amongst other words said. A domino factum
est istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris.

This thing is done of our Lord, and it is a marvel in our sight. May we not
say the same, gracious queen when we do remember how wonderfully god has
hitherto, the space of many years preserved your highness from ye cruelha^ds of
your enemies and at the length exaltyng the same unto her right enherytaunce of
the royal croune of England? May we not truly say: A domino factu^ est
istud, etc This is the work of our lord, and it is merueylous, to our eyes?
For is it not a strange thing, and a wonderful work of God, yt many
puissant mighty, and rich princes, having the furniture and present aid of
all things, that man's polytyke, worldly wise wit could judge, and devise
necessary to bring their propose and enterprise about, for their own
advancement, and your graces destruction, were overthrown of god, and of your
hyghnes, by his especyall goodness, and singular help without any great riches,
policye, power, and aid of men? May not your grace then iustlye say with the
Prophet. Dextra dominifeict virtutem, dextra Psalm. cxvii. woe moved all the
commo^s her^es to serve your grace at the first rebellion against you was it
not god.
domini exaltauit me? Our Lords hand has wroughte myghtylye, our Lords
hand has exalted me? Again, may not we, your graces loyal faithful, and
obeysant subjects truly say, that god (which gives al victory) did fight
for your highness, as he ever did for his people ye Jews when they believed in
him, Exodus xiiii. Except he an indurate Pharao or a Judas. Hester. vi.
woorshipped him, and served him, devoutly? What man is so blind, but that he
may see plainly the mighty hand of god defended your grace? The haulty,
high, emuous, and ambitious. A man prepared a gibbit to hang the good humble
servant of god, Mardocheus upon, ced scidit i^ fouei^ Psalm. vii.
quam fecit, but he fell down into the pit which he had made, and was hanged
upon that galoes himself. And did not god take semblable vengeance upon your
hyghnes mortal enemies, the rebels, which sought your graces destruction, and
thereby many of them, justly perished the^ selfs, your highness mercifully
sparing the rest? Are not they the^, which your grace pardoned, highly bounden
to be true and faithful subjects hereafter unto your grace? Let them remember,
that Christ said unto a sinner, to whom he had forgeuen his offenses. Vade
et noliamplius peccare, ne Joan. v.
quid deterius tibi contingat.

Go thy way and sin no more, least some worse thing chance to thee. For
god has spared them, and your exceadyng clemency, to the intent they should
amend their lives and obey both him, and your highness, which thing if they
do not, a far greater plague is to come upon them undoubtedly, as the
aforesaid christ's words, declare plainly.

Let them be ware, and forsake their new wicked religion, and return
again to the Catholyke Church, ever having in remembrance, Actoru^.v.
Josephus. li. 18. ca. 2 and antiquiattu^
unto what confusyon came Judas Galileus, and Theudas (of whom Saint Luke
writes) and such other sedicious setters Eusebius. li. i. ca, 3. hist eccle.
Actoru^. v.
up, defenders, and folowers of new doctrine against Christ, and the catholic
faith, Of who^ note ye saint Luke wrote, as ensamples do declare that which he
before had said of Christ's Apostles preaching, when he wrote thus. Discedite
ab hominibus istis, and smite illos, quoniam si est ex hominibus consilium hoc,
aut opus dissoluetur, si vero ex deo est, non poteritis dissoluere, ne forte
and deo repugnate videamini,

That is to say, depart ye hence from these me^, and let them alone, suffri^g
them still to preach, for as much as if this counsel, or work be commen
of men, it shall be broken, but if it be of God, ye cannot loose, dissolve, or
break it, least parauenture ye may seem to fight against God. Does not this
lesson sufficiently and manifestly instruct us, that the old belief (which
has been ever in this realm, sense it was last converted to the faith) is the
very true belief, because it has been at all times followed of good christen
people, and Beda. lib. i. hist. Ang.
not only of us English men, until of late years, and now is restored again
unto us, by Gods merciful goodness, our most noble and gonly kings help,
your graces travail, and aid ye lord Cardinals grace, being a mean and great
helper to compass and bring that thing about, preserved of God unto that
propose? See we not also evidently that this new belief, yea an unbelief
rather, was not of god, according to Gamaliels rule, seeing it was never taught
amongst us until of late, nor amongst any other Christian nation, and seeing
also that it is now overthrown so soon again? Does not men then strive
against the wind and stream and spurn against the prick, (as Christ said
unto Saul,) when they Acts.ix.
labor to suppress that Christ's true faith, and to set up, in ye stead of
it, their own fond dreams? Unto who^ your highness may say, ^nite consilium, et
Isaye.viii.
discipabitur, loquimini verbum, et non fiet, quia du^^ est nobiscum. Enter ye
into counsel, and it shall be broken, speak ye a word, and it shall not be
done, because our lord is with us. Wherefore I considering most virtuous Queen,
ye great goodness of God declared toward your grace, and toward this whole
realm, and country, in restoring again the true religion of Christ into it,
and also seeing your hyghnes ernest zeal toward the troth, and exceading
travel of the same in setting it forth, did think it my bounde^ duty to put
my helping hand thereunto, especially forasmuch as Christ our savior said yt he
came into ye world to bear witness unto ye troth, and died for ye defense of
it. For which causes I have made this book and e^titled it ye bouclier of the
faith. Which I have dedicated unto your grace, most humbly beseching your
highness, to take in good worth this my labor, taken (as god is my record) only
for the defense and declaracion of the troth, yt thereby your graces
subjects, which have been seduced, and deceived by the late new prechers,
teachers, and writers, may plainly see, how they were led by the^ out of ye
right way into many manifest and shameful errors, and return again out of them
unto ye catholic verity, yt the troth may deliver the^ from ye peril of
everlasting da^natio^, and at their mortal life's Joan. viii.
end, bring the^ to the endless joys of heaven, through gods great mercy and ye
deserts of Christ our savior, unto who^ with ye father, and ye holy ghost be
honor and glory, for ever and ever. Ame^.

To the good Christian Reader.
I Reme^bri^g good Reader, how the people of this our country are infected,
and poisoned in their souls, by ye new preachers evil sermons, and wicked
books, and that as yet few books have been set forth for the confutacion of
them, to reduce the people again unto the catholic faith, did think it my
duty to travail and labor, theri^, especially seeing every man must make a
strait account and reckonyng to Christ at domes day for his talentes, and
gifts received Mat: xxv.
of god. When he that has increased those gifts by godly vsyng of them Roma.
ii.
shall receive a reward of god according to his doings, and he which has not
so done, shall be punished therefore. The which things, with other more, moved
me to write, and set forth this traicte for the defense of the truth, not to
enstruct the learned in Divinity, which need not much my teaching, but to
teach the unlearned, to stay and establish the waueryng, to assure and certify
the doubtful of the troth, to bring the^ again unto the troth of the
catholic church, which were disceaued through ignorance, and are willi^g to
learn, and embrace the veritye, gladlye refusyng the faulsitie, and untruth,
and to confound the malicious and obstinate defendours, and folowers of
heresy. Seek here good Reader, no eloquence, which serves (as Lactance says)
the world, and Lacta^tius Euse bius. lib. 3. ca. 24. hist. ecclesi. De
doctrina christiana, it.
which the simple troth needs not, but the troth plainly and rudelye taught
for the edifying of the simple and rude people. For what avails (as Saint
Augustine says) a golden keye, if it cannot open the lock, which I would
have opened? And what matier is it, if the key be made of wood, so it can open
my lock? Even so what profits the speakers teachers, or writers eloquence,
yfit open not the door, or lock of the holy Scriptures unto the people? Also
what hurts his rude speaking and plain gross manier of preaching, teaching,
or writing, if he thereby do open the Scriptures to the people for their
instruccion.

Said not Sayncte Paul, that he came not to preach in wise, eloquente,
Rhethorike words, least thereby his preaching of Christ i. Cor. ^. ^. ii
and his death, should be void, and of none effect.

Why then should I (if I could as well as any other manne can) use painted
terms, sekyng thereby the vayn praise of men, edifying not the people, and
loosyng my reward of God? Wherefore I will be plain and use no eloquence at
all, heartily Math. vi.
desyryng thee good Reader, to accept my endeavor, and traueile taken in this
enterprise, to amend ye fautes if thou find any, in this traict, and either
to use the same my labors, with thanks geuyng to god the father, from whom
all goodness comes, Iacobi. i.
) as s. James witnesses, or else to setfoorth something better of thy own study.

More I beseech every man, which shall read this my book, and principally
all them that are yet of an other belyefe, than I teach herein, to read this
treatise, and other my books now printed, and which shall be shortly set forth
in print, without al corrupted affeccion, and then I doubt nothing, but they
shall be edyfyed thereby. For I do teach nothing, in this my book, but
only the faith and troth of the catholyke church, which erreth not therein,
as the first Mat. xvi and vlt. Co^siliu^ Nicenu^. c. 9
general counsel, holden at Nicea about a thousand two hundred years passed,
witnesses, saying: Quod irreprehensibile est, catholica defendit ecclesia,

The catholic church defends yt thing, which is not reprouable. And To. ii.
^pist ex viii. ad Ianuarum
s. Auste^ says, yt the catholic church does not approve nor keep in silence,
nor do any thing against the faith or good life. Wherefore let the^, which are
gone out of this church, willi^gly deuidyng themselves from the unity of it,
return home again to her, their loving mother, not forgeatyng that as no man nor woman, which was out of Noes ship in the time of the floude,
eschaped Ciprian.
death, even so no man, nor woman Austen.
which is out of this Saint Peter's ship, the catholic Church, as a
Schismatike, can be saved from the peril of that death both of body Math. 25.
and soul, which shall never have end, because Christ is (as Saint Paul
says) the savior of his body, Ephesia. v.
which is the Church, and he is made the cause meritorious of everlasting
Hebrews. v
salvation only to al the^ (as he witnesses also) that obey him which
commands us to be obedient unto his spouse the Church, Math. xviii.
S. Ciprian a great goodly clarke, and a blessed Martyr, which was about. M.
CCC. years passed, expresses Lib. i. epi. 3.
plainly the cause of heresies schisms, divisions in religion, and of the
contempt of the cleargye, and of Priests, when he writes thus. Heresies,
schisms, and contempt of priests; do rise of that only, that there is not
one head Priest, and judge obeyed, in the church of Christ, as his vicaire.
Ne que aliunde haereses, aborte sunt, aut nata sunt schismata nisi inde quod
sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, nec vinis in ecclesia ad tempussacerdos, et ad
tempus iudex, vice christi cogitatur: cui si secundum magisteria obtemp^raret
fraternitas vniuersa nemo aduersus sacerdotum collegium quidquam moueret.

Heresies (says Cyprian) are risen up, or schisms sprung of no o-other
thing, but thereof that ye pryest of god (he meant the Pope) is not obeyed, and
that there is not for the time one priest and one judge thought upon, or
esteamed, in the church, as Christ's vicaire. Unto whom if the whole
brotherhoode, that is to say, all christians, would according to Note this
well.
the Masters teachynges obey, no man should move any thing against the college
or company of Priests. I will shortly write of this matter at large by gods
grace


Is not this manifestly spoken of this ancient Martyr, to declare and setforth
the cause of deuisions in our faith, of heresies, and despysyng of priests?
Have we not found this his godly saying most true now of late in this our
country? But I leauyng this mattier until an other time, do exhort all
men, that are divided from this catholic church and the general head of it,
for the love of Jesus Christ, which shed his precious blood for them, us,
and for all the world (as Saint Paul and Saint John do testifye) to i.
T^mo. ii. i. John. ii.
come again unto ye unity of the^ both, and forsakyng al their errors, and all
opinions, to receive the troth again obeying ever the kings highness, sent
hither of god for the wealth of this realm, and the Queen's grace, the chosen
and elected of God, to bring us again unto ye said unity and unto grace and
godliness, which was of late wonderfully decayed amongst us. Geus absque
consilio est, et sine prudentia, vtinam, saper^rit, et i^telligere^t,
acnouissima providerent. Deute. 32.
For if they still abiding in their blidnes and errors obstinately, will not
obey gods troth, and our most noble and godly king, and virtuous Queen, let
the^ nothing doubt, but yt god will be aue^ged upon the^, as he has already
upon some of their graund captains for their evil religion and malicious
disobedience against our sovereign Lady, and very right enheriter of this
realm, and will be upon the rest of yt sort if they be not obedient unto hi^,
and her yea although that her hyghnes used never so great piety, and clemencye
toward them, willing thereby to win the^. For what vengeance took Nume. xvi.
god upon Chore, Dathan, and Abiro^, for their rebellion against his servant
Moses? Did not the earth open, and swalowed the^ up? Were not their adherentes,
that took part with them, all brent with fire? Why will not me^ remember this
historye, and such others, Roma. xv
written in the scryptures (as all other things are) for their instruccion?
Why read they not ye chronacles of England, that they may learn, that
rebellion never came to good end? Why remember they not that all rebellions of
our age and time whatsoever cause they have pretented to have for to rebel,
came to confusion? will men be so blinded, that nothing can make them see the
danger of rebellion? who is so ignorant, but he knows, that Saint Paul,
and Saint Peter commands Roma. xiii. Titus. iii. 1. Petri. ii.
us to obey our King, Queen, and the higher powers, under them, and that (as
Saint Paul wylleth) not only for to avoid temporal punishmente, Roma. xiii.
but also for our conscience sake. Did our new ghospellers follow this
commandment, when they conspyred and rebelled against our king and Queen,
yea against Prove. viii.
god himself, of who^ they have their authority, and by whom they raygne? God
hitherto has been ye Queen's hyghnes bouclier, and mighty defendour against
all her enemies, and will be, whiles she lives in this world.

Wherefore I say once again let no man resyste her hyghnes proceadynges, nay
gods proceadinges rather, and the catholyke Churches, least they win nothing
else thereby, than extreme misery, and their uttermost undoing, as many have
done, before this time, whereof they are not ignorant. For there is no counsel,
no policy, nor wisdom) as Salomo^ says) Prouer. xxi
yt can anithing prevail against our lord. The which has by his especial
goodness toward her grace, and this whole realm, given to her highness grace to
conceive a child, wherefore it is every true and faithful subjects bounden
duty, heartily to give him thanks, to rejoice, and be glad therefore, and
deuoutely to pray night and day unto him, that as she has conceived by his
singular grace, eue^ so he would aid, and strengthen her, highness in her
birth, as he did Sara Abraham's wife, Rachel, Isaacs Gene. xxi. Gene, xxx i.
regum. ii. Luce. i.
wife, Anna Helchanaes wife, Elizabeth zacharies wife, mother of saint John
Baptist, with diverse others, very aged women, that she may easily without
great pain, and al danger of her life, bring forth yt her child into this
world, and that it may long live here amongst us, and raygne over us,
quietelye in much prosperity, and honor, to gods glory, unto who^ be all
praise for even.

AMEN.

The second book shall be prynted shortly by gods grace,

A co^futacio^ of an error set forth by the autours of the Catechism made in
king Edward the syxte D. tho cra^mer, D Ridley. etc. Fo. 9 Catechismi.
time, and published in his name, which is that no man can observe gods
commandments. (*)
PEter Martyr, good Christien Reader, was in this matter against Doctor Thomas
Cra^mer late Archebishoppe of Cantorburie, Doctor Ridley, and other the
Auctours, and makers of the above named Catechism. For he affirms in his
comentaries written upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians that by Fo. 53.
the grace of God a man may keep Gods commandments, although he afterward
says that no man can observe this precept Diliges dominum deum tuum etc. Thou
shall love thy Math. 22.
lord God with all thy heart. etc. nor this. Non concupisces. Thou shall not
Exodi. 20. Romans 7. 1. Cor. 16.
coueit thy neighbors wife. etc whereby it appears plainly that the spirit
of unite and peace was not with the^, but to the purpos. The Scripture says
^sti impleuerunt voluntatem mea^ These me^, Caleb, and Iosue, have Number. 32
fulfilled my will. What mente GOD hereby his will? Meant he not his holy
commandments, which he would men should fulfill and keep? For yt is
signified in mani Math. 6. Fiat volu^t^stua. etc Thessa. 4.
places of the Scripture by Gods will. Were they not then very ignorant, when
they did teach me^ that no mortal man could keep the commandments, seeing
God says that those. ii. men fulfilled his will? Also GOD said unto Jeroboam
Tu non fuist, sicut seruus meus, David, qui custodiuit 3. Reg^^. 14.
mandata mea, et sequtus est me in toto cord suo. etc Thou have not been like
unto my feruiteur, Dauyd, which has kept my commandments, and has followed
me in all his heart. etc. Lo God says that Dauyd observed his
commandments. Who is the^ so folishe to believe these new brethren, which
do defend the contrary? David said of himself. Propter verba labioru^
tuoru^ ego custodiui vias duras Psalm. 16.
For the words (O Lord, which you have spoken, I have kept hard wais Ageine
he says, our Lord will reward me, according to my righteousness Psalm. 17.
and the cleanes of my hands. Quia custodiui vias domini etc Because I have
kept our Lords ways, which are his commandments. Eteni^ seruus tuus
custoditilla, et in custodiendis illis retributio multa For thy seruiteur, O
Lord Psalm. 18.
has observed thy commandments, and there is a great reward in keeping of
the^, David says ageine that he kept Gods commandments by the aid of
his grace. Viam mandatorum tuorum Cucurri, quum dilatasti Psalm. 119.
cor meum Memor fui nocte nomiris tui domine, et custodiui legem tuam particeps
omniu^ Costodientiu^ mandata tua. Says god by his prophet Ezechiel. Spiritum
meum dabo vobis, et faciam, vt in preceptis meis ambuletis. Ezech. 36.
et iudicia mea custodiatis, et faciatis ea. I will give my spirit unto you,
and I will cause you to walk in my commandments, and to keape my
judgments, and to do them. Note that god says, I will give to you my
spirit, and I will cause that you shall keape my commau^dme^tes, for those his
words declare that by his spirit, and grace man's free will observes his
commandments, so that his grace works with our free will, and our free
will with it. The which S. Paul witnesses saying. Vo^ estis co^diutores, seu
1. Cor. ^^
coope^arndei, you work with God, Plus omnibus labora ui, non ego, sed gratia
dei mecum 1. Cor. 15.
I have labored more then al other, not I, but the grace of god with me Cum
timore et tremore vestram ipsorum salutem Phil. ^.
operemini. Deus enim est, qui operaturin vobis, et velle, et perficere Pro
bona voluntate. Work Man's free will works with gods grace.
your own salvation with fear, and trembling. For god it is, which works in
you both the will, and also the acco^plisheme^t of the same good will. But I
return again to my propos. There are very many places of the old Testament,
that do prove euydently Gods commandments not to be impossible for a man to
observe, which to be brief, I pass over, and will allege two or three textes
of the new Testament for the establishment of this Catholic doctrine,
against Doctor Tho. Cra^mer. Rid^^y.
Cra^mer late Archbishop of Cantorbury, Doctor Rydley, and the other makers
of the foresaid Catechism, and the ungodly articles ad ioynyng to it, Christ
said. Iugum meu^ suaue, et on us meum leave. My yoke is Math. 11.
sweet, and my burden is light, or easy to be borne. How may this be true,
good Christien Reader, if none can observe Gods commandments by the aid and
help of grace? For is that thing sweet to us: which we cannot fulfill, and
therefore we must needs break it, and thereby offend God, and pourchase to us
his high displesur, indignation, and wrath? Is that burden light, which no man
hitherto has borne, nor any man may bear? O exceeding blindness of these new
Gospellers, which would cause other men to see. Oh how ignorant are they, yt
yet still will believe their wicked, and schismatic Doctrine? S John is
against 1. John. 1.
their teaching, when he says I four heart, most dear brethren, shall not
reprove us, as gilty of si^ne, we have an affiance, esperance, or hope in God,
and what soever we desire of him, we shall receive it. Quia mandata eius
custodimus, because we do keep his commandments. Is not this directly and
plainly voritten to the reproach of these new brethren, and the co^futacion of
this their pestilent heresy? But S John 1. John. 3.
reproves their opinion agein with these words. Haec est Charitas dei, vt
mandata custodiamus, et ma^data eius no^ su^t grauia. This is charity of god,
that we do keep his commandments, and his commandments be not heavy or
grefuous behold S. John says yt we do keep gods commandments and that they
are not heavy agreing with his maistre Christ therein and our new brethren Math.
11.
say yt they are so hard and heavy yt no mortal me^ can keep them. Will
the^ any man, that is not utterly blind, believe yet their doctrine John. 17.
Said not Christ. Sermone^ tuu^ seruaverunt pater, They have O father, kept thy
word, saying, or commandment. s. Paul said, Omnia possum in co qui me Phil.
4.
confortat Christus. In or through Christ which makes me strong, I ca^ do all
things. Could he not then keep Gods commandments, which could do all
things that were necessary to be done for his salvation. He said that God
would not suffer man to be tempted or stered to commit 1. Cor. 10.
sin, above his puissa^ce, or power to resist, that he were not overcome by
that temptacio^. Could this his saying be true, if no man might observe Gods
commandments should not the^ god suffer us to be tempted above our power to
withstand that temptacion? Said not also. S Paul sin shall have dominion
over you, because ye are not under ye law: but under grace. Said not Romans 6.
more over, yt when he himself was tempted, god said to him, my grace is
sufficient for thee, that thou may overcome that temptacio^ and sin 2. Cor.
12.
not? what else is it but mere madness to say, that no man is able to keep Gods
commandments by Gods grace, that he sine not deadly? Now hear certain of the
best, and most ancient Doctors sayings, that thereby, thou (good Reader)
may see plainly, how shamefully these men err, and are out of the
Catholic faith of Christ's catholic church and avoid their doctrine, as
pernicious and pestilent to man's soul.

Certain of the old writers sayings, witnessynge that a man may keep Gods holy
law, and command mentes by his aid, help, and grace.
SAyncte Augustine says Lib. 2. ca. 6. De peccatorum meritis. etc.
Dubitare non possum, nee deum aliquid impossible homini praecepisse, nee deo
ad opitula^ dum, et adiuuandu^ quo fiat, quod iubet, impossible aliquid esse.
I can not doubt, another that God has commanded any thing ympossible to man,
nor yt there is any thing to him ympossible to help, yt the thing, which he
commands, may be done. Again he writes thus. L^o de natura and gracia.
Ca. 69.
Firmissime creditur, deum iustum, et bonum, impossibilia non potuisse
praecipere, oi^a quippe f^u^t facilia charitati: cui vni christi sarcina leuis
est, aut ea vna est sarcina ipsa quae leuis est, secundum quod 1. John. 5. what
are they then, which do not believe so?
dictum est et praecepta eius grauia non sunt. We Catholic me^ do believe most
steadfastly, that god, which is righteous and good could not commau^d things
impossible for man to do, and keep, because all things commanded, are made
easy to him that has charity, unto ye which charity alone Christ's burden is
light, or else that charity herself is that burden it self, which is light to be
borne of man, according to that, which is said of S. John, and his
commandments are not heavy, or hard. Si praemia vitae Lib ^^ salutaribus
documentis. Cap. 9.
aeternae volumus promereri, deima^da^^ lotis viribus satagamus custodire. Na^
praecepta eius nol^ribus grauia su^t, vole^tibus leuia. If we mind (says he)
to merit, or deserve the rewards of everlasting life, let us traueile and
diligently enforce your selfs with all our strength or puissance to keep Gods
commandments. For Gods commandments are grievous, or heavy to them, which
have no will to keep them, but they are light and easy to them, that have a good
will to observe them. Neque imperaret (inquit) hoc deus, si i^possibile, vt
faceremus, iudicaret, vt hoc ab homine fieret Deus August in. Psalm. 56.
neque aliquid impossible potuit imperare qui iustus est, nec dampnaturus est
hominem pro eoque non potuit vitare, qui pius est, God would not To. 10. serui
side tempore.
have commanded this thing, (says Austen) if he had judged it impossible for
us to do. For God, which is Open your eyes, ye new brethren,
ryghteous, could not command any thing impossible, nor he will that ye man
see your error, and forsake it.
dampne man for that thing, which he could not avoyde, because he is piteous,
or merciful, Peccati verum teneri que^quam, quia non fecit, quod facere non
potuit, summae iniusticiae, et insaniae est. A man to beholde^ guilty of sin,
because he has Lib contra manicheos Capi 12. et lib. 1. Ca. 15. Retract.
not done yt thing which he could not do, is an extreme unrighteousness, and
madness. Are not then our Lutherans, and Swinglians very made, that say that
man can observe Gods commandments, and therefore every man is guilty of sin
in breakinge of them, which he could in no wise fulfill by Gods help? He
says ones again. Quis non clamet, stultum August lib. de fide co^tra
manicheos Ca. 10.
praecepta dare ei, cui liberum nomest, quod praecipitur, facere, et iniquum
eum da^nare, cui non fuit potestas iussa complendi Who may not cry out, that
it is folly to give him commandments, in whose liberty it stands not, or
which cannot keep the thing, that is commanded him to do, and that it is an
unrighteous thing to conde^pne him, which had not power to fulfill ye things
commanded? I let pass mani such sayings of S. Austen, and will recite some
other Doctors se^te^ces upon this matter S. Cypria^, which was about. M. CCC.
years past, Says. Nihil impossible, nihil iubet austeru^. Cyprianus de
baptismo christi.
God commands nothing impossible, nothing sharp, or hard. Simeon ille
iustus, side plena, deiseruauit praecepta. That ryghteous man Symeon has
observed Gods commandments with a full faith. Saint Chrisostom dyssenteth
not from this Christ homi 23. in Matheum.
doctrine, when he says. Neque oneiosu^ aliquid, a^t molestum est imperatum,
sed sic facilia cuncia pro^^us, ac leuia, vt si asseramus promptam solummodo
voluntatem, oi^a eff^ceie possimus, etc There is nothing onerous, heavy, or
greifes commanded to be done, but al things, which are commanded, are
utterly so easy and light, yt if we bring with us a ready will only, we may
do all things commanded us to do. Possibile est dei iussa Chrysostom homi. 6.
De laudibus Pauli.
perficere, si modo velimus omnem naturae trepidatione^ alacriter virtute
superare Nihil est impossible eorum, quae a christo hominibus imperantur.
Says not here this ancient great clearke, and holy Doctor, that nothing is
commanded us impossible, and that we may fulfill all that is commanded us to
do, if we will Chrisost homi. 19. in Matheum.
endeavor our selfs diligently to overcome ye feebleness of our nature? Ne
impossibilia putemus praecepta dei, que et v^alia nobis sunt, et valde facilia,
si tota vtique mente vigi lemus. Nihil impossible imperat Christus, in tantu^
vt eius praecepta supergressi sint multi. Christ Opera supererogatio^^. ^
commands nothing impossible in so much yt many men have done more the^ was
commanded the^ to do S. Hiero^ was of this belief, which Hieroni ad bamasum
papam de symbolo fidei.
said. Execramur eorum blasphemia^, qui dicunt aliquid impossible hominia deo
praeceptum esse, et mandata dei non a singulis, fed ab omnibus in communi posse
seruari. We do judge their blasphemy abominable, which do say, that God
has commanded man any thing impossible to be done Note this.
of him, and that Gods command mentes can not be observed of every man
particulerlie, but of all me^ in common. He says also. Fate^ur de^mandata
Hieront. Cor contra pelagianos
dedisse possibili a, ne ipse author ^iusticie sit, s^^d exigat freri, quod
fieri non possit. We do grant, that God has given commandments, which may
be kept least he should be ye author, or doer Read ye new brethren and
^ecante in season.
of unrighteousness, or sin, if he should require that thing to be done of us,
which could not be done. This is suffisant for the perfect co^furacion of
this error, which Doctor Cranmer, late Archbishop of Cantorburie, Doctor
Ridley, and semblable others, that made the above mentioned Cathechisme,
defended ignorantly both against ye holy scriptures, and also the old and
godly catholic writers. Wherefore I will make an end of this traictie with.
S. Austen and S. Basils se^tences, August lib 2 ca. 3 de peccatorum meritis,
etc.
of the which the first says. Quod ^i nolumus, non peccamus, nec preciperet
deus homini, quod esset humane impossible volu^tati We do not commit sin,
if we will and God would not command man to do that thing, which should be
impossible to him to do if he would, S Basil says, speaking of the loving
Basilius ad interrogatione^, 17 6. regularis breuiorum.
our enemies. Sine dubio autem no^ precepisset hoc deus, qui bonus ac iustus
est, nisi etiam facultatem, qua id faceremus, fuisset largitus. Without doubt
God, which is good et be regula monachoru^, ca, 8^
and righteous, would not have commanded this thing to be done, except he had
given also power to us, whereby we might, or should do it. Moreover he says
thus. Impium est Homi. 3. in Psalmos.
asserere praecepta spiritus sancti i^ possibilia esse obseruatu: It is a
wicked thing to say, or to defend, that the holy gostes commandments are
impossible to be observed. Were not then the authors of the Catechism, which
is named before, Peter Martyr, Laumer, Tho. Hoper, doctor Richard Coxe, and
such others wicked, when they defended that vngoly opinion: I beseech god of
his tender mercy, for the love of his dear son Jesus Christ, give them
grace to see their blind errors and seeing them, to leave them in time that
they having a whole and a very Perogacio
perfect faith, may observe Gods commandments to pourchasse themselfes the
glory and Joys of Heaven, thorough Christ our Savior. Amen.

Of works called volu^tary works, which a man does of his own mind without
any commandment of God. Our new teachers deny utterly that there be any such
works, but ygnorantly, as it appereareth, hers.
THe setters fourth of the articles A^^i. ^
a^nexed unto ye Catechism, of which I spoke before, Peter Martyr, and other
ye new brethren, deny utterly this kind of works affirmyng that no work
pleseth God, except it be commanded of him to be done. Which their opinion is
plain against the holy Scriptures, and the judgments of all the old Godly
Doctors, as it shall by gods help appear in this Chapitre manifestly. For did
not ye Hiere, 35
Rechabites only by the commandment of their father, having no charge of
God, absteyne from drinkyng of wine, buildinge of houses, sowynge of Corn, and
plantinge of Vynes, and God was therewith so well pleased, that he rewarded them
for so doing, with a continuance of their ofsprynge, or posterite in their
house, or stock? Were not then our new brethren ouerseene in this opinion?
What law of God enforced S John Baptiste to forbear delicate Math. 3. 11.
fleasshes, Fisshes, drinking of wine and all strong drinks? Did he not live
so strayghtly of his own will, and voluntarily? Did not Christ commend him
therefore? Is not his life left unto us for an example to follow it?

How much then are our new Gospellers deceived in this their opynion? Who that
learned is, will say that Mary Magdalen was bounden by Gods commandment to
power out her precious oyntmente upon Christ, and yet he said that Math. 26.
she had wrought a good work to him? Did not the poor wyddowe which gave all
her substance to the tresour of the temple, more then she was bounden by Gods
law? Was Luke 21.
not her deed accepted and praised of Christ? was there any law, or commanded
of God, which constrained S. Paull to preach the Gospel Act. 20.
freely, not taking his meat and drink of the^, unto whom he preached 1. Cor.
4. 9. 2. Thessa. 3
it, but laboring with his hands to get his own living and others?
Witnesses he not, yea proves 1, Cor, 9, 1, Timo, 5, Math. 10 Luh. 10.
he not sufficiently, that he might lefully have lived by ye prechinge of
scripture, as ye other Apostles did? For Christ said, the labourer is worthy to
have his wages, and meat. It is the^ evident, yt S. Paull did more the^ he was
bou^de^, when he preached ye Gospel of Christ freely, without taking as much
as his meat and Gala, 6, Timo, 5, Qui been presn^teti,
Drink of the^, unto whom he preached, albeit they were bou^de^ to have given
it to him. s. Auste^ does so take ye his preaching freely, pro opere
superogationis, for a work not of duty, but Luke, 10, Lib de oper^ monachoru^
Ca. 5. and Libde adulter^nis coniugiis. C^. 1^, and, 14,
done franckly and willingly without any law of God to co^pel him to do it.
S. Paul cou^seyled the christian man not so forsake his wife being an infidel,
if she would quietly dwell voith him without the reproach of christ and his
faith, and that he did not by any Lib. 1. de serui domine in monte
commandment, as S. Auste^ witnesses saying. Hoc est consilium eius, cui
credo dictum esse, Si quid supererogaueris, ego redie^s tibi reddam, This is
the counsel of him Lucie. 10
to whom I think it is said. If thou shall despe^de any thing more, I
coming again, will render it to thee. Is every man bounde^ by any
commandment of God to sell all his gooddes, and to give them to the poor?
Did not Christ only cou^seile the young man to do that, leauyng it to his free
choice, and will, whether Math. 19.
he would do it, or not? ^or who doubts, but yt it is the co^de^pned opinion
of the Anabaptists to say, that all things must needs be common?

Also S. Paul bad not the Rich 1. Timo, 6
men give al their riches together at ones to the poor, but to give alms unto
them. Who doubts, but that good people of a high perfection, not Act. 1. ^, 4
enforced by any law or commandment of God did at the beginning of Christ's
Church (as S. Luke bears record) give al their goods to the Apostles? The
which perfect Mou^kes and other relygious men ought to hauo nothig propre
life Mou^kes and other Religious men and women took upon them, vowing
voluntary pourete, and renouncing the propriete of goods at the time of
their profession, and therefore they may not lawfulli enjoy any riches as their
own and propre but they must needs live in common, as ye Apostles, and their
folowers did at ye begi^ning of Christ's church, the life of which they have
professed. I would wyshe that all such votaries, would remember yt God by S.
Peter stroke Ananias Act. 5.
and Saphira with soudeyne death because they reserved a portion of the money
received for their feilde being sold, which they did against their vow and
promise: For if they offended God so greuouslye for keeping part of their own
Money Read this ye beneficed votaries,
against their vow, how much more do they offend God, which do heap
benefice upon benefyce, and gather much Riches together against their vow of
pourete? but of this matter in an other traicte more largely. What is he, that
will say (except these ygnorante new 1. Cor, 7
brethren) that any man or woman is bound by Gods law to live chaste as
Virgins, and wydowes, if they have not vowed chastyte? For Christ and Sayncte
Paul Math. 19, Qui potis capere et 1. Cor. 7 co^silium.
do only exhort and counseyll that manier of life, and not command it.
Sayncte Basyll lived with Bread and Water, as Gregorye Nazianzene Sayncte
Hieroms Maystre testyfieth of him. In i^o^o^in,
Sayncte James the Apostle, which was Bishop of Hierusasalem, did never
eat Flesh, never Drunk Wine, nor any strong Drink (as Saynct Hierom
witnesses Hiero de ^iris illustribus. Aegesippus. lib 5. comment.
of him) he never did wear Clothe made of Woulle, but Lynen only, and he
prayed for the People so much, and so long, that his knees were with
kneelynge so hard as a Camels knees. Who that wise is, will say, that Sayncte
James was bound by Gods commandment to do all these things? Wherefore
these works were only voluntary, and of no duetye. But hear now certain of
the old Catholic Doctors sayings, for the more full and perfect proof of
this verite called into controuersye of our new Brethren.

Certain of the Ancient Doctour^ sayings upon works of parfectio^, done of
man volu^taryly, without Gods commandment.
SChrysostom speaking of Chrisost Homi. 22 in 1. Cor. 9.
S. Paul's preachi^g gods word freelye without taking any kind of thing for his
labors, when he might lawfully have lived biyt his office, says. what say
y^, Paul, tell me, I beseech the? If thou do preach the Gospel, have thou
no glory, except thou do it freely, without taking meat and drink for thy
traueyle, and than thou have glory? Is this thing (to preach for nothing at
all) greater tha^ to preach? Nin^ue, quoniam illud quide^ praeceptum est,
hocau^t meae voluntatis officiu^, Quae ^ede ye Martinia^^ and Lutherans.
enim supra praeceptu^ fiunt, multam secundum hoc mercedem consequntur, quae
au^t sub praecepto continentur, non i^dem, To preach the gospel (says he)
is commanded of God, but to do it freely for nothing is a good deed of my
free will. For those things, which are done above Gods commandment, man
gets a great reward, but not so much for the doing of things contained
under Gods commandment. Than he says, that it is a greater, and a better
work to preach freely for nothing worldly, tha^ to preach for some worldly
thing and therefore Christ said. Cum feceritis Lu^e. 17.
omnia. etc, When ye have done all, that is commanded you to do, say that we
are unprofitable servants, for we have the things, which we were bounden to
do. See thou not here good Reader, that Saint Chrisostonie expounds
Christ's words recited out of Luke for the Luc^e. 17
defense of voluntarye works not commanded, which authorite, Note this
Peter Matyr, and other our new Brethren do wreast against both these works,
and also against the merits of our good works? Sait Chrisostom says again.

Ani^adu^rtis in hoc quoque Pauli sapienciam, Non Ho^i. 22. i. 1. Cor. 9
enim inquit, si inuitus euangelizo, non hab^o mercedem, sed dispensatio mihi
credita est, ostende^s, quod hoc quoque mercede^ habet, sed quanta^ qui
praeceptum seruat, non quantam ille, qui insuis glo riaitur operibus, et
prae^eptum superat, What Note this Lege Chrisosto homi 1, in Titum Ca. ^.
could he have spoken more plainly to declare that works done without Gods
commandment are good, do please God, and that the doer of them shall have a
greater reward in heaven, than he, which does nothing more then is
commanded him of GOD? But here Homi. 22. ^. 1. Cor. 9
Sayncte Chrysostom ones again writing after this manner upon S. Paul's
preachinge freelye. Na^ cum sit benignus deus, multam praeceptis suis instituit
man suetudinem, vt non solu^ ex praecepto, sed ex propria quoque multa faciamus
sententia. Eteni^ nisi ita voluisset, arc^ius instituere praecepta poterat, et
dicer^ Mark,
qui non se^per ieiunat, puniatur, qui non seruatvir^ ginitatem, afficiatur
supplicio, qui non oi^bus suis se rebus exuit, paena^ luat grauissima^. Verum
no^ ita ^a^xit, tibi volens, sivolueris, indulgere. Propterea cu^ de
virgin^tate dissereret, dixit, Qui potest separari, Math. 19.
separetur, Et diuiti quaeda^ praecepit quaeda^ permisit suae licentiae Non
enim dixit, Vende res tua^, sed si vis esse perfectus, vende, He says, that
god Math. 1^
commanded not virgi^te, but left it in man's will, and cou^ceyled it, as
Sayncte Paul did following him 1. Cor, 7 Math. 1^.
Also he affirms that Christ bad man not to sell all his goods, but said,
if thou will be perfyte, sell them. Saynct Austen also says, that it is a
work of perfection to August be bon^ comangali. ca. 8.
renounce the propryete of all our goods together, and that Christ commanded
us not to do so, but gave to us counsel to do it. More over he writes
thus. Multa sunt facie^ da Lib. i. de adulterinis coniugiis. ca. 1^. ^t. 14.
non iubente lege, sed libera charitate, et ^a sunt in nostris officiis.
gratiora Many things are to be done, the law not commanding them, but with a
free charity, and those things are amongst our Our new brethren say the
contrary
good deeds more thank worthy, and acceptable to god, tha^ they be which he
has commanded in his law. Must he not be much then over seen, which will
believe Doctor Thomas Cranmer, late Archebisshoppe Cra^mer, Ridley
of Cantorbutye, Doctor Nycholas Ridley, Latymer, and such other, (that made
the ^^ti. ^.
Catechism and Artycles, adioynynge to it, which where set for the in King
Edward the syxte time) before these Scriptures now aleaged, and Doctors?
Say^icte Augustyne recyteth this saying of Christ. Si quid super erogau^ris,
etc, and then says Ideo dicunt hoec non a du^o praecipi, quam ^u. ^^
vis a du^o monea^tur osteri vt ta^to intelligantur esse gratiora, quanto mag^s
offenduntur indebita. See thou not that Saint Austen affyrmeth here again,
that works not commanded nor due to be done, are more meritorious, and
acceptable to god, then works commanded to be done. Read Saint Auste^ lib.
de fide et operibus, cap 16, de sanc^a virgin^ate cap 1 (...) lib. 2 cap. 17
historia Ecclesiastica et hist tri^ lib 1 Capi. ^ Tertu^an de monogamia Hieroni
^i, contra Io^^ni^num,
Saint Hierome says upon this Christ's saying. Qui potest capere etc,
proponi^ proe^^um, inuitat ad ^ursum, tenet in manu, virginitatis brauium, et
ait Quisitit, veni^t, e^ bi^at. Qui Potest capere, capiat. Non dicit, v^litis,
^oliti^, bibendum est vobis, etc, Hear Saint Hierome again saying upon this
text of Saint Paul, De virginibus p^^eceptum i, Cori, vi^,
domini non hab^o, con^ilium autem d^, I have not the commandment of our Lord
concerning virgins, that they should cont^ie in their vyrgirutie. but I give
them counsel Hieronido i^, de virginitate serua^^^, Lege Hiero ad dem^t^^a^em,
to abide still in their vyrginitye. Q^ re domini no^ habet praeceptum de
virginibus Quia maioris est mercedis, ^^o^ cogi^^ et offer^ur Why has not
Saint Paul a commandment of our Lord touching virgins, that they should
continue in their virginite? Because that thing, which is not required of us by
compulsion, and yet it is given, is of a greater reward. Again ^^eroni in ca.
^vi, Esa,
he says upon the Prophet Esaye entreating of them that hade chosen to live
continently, as wiedowes or Math, ii.
virgins. Hic cunuchus regno caelorum, vim fa^^, et viole^ter d^^p^^ illud ^ste
custos est sabbato^u^, cont^mnens opera nup^iarum Iste ^ligit, q^ae dominus
vult, vt plus offerat, quam preceptum est. This Eu^^che enforces himself to
obtain the kingdom of heaven and violently rauisheth it. This is the keeper of
the Sabbot days, despysyng y^ works of marriage. This man chooses the
things, which our Lord will have done, that he ^eade ^e ^etroma^^^^ans, and
repe^ in ^une ^sa, ^xviii,
might do more, then is commanded. Also Saint Hierome says: Philemon
potest di^ere, ^ol^^ntaria oris mei ^^ ^eplacea^t tibi d^mine, plus que faciens
quam prae^eptum est, vincit cos, qui ^antummodo imperata ^ecerunt, and iubentur
dicere, serui invtiles sumus, Luke. xvii. Note this.
quod debuimus facere, fe^^mus. Virginitas quoque maiore praemio coro nature,
quia praeceptum domini no^ habet and vltra praecepta se te^dit. Philemo^ may
say, let, O lord, the voluntary sayings of my mouth please thee, and he dooyng
more than is commanded Psa. ^xviii.
passes them, which has Luke. xvii
done only things commanded, and are bid to say, we be seruituers Read this
^ilige^tly against our petromar^^nians,
unprofitable, we have done y^ thing which we were bound to do. Virgynity is
therefore crouned with a greter reward, because it is not commanded of our
Lord, and it goth beyond or further than things commanded. Is not this
plainly spoken against Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, D Thomas Cranmer, D.
Nicholas Cranmer.
Ridley: and such other our new brethren, which deny utterly all such works:
that are not commanded? Opera super ^^ogatidnis.
Saint Hierome said to one Heliodorus, which was a Monk, steryng him to live
solitarily. Non est tibi eadem causa, quae caeter is, dominum aus^ulta
dicentem. Math. xix,
Sivis perfectus esse, vade, etc, Tu autem te perfectum fore pollicirus es. Nam
cum derelicta Monks ought to ^^ more perfect tha^ others
militia, te castrasses propter regna caelorum, quid aliud, quam perfectam
sectatus es vitam? Rursus i^ them ait: Maioris gratiae est offerre, quod non
debeas, quam reddere, quod exigeris. It is a thing of a greater reward, to
offer Lib, i, co^tr^ Iouinianu^
unto God, a thing, which thou owe not, than to render to him that, which
thou art required to do of duetye by the law of god. Who will not believe this
holy great ancient doctor, rather than our new brethren? Of this high
perfection are, or should be al religious men and women, which have vowed
Ofin^^es and monasteres ^^ief. y.
and professed voluntary povrete, to have and possess no worldly good, as
their own and proper, but to live in common. Which are now thruste out of
their monasteries, how lawfully, and justly, I will not now declare, but an
other time, and yet this I will say that the suppression of abbeys, of
collages, and the abusing of them, and of other the church lands, which men
have by impropriations (against gods law) have been and are continually a great
damage and decay unto the honor and scruice of God, the godly bryngyng up of
scholars in virtue and learning, and unto the common weal in worldly things.
For where the abbeys nouryshed many poor men's children at schole (emongst the
which I was one, or else I should never have been learned) they also kept
hospitality, and maynteyned many strong men to serve the realm at need in
time of wars, where now is found a shepehearde, and his dog only. The
abbeyes tilled much corn, for the sustentacion of many men, women, and
children, but now sheep and beasts are fed there, which do in a manner eat
up men, women, and children, and do cause al things to be extremely dear.
The abbaies raised no rentes, whereby the tenantes lived welthily, and selled
every thing good chepe, where now their lands are so improued, and the rentes
of them so much augmented, and increased, that the tenauntes live but poorly,
and are constrained to sell every thing three times more dearly, than they were
accustomed before to do or else they can not pay their re^tes. The abbeis
mai^tened woods but now they are so spoiled, consumed and wasted, that a load
of wood costeth more now then four did, when they stood, and collages. What
Note thi^.
conscience have men thus to abuse those lands against the commonweal, which
were given of the founders and used of the religious men for and to the
auauncing of gods honor, and the common weal of this realm? Were it lawefull
so to abuse their own heritage, against the order of charytye? Do they
think never to make an acconmpte to GOD, for this their dooynge? Why do they
not remember that Christ says, what shall it profit Math. xvi.
if a man win all the world, and loose his soul? but of this matter, I will
speak in an other treatise more now I return to my purpose again Hear what
Saint Ambrose says Lib. de vi^uis.
speaking of these Christ's words: Sivis esse perfectus, etc If thou will be
perfect, Math, xix.
go and sell al things, which thou have and give the^ to the poor. At vero
cum iuuenis praeceptase implesse memorasset, consilium ei datur, vt vendat
omnia, et sequatur dominum. Haec enim non praecepto imp^ra^tur. sed pro
consilio deferuntur, To give all at once to the poor is not commanded of God,
but only counsayled of him. Saint. Ciprian which was about M. CCC. years
passed, adfirmeth that virginity is not commanded, or the chastity of a
wyedowe, but only counsayled, when he says. Quum iam refertus est orbis, et
mundus impletus, qui capere possunt continentia^, spadonum more viuenres,
castrantur ad regnum Nec hoc iubet dominus, sed hortatur, nec iugum
necessitati, imponit, quando manet voluntatis arbitrium liberum, Christ (says
saint) Cipria^ commanded Ciprianus de habitu ^irginum,
not any man to live chaste or co^tinently without the company of a woman, but
exhorted and counseiled us to live so, leauyng the matier unto our free will,
and liberty. Were not then Peter Martyr, and other vf that sect, and opinion
very much deceived through ignorance of the troth, when they taught the
contrary? Saynct Hierome showing, why Paul said, that he had Hieroni a^ (...),
no commandment of God touching vyrgyns, but that he counseled them so to
contynew, says: Quia vt ipse esset virgo, non imperi^fuit, sed propriae
volunta^^, Non enim audien di sunt, qui cum habuisse vae^rem confingunt, cum de
co^tinentia disa^erens, ^^ suadens perpetuam castitatem, intulerit, i, Cori,
vi^.
Volo omnes esse sieut meipsum, et infra, Dieo au^e^ non ^^ptis and viduis,
bonum est illis, sil^^ permanseri^t sicut et ego. Optatus (as Fulgentius Lib,
ii, ad Monu^^,
writes of him) says that saint Paul taught and counsayled a work of
supererogacio^, and about gods law, when he counseiled me^ and women to keep
their virginitye.

Quia virginitas, inquit, voluntatis est, no^ necessitatis, Hieroni ad
prima^achu^.
But here saint Hierom once again affirming plainly y^ wilful poverty, De
obitu Paul lege ^u^ contra vigilati^ et Q. 3. ad ^edibian^.
and virginitye are not commanded of God, but counseled only. Semper
grandia in audie^tium ponuntur arbitrio. and ideo virginitate^ Apostolus no^
imperat, Si vis, inquit Christus, perfectus esse, non tibi imponitur necessie
tas, vt voluntas consequatur praemium. Si ergo vis esse perfectus, and
desideras quod prophetae, quod Read ye votares which have many fat benefyces.
Apostoli era^t, si apostolicae dignitatis culmen assequi velis, vade, non
parte^ substantiae, ne timor penuria infidelitatis occasio sit, and cum Anani^
et Saphiera pereas, sed vniuersa, quae possides, da pauperibus non
locupletibus, non superbis, non amicis, no^ propinquis, non vxori, non liberis,
da, quo necessitas sustenietur, non quo aug^antur opes, Haec ille. But this is
sufficient of this matter.

FINIS.
A BVCLIER OF THE FAITH TO DEFEND the truth against diverse errors, and
heresies, taught in this realm of England of late, dedicated unto the Queen's
Grace, Queen Marye. etc
SOme of y^ sentences of. ^. Austen concerning purgatory, y^ praying for y^
dead giving of alms to the poor, and saying of masses for the souls
departed, grounded and establyshed upon y^ scriptures. Whereby a man may plainly
se, how shamefully they are deceived, that say Saint Auste^ doubted of this
matter, and also that the makers of the articles annexed unto the Catechism set
forth of late in king Edward the sixth time, Articul^, ^^
^rred, calling the doctrine of purgatory, the teaching of the schole me^ and
vain.

And thirdly that our new gospellers are not members of the Catholyke church of
Christ, but Schismatikes and out of Christ's church in deed, because they are
not of the catholic churches belief.

That saint Austen doubted not in this matter, it appears evidently, by
that, that he rehearses Aerius amongst other heretics, because he said that
prayers, and sacrifices should not profit the dead. Wherefore by his judgment
al our Libro de here is. bus cap, liii.
Swinglians, and not only Peter Martyr, and the authors of these articles,
before mentioned, are very heretics in deed, because they defend obstinately
that opinion, for the which Aerius was condemned of Heresy. Also Saint
Austen, has these sentences following.

^ed si forte agrnm non coluerit and spinis eum opprimi Lib, ii, cap, xxiii, de
genesi contra Manichee^
permiserit, habet in hac vita maledictionem terrae su^ in omnibus operibus
suis, et post hanc vitam habebit, vel ignem purgationis vel penam eternam, But
if perchance he will not till his fyelde, but will suffer it to His soul he
meant.
be ouergrowen with thorns, he has in this life the curse of his earth in all
his works, and he shall have after this life, either the fire of purgatory, or
else pain everlasting. See thou not (good reader) what sentence, Saint
Austen gives in this matter, nothing doubting therein? Lib, ^^, ^^, ix, de
(...) ^e del,
Again he says. Piorum animae mortuorum non seperantur ab ecclesia, quae
nun^ est regnum Christi, alioquin ne^ ad altar dei, fieret e^rum memoria in
communione corporis Christi, The souls of godly men departed are not separated
from the church, which now is the kingdom of Christ, or else they should not be
remembered An Alte^ of God,
at gods altar, in the communion of Christ's body. What can be spoken more
plainly than this is? Appears it not here that our new brethren believe not as
Saint Austen did, and the other Doctors of the latin church of Christ? Also
in an other place he says thus: Futurum est, vt quidam August, In. psa, 37.
in ira de^emen dentur, and ^^ indignatione arguantur, and forte non omnes qui
arguentur, emendabuntur, sed futuri sunt in emendatione quidam salui, sic tamen
quasi per ignem, Arguentur and ^, Cor^, iii, Math. xxv.
non emendabunt^r, quibus dicet Christus. Esuriui and non dedistis
mihimanducare, etc.

Undoubtedly the time shall be that certain men shall be amended in the wrath
o^ God, and be reproved in his indignacion. And pe^ adventure all which shall
be reproved, shall not be amended, but certain shall be saved by amending but
yet so as it were through fire.

They shall be reproved, and not amended, to whom Christ shall say, I was
houngry, and you gave me no meat. etc. And a little after ^ the same place he
says, pourge me, O Lord, so in this life, that Ignis pu^gatorius.
thou may make me such a man in this world. Cui iam emendatorio igne opus
nonsit, propter illos, qui salui erunt, sic tamen quasi per ignem, and quia
dicitur saluus erit. Contemnitur ille ignis, ita plane, quamuis salui e^unt per
ignem. Grauior tamen erit ignis ille, quam quiequid potest homo pati in hac vit
a. Purge Note thy^ sentence.
me so, O Lord, in this life, that I may have no need now of that fire,
which amendeth men's souls, for them that shall be saved, but yet so as it
were through fire, and because Saint Paul says, he i, Cor^, ^^.
shall be saved through fire, that fire is set at naught, and little regarded,
so it is forsooth, all though in deed they shall be saved through fire, Ide^
habet vera et falsa pe^it^ti^ Cap. xviii.
yet that fire shall be more grievous and painful, then any thing, that a man
can suffer in this life. Does Id^ habet be vera et fa^sa penitentia, cap,
^^iii, Libro de cura ag^da pro mortuis. Cap. ^.
saint Auste^ doubt now in this place of the fire of purgatory? Again he
declares plainly, that the Lutherans and Swinglians are not members of the
catholic church, which prays for y^ dead when he says thus Va^are non
potest quod vniuersa pro defunc^is e^^lesia supplicare consueuit, It cannot be
for naught or unprofitable that the universal Church has accustomed to pray
for the dead. We read (says he) in the books of the Machabees This is the
true church of Christ, and not the Lutherans church^.
that a sacryfice was offered for the dead, but although it werread in no place
of the old testainente, yet the authority of the universal church is great,
which is clearly seen in this custom, where in the prayers of the priest,
which are made to God at his altar, the dead are prayed for, ye hear him
again, saying: Tom, ^. ii, xxi, cap. xiii de ciuitat^ dei.
Temporarias paenas alii in hac vita tantum, alii post mortem, alii nunc and
tunc, ve^u^tame^ ante iudicium illud seueriss^mum, nouissimumque* patiuntur,

Some men suffer pains for a season only, in this life. Some He douteth not
here of purgatory
after this life, some both now and then, but yet they suffer those pains,
before that most sharpest and last judgment.

In an other place he confyrmeth the same with these words. Neque nega^du^
est defunctorum animas pietate ^uoru^, Ad dulciti^^ quest. 2. b in enchiridio,
cap, 110. Tom. iii.
viuentium releuari, quum pro illis sacrificium mediatoris offertur, vel
elcemosynae in ecclesia fiunt, sed eis haec prosunt, qui cum viuerent, vt
haecsibi postea prode^se possent, meruerunt.

It must not be denied, that the souls departed are relyeued and easyed of
their pains, by the charytable goodness of their friends alive, when the
sacrifyce of our mediatoure Christ, is offered for them, or when alms are
given for The mass is a sacrifice propiciatorie which is against the new
brethren
them in the church, or amo^ngest christian people, but these things do profit
such, as deserved, when they were alive, that they might afterward profit them.
Quum ergo sacrificia sieve altaris, sieve qnarum cumque eleemosynarum, pro
baptizatis omnibus fidelibus offeruntur, provalde bonis gratiarum actiones
sv^t, pro non valde malis propitiationes Note that he says propitiacions.
sunt, pro valde malis et sinulla sunt adiume^ta mortuorum, quales cumque
viuorum consolationes sunt Quibus autem prosun^, aut ad hoc pro sunt, vt
plenaremiss^o, vel certe vt tolerabilior sit ipse damnatio When therefore
sacrifyces An altar.
either of the altar, or else of alms, are offered for all feithful people
baptized, they are for the very good, thanks giving, For them yt are not very
evil, they be propiciacions, that is to say purchasinges of ye favor and The
mass is a sacrifice propitiatory and even so are aims
mercy of god, For the^ which be very il, although they be no help or profit
to the dead, yet they be consolations and comfortes of the living, but to to
obtain mercy of god for the souls deperted, and not only the passion of
Christ.
whom they are profitable, either it profits the^ to this end, yt they may
have full remission of their sins, and pains, or at the least, ye their
pains may be made more tolerable. Does nots. Austen affirm here manifestly
without al doubt, that the souls deperted are relieved through alms given for
them, and the sacrifice of the mass? Does he not also plainly say yt by alms,
and by the sacrifice of the mass, the souls departed obtain remission of
their sins, and that they are propitiacio^s or menes to purchase mercy of god
for the^? What madness is it the^ to deny this, or to say yt s. Auste^ doubted
of this matter, how blid are they the^ which stiffly defend that ye mass is
not a sacrifice profitable to ye souls departed out of this world? Sajnct
Austen speaks here, and in many other places of alters, which our new
brethren did cast down, as the heritikes called Donatistes did, which never
christian good man did. Again he says, Propter quorundam soluenda Lib. xvii.
ca ii. de ciuitate doi.
peccatorum vincula Christus ad inferna descenderat. Christ went down into
hell to loose the bonds of certain sinners. This his saying must needs be
understand of hell, which is called purgatory, and of sinners being their
punished for their sins, because Christ descended not into the hell of the
damned for ever, for their Math. xxv
sins shall never be loosed, because their pains are, and shall be, (as Christ
said) eternal, or endless, I te^ he says, Pro defu^ctis quibusdam, vel ipsius
ecclesiae vel quorundam Tomo. v. li xxi, ca. xxiiii be ciuitate dei.
piorum exauditur oration The prayer either of the church, or else of some godly
me^, is heard of god for certain persons departed out of this life. Tomo, x
Sermon, 32. de sanctio,
Doubts he here of purgatory? Also when he preached to the people of the
souls departed, he said thus: Illo transitorio igne (de quo dixit Apostolu^,
ipse enim, saluus erit, sic tamen quasi pet ignem) non capitalia, i, Cori, iii,
sed minuta peccata purgantur, With that transitory fire (of the which Paul ye
Apostle has said, yt he shall be saved, but yet so as it were through fire) are
pourged small sins, not deadlye sines. See not thou (good reader) that. S.
Austen establishes here again purgatory by thautoritie of S. Paul? doubted he
then of it? Moreover Lib. ix co^fessionum, cap, xiii,
he prayed for his mother departed saying: Nunc pro peccatis matris me;
deprecorte, domine, exaudi me, per medicinam vulnerum nostrorum, quae pepe^dit
in ligno, and sede^s ad S Austen prayed for his mother being dead
dexteram tuam, inter pellat pro nobis, I pray to the, now, O lord, for the
sins of my mother, here me by ye medicine of our wou^des, yt is to say through
thy sons passion, by which our si^nes are healed which did hang upon ye
cross, and now sits on thy right hand prayi^g for us He prayed to God also
to inspire the The sacryfice of the mass.
hearts of priests to pray at ye altar in their masses, for his mother
Monica, and Patricius his father, her husbo^d. I did not weep (says he) in
those prayers, which we made to the, o lord when ye sacrifice of our price or
rau^so^ was offered for my mother. Obl^tiones pro spiritibus dormie^tiu^. quas
vere aliquid adiuuare ipsos crede^du^ est, sup ipsas memorias, no^ si^t
su^ptuosae. Ang episto.
Let not ye oblacio^s made in ye remembrance of ye dead be to costly, which
we must believe, something to help Is this to doubt of purgatory
the^, does he the^ doubt, yt sacrifices avail ye souls departed, when he
says we must believe yt they profit the^? Must Sacrifices do profyt the souls
deperted,
he not be very folish, that will believe these new teachers before s. Auste^ and
Tomo. x. sermon. 41 de sanctis. ^
al ye other au^cie^t doctors, which are plainly against the^ in this matter.
In an other place he writes thus again Quicquid de istis peccatis (minutis) a
nobis redemtum non fuerit, illo, igne purgandum est, de quo ait apostolus, ipse
saluus erit sic tamen quasi p^gnem. Whatsoever of these small sins we leave
vnraumsomed, shall be purged with that fire, of which saint Paul speaks,
saying, he shall be saved, but i. Corin. iii,
yet so as it were through fire. Ita peccatain hoc seculo purga, vt in futuro
ille ignis purgatorius, The fire of purgatory
aut non inueniat, aut certe parum inueniat quod exurat. Cleanse thou so thy
sins in this world, that in time to come, yt fire of purgatory, either may
not find, or at the least it may find but little, which it may burn away e.
Siaute^ n^e in tribulatione gratias agimus, nec bonis operibus peccata
redimimus, ipsitam diu i^ purgatorio illo Mark we^^ this,
igne moras habebimus qua^diu peccata ta^qua^ lignum, foenum, stipula,
co^su^mantur, signis dorro^ erit quam quid potest in hoc seculo paenarum,
videri, S, Austen doubted not of purgatory,
aut cogitari, aut se^tiri But if we give not god thanks in our tribulacion,
neither yet redeem our sins with good works, we our selves shall so long
time remain in the fire of purgatory, until our sins be consumed, like as
wood, hay, or stuble, which fire shall be harder, or more painful, then any
pain, that may be see^, thought, or felt, in this world. Is this to doubt of
purgatory? He Tractatu ^ in Ioha^ne^.
says in an other place, that priests at their Masses do rehearse the
Saints and Martyrs names, not to pray for them, as they do the names of
others departed, that they may rest in peace, but that they would pray for
us to God, that we might follow their godly and virtuous life. This is very
plainly written of holy Saint Austen Note this reader, of the masses sacrifice.
(and ought to persuade every good man to believe as he did in this manner,
which says again.

Oration bus sanctae ecclesiae, et salutari sacrificio, and eleemosynis, quae
pro eorum spiritibus eroga^tur, non est dubitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis
misericordius agatur a domino, quam eorum Tom, x, sermon, xxxii de verbis
apostoli i, thessa, ilii,
peccata meruerunt: Hoc enim a patribus craditum, vniuersa obseruat ecclesia,
vt pro eis, qui in corporis ac sa^guinis Christi communione defu^cti sunt, cum
ad ipsum sacrificium suo loco commemorantur, oretur, atque pro illis quoque id
offerri co^memoretur. Quum vero eorum commendatorum causa opera misericordiae
cele: brantur, quis eis dubitat suffragari pro quibus orationes deo non
inaniter alligantur? Non omnino Et de cura agenda promortuis, Cap, 1,
ista prodesse defunctis ambigendum est

This it may be Englished, it is not to be doubted, that the dead are helped,
through the prayers of the holy Church, and the sacrifice, which brings
salvation and by alms, that are given for their souls, so that our Lord
should entreat them more mercifully, then Read ye that say, S Auste^ doubted
of purgatory,
their sins have deserved. For the whole church observes and keeps this
thing, taught them by tradicion of ye fathers, that prayer is made for them,
which are departed in the communion of Christ's body and blood, when they at
the sacrifice it self, in their place, are remembered, and that same sacrifice
is remembered also to be offered for them, when for their sake commended (to
GOD.) works of mercy be celebrated, and done, who doubts but that they are
helped thereby, for whom prayers be made to god not in vain? We must nothing
doubt at all, but that these The sacrifice of the mass is propitiatory,
things do profit them. Note here good reader, diverse lessons against Peter
Martyr, and the other Swinglians. First that Saint Austen calls the
sacrifice of the holy Mass: Salutare sacrificium, a sacrifice ge^i^g to us
salvation, which is the mass to be a S, Austen douted not of purgatory,
sacrifice propiciatorye. Secondly y^ he says ^hrise, it is not to be doubted
but that the souls departed are holp throw prayers of y^ church y^ sacrifice
of y^ mass, and alms given for the^ to obtain the ^auor and mercy of god:
Atradicion vnwrit^en in the scriptures,
Thirdly note yt he says, yt it was tha^ a custom and an usage through out al
y^ catholic church (which was left to it by tradicio^ of ye fathers) yt
prayers should be said, alms given, and Christ's body and blood offered i^
sacrifice Doctor Thomas Cramner, D, Ridle^ Latimer, Rogers Thomas Hoper, and
semblable others,
at mass, for ye souls deperted, and y^ no man should doubt, but yt they were
releued thereby. He must be the^ very foolish, yt will believe Peter Martyr, or ye
makers of ye articles adioined to ye catechism before named, or any other
which does teach the contrary to this catholic doctrine, because Saint
Austen declares them to be no members of y^ catholic church of the which he
and the holy fathers The Swi^glians are not members of the cath^like church but
Schismatikes,
then were members. Seeing our English Lutherans, and Swinglians that so
shamefully err in the blessed Sacrament of the altar, are so manifestly
deceived in this matier, against both the Scriptures, the catholic church
and also the ancient doctors: why will men be so mad any longer to follow
them in any other of their wicked opinions? For can the holy ghost be with them
that are no members of Christ's church, but plain Schismatikes, as now it
appears that they be? Finally Saint Austen writing, whether Libro de cura, ^
mortuis, age^da Cap, iiii,
it should profit the soul, if the body were buried nigh to the tumbe of a
holy Martyr, which questyon Merits of wor^es,
Pauline the Bishop of Nola asked of him, said, that it should be pro^itable,
because the man's friend seeing him buried there should pray to the Martyr for
his soul. Qui affectus, cu^ defunctis a fidelibus exhibetur, eum prodesse non,
est dubium his, qui cum in corpore v^uerent, ta^a sibi post han^ vitam prodesse
meruerunr. Which affeccion and love, when faithful me^ show it or do it for
the dead, it is no doubt, but it profits them, that deserved, whiles they
lived, that such things might profit them after their death. Who yet will say
that. S Austen doubted of purgatory? He doubted not of purgatory, nor of the
pain thereof, but only of the manier and the duraunce or contynuaunce Ad
dulcitiu^ q, ii, et in enc^iridie,
of that pain, whether that as wood abides longer in than hay, and hay then
stubble, so Sermon, de anunabus defunctoru^.
some man's soul should be after such resemblaunce longer in that pain
than some others. And yet he writing afterward of the same matter, declared
that he doubted not in it. Rabanus, li, ii, de institutione clericorum, cap,
xliiii,


Rabanus holds with this feith, sayi^g Sacrificiu^, pro fide hu^ defunctorum
requie offerre, quia per totum orbem hoc custoditur, credimus quod ab ipsis
apostolis traditum fit Hoc enim vbique catholica tenet ecclesia, que nisi
crederet fidelibus defunctis peccata dimitti, non pro eorum animabus
eleemosynas saceret ve Isac^^f c^u^ offerret To offer sacrifyce for the quiet
rest Hoc idem habet Isidorus, lib, i, cap. xviii, de offici^s, ^cclesiastici
of the faithful departed, because it is observed and kept throughout al y^
world, we do believe that it was ordained and taught of the Apostles. For the
catholic church does keep and use it in eueri place, which except she believed
the sins of the faithful departed to be forgeuen, would not give alms, nor
yet offer any sacrifices for their souls. Saint Hierom ratifieth this
doctrine saying: Ad Pa^machiu^ de ob^tu vx oris sue Pauline,
Pa^machius noster sanctam fauillam ossaque veneranda eleemosynae balsamis
rigat. etc. sciens scriptu^ sicuta qua extin guit ignem, ita eleemosyna
peccatu^ Our friend Pammachius waters the holy ashes, and worshipful boanes
(of his wife Pauline) with ye sweet balm of alms deeds, knowing yt it is
written: like as water que^cheth Ecclesi, iii,
the fire, so does alms deeds quench sin. Again he says: Et sicut diaboli,
and omnium negatorum, and impiorum, qui di^^erunt in cord suo non est deus
credimus aeterna tormenta, In ^alce co^mentarioru^ in Esai lx vi.
sic peccatorum, and impiorum, and tamen christianorum quorum opera in igne
sunt probanda atque purganda, moderatam arbitramur and mixtam clementiae
sententiam iudicis.

And as we do believe yt the pains of the devil and of all that deny Christ, and
of all wicked persons, be eternal and everlasting: even so we think that the
sentence of the judge (Christ) against sinners and ungod ly men, and yet
Christians (whose works must be tried and purged by fire) to be moderate, and
mi^gled with clemencye and mercy.

Thirdly he says: Notandum aute^ quod In prouerbia, xi, The sacryfica
auai^^^h the souls departed,
et si impiis post mortem nulla spes veniae est, sunt tamen, qui de leuioribus
peccatis, cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt, post mortem possunt absolui, vel
paenis, videlicet castigati vel suorum precibus and cleemosynis, missaru^que
celebrationibus, sed haec quibuscumque fiunt, et ante iudicium, et de
leuioribus fiunt erratis

But it is to be noted (says s. Hierom,) that although the wicked persons A
notable place of, S Hierome both for purgatory and also for the holy mass.
have no hope of forgeuenes after they be dead, yet there be some, which may
be loosed after their death from small sins, with which they were bound,
when they dyed. That is to say either punished with peynes, or else thorough the
prayers of their friends, or alms deeds, and with Masses, said or song for
the^. But yet, for whom soever these things be done, they most be done both
before Domes day, and also for small and light offenses.

S. Bid our countrema^ expounding Beda in cap, 3, luce,
these words of s. John Baptist, Christ shall baptize in spirit and fire,
says: Sunt qui ita exponu^t, quod in presenti in spiritu, and in futuro in
igne Baptizemur. Vt videlicet sicut nunc in remissionem oi^m peccatorum, aqua
and spiritu renascimur, ita and tunc de lenibus quibusdam, quae hinc nobis
cuntibus adheserunt, purgatorii ignis ante iudicium vltimu^ baptismate,
permu^demur. dicente Apostolo, si quis superae 1, Cor, i,
dificauerit etc Ipse saluus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem. There be some
men, yt do expou^nde S. John's words thus, That is to say, we be Baptized in
Idem habet Haimo in. 1. Cor. 3.
this life, in spirit, and in the life to come in fire: which is as much to
say, as now in this world we can have no remission of our sins, except we
be borne again of water and the spirit: even so in the world to come, we
shall be cleansed before ye last judgment, by the baptism of Purgatory fire,
for certain small sins, which we died in. As S. Paul says, if any man bilde
upon the foundation, wood, Hay. etc. he shall be sauid through fire. How
plain is this against all the Lutherans and Swinglians, which deny
Purgatoric. S Ambrose holds with this Oratione. Funcbri de obitu Theodosii,
unperatoris.
Doctrine, saying. Da requiem perfecto ra mulo tuo, requiem quam praeparasti
sanctis tuis, Give rest, O Lord, to thy perfyte servant, the rest, which
thou have prepared for thy saynctes. Again he says, co^fortynge one Faustus,
over much lamentinge the death of his sister. Non tam deplora^dam, quam
frequenta^da^ Lib. 2. epistle. 8.
orationibus re^r. nec maestica^dam tuis la crimis, sed magis oblationibus
ai^^m eius deo commenda^da^ arbitor. I judge yt she ought not so much to be
wept for, as to be often prayed for. Nor I think that thou should sorrow
for her, but rather cause sacrifices to be offered The sacrifice of the Mass
proufiteth the dead.
for her to God. Why wynked our new brethren at these manifest sayings set
forth, in this matter? would they that we should credyte them before all the
holy Doctors of the Church? Are they so blind and shameless to desire that
of us? But yet hear again what some other of the old and Godly writers, say
in this questions yt therbi it may yet more plainly appear, how greatly
Peter Martyr, and his brethren do er^e from the belefe of christ's Catholic
church, and the holy Doctors of the same, to the end y^ all men may forsake
their doctrine or beware of it in time to come, that they peryshe not for ever,
but may be saved.

Tertulianus in his book that he De Monogamia.
wrote exhortyng wyddowes not to mary again, says, Pro ai^a mariti oret, and
refrigeriu^ postulet ei interi^, and in prima resurrectione consortium and
offerat annuis diebus dormiti on^s eius, Let the widow pray for her Yerelye
minds ar no new things.
husbands soul, and desire of God for him in the mean season, a refresshing
or an easement of his pains and a feloship in the first resurrection, and let
her offer yearlye for him the day of his death. Are they not then very blind,
that will follow our new brethren, which do teach the clean contrary to this
godly Doctrine, and yet they would make me believe, that they set fourth the
bel^e^e of the primative Church?

He again in another place says. De coro^a Militis.
Oblationes pro defu^^tis pro nata^^^^s anu^ die sac^^us We do make oblatione,
and keep a^nyuersaries for y^ dead. This was Anniuersaries.
written above thrittene hundred, and fifty years past, and yet our new
Gospellers would make us believe, that this doctrine is new, and y^ it was set
up by the schole men, as an Article aduered to ye Catechism before rehersyd,
falsely says. Who will the^ Arti. 23.
believe them in other things, seeing they lie so playnlie in this thing?

S. Pauline, to whom* S Auste^ Epist, ad Pammachium defientem mortem vxoris
sue. Lege paulinum.
wrote, thus has, T^^ea^ prose q^^utus ^^ remediis falutaribus and vi^is
operibus hoc est, eleemosinis, debito ordine: Primum charo fune^i iusta
persoluens, piis lachrimis, and largo charitatis rore per^u s^is, ^^ligiosas
exequias honorasti.

Thou have showed to her thy love Episto^^. 1.
with holso^e remedies, and lively words, y^ is to say, with alms given to
the poor for her soul, in^dew order first of all keeping deryges and serue^
for y^ derely beloved dead perso^aige, thou full of charity Personage. Or.
Dirigee^.
shaft houonted her Godly obsequies or Diriges with souing tears, de^lareth
not this sayng this au^n^ient Doctors belief herin? Charles the great
Emperor, in the Ep^aphe, which ^he ma^e upon the To^be of Adrian the Pope,
wrote this, Qui ^^gis ho^ versus, deuoto peotore suppler Ambor^^ miti^ di^
miserere le^^

Thou that ^eadest these verses, make humble peticion to God, and say with a
de^onte mi^de, god have merry upon them both.

Sayn^t Ciprian declares playnlie, Lib. 1. epist^e. 9.
that he and his e^ders the Bishops, believed y^ pra^ers, and the sacrifice of
the holy Mass, were profitable to y^ souls departed, for he says Victor, cum
contra form a^ in concilio a sacerdotibus S. cip^ian. and his elders bele^ed
that there wa^ a purgatori And that the sacrifice of the holy proufyiet^ the
dead.
datam, geminiu^ faustinu^ prelby^^rum ausus ^it a^torem co^stituere, no^
estque pro dormition^eius apud vos fiat oblatio, aut deprecatio aliqua nomine
e^us in ecclesia freque^tetur. This was written about. M. CCC. ye^es sense of
this holy martyr, and great clearke, and it is this much to say in English
Saying yt victor has been so bold to make Gemine fa^stine his executre,
against the ordinance made of the Priests in the counsel there is no cause
why any sacrifice should be made for his death amogest you, or any prayer
used in the Church, in his name.

Certain Greake Doctors sayings for the defense of Purgatory, whereby the
faith and belief of the Greake Church may plainly appear in this matter, as
the belife of the Latyne Church does by the authorites before recyted.
TO thente^t, good reder, damascene.
that thou maiste euide^tlye see, how that our new brethren do err against
y^ belief of al godly ancient S. Austen has the same lib, de Here Is. Cap. 53.
fathers of al ages, both of y^ greek and latin Church also, I will briefly
recite certain greake Doctors saiyngs upon this mattier first Saint
Damascene in his book of Heresies, says ageinste the Heretyke. Aerius. Negat
quodqua^ offere^du^ esse pro mortuis, He denies that any thing should be
offered for the dead, ergo by the greake church they are condemned of Heresy
that say, as Aerius did, and therefore our new teachers, and their scholars are
all out of the right Lib. ^. Tomo. 1, ca. ^5.
way. Epiphanius also, a Greake writter, which was almost twelve hunderd
years paste writtynge against ye above namid Aerius, says, after he had
rehearsed his reasons made against prayinge for the souls departed Postea vero
de eo, quod proferantur Read ye, Lutheria^s: and Swi^glians and return to
the truth again.
n^i^^ vi^a defu^ctoru^, quid hoc magis fuerit vtile? but afterward, touching
that, y^ the names of the dead be rehearsed at mass what thing can be more
profitable for them tha^ this? Prosu^^ preces que pro ill^s fiunt, et^a^ ^^tot
culpa^ no^ abscinda^t, Prayers which are made for ye dead do profyt them,
although they take not quite away the whole offense? Memoriam facimus pro
pec^atoribus, mis^ricordiam dei implora^tes. We do make a memory for the
souls, of sinners departed) desyring god to be mercyful to them. Also in a
another place, teaching ^i. ^. Tom. ^. sub ^^nem
us brieflye the Doctrine and fayeth of the Apostolic and Catholic Church,
writes thus. ^^ ^^is autem, qui vita defuncti sunt, ex noi^^, memotia^ ^aci^^t
orationes ad deum perficientes, ac cultus d^ui^os, and mysteriorum
dispe^sationes. Sees^ thou not here, good Christian reader, the belief of the
Greake Church? does not this old writer comdempnyng Aerius of Heresy
condemn therewith all our new Preachers, seeing they teach the same heresy*
but hear now this English of Ep^phanius words before recited, which is this.

As touching them, tha^ are dead, they do remember them by name, prayng to God
for them, accomplishyng the godly services or worship pinge^, and the
distributions of y^ Sacrame^^es, in the Mass he meant. L^^here is the belife of
the Greake church, which S. Damascene does set for the again saying.

(...) Sermon de obdormientibus.
(...) sacram^ntis memor^am eorum quif^deliter obdorm^erun^, habendam
edixerunt, Quod ad^^^e (...) contradiction^ obser^^ (...) and catholica^
ec^les^^ Christi, and dei a (...) ad fine^ (...) ab coque tempore vsa que in
preses, and in fine^ vs^que ^nundi. Oi^o hoc neque Hec est catholica ecclesia
extr^ quam ^un^ s^inglia^ and vit ^eran^
(...) neque ab^urde, neque t^ mere fortu^^ou^ ordi^^ (...) ^st. Quae ^ni^
(...) religio (...) nescia sus^epit, and ^n ^ot se^^la se^uat in co^cuss^
m^^ime vana sunt sed vtisia, deo placita, saluti^ue nos^^ (...).

The holy Apost^es disciples of ou^ savior, made a^ ^^e, and an ordinance,
that a memory should be had, in the dread ^ll and lyuelye sa^ramentes of them,
which were dep^^ted in the faith of Christ^. The which thing the Apostolic,
and catholic Church of Christ, h^ther ^ tradicio^ of the Apostels,
to obseruith and keeps steadfastly, yea and that without any again saying
or contradiction, from one end of the world to the other, and from that time
of the Apostles ordinance contynuallye unto this present time, and unto the
worlds end shall. And this was not ordained in vain, another folyshlye, nor
what can our new men say to this? are they of the catholic church which deni
the Doctrine that she holds
yet rashely, or by chance. For such things as Christ's Relygion, that cannot
err, receives and keeps so long unmoved, be not in vain, but profitable,
to God pleasant, and much helping to our salvation. He makes mention in that
sermon of masses, said the therty, and the forti day and at the years end,
yearly for ye dead, which things, the catholic and Apostolic church
observes steadfastly and without saying against it of any person. Then he
says teaching us a very notable lesson. Profecto^^ ^tiuolu^ and inutile opus
esset, quu^ tot sa^cti dimnoque spiritu pleni, patriarc^ae, patres, ac doctores
Note this fruteful les^on.
fu^rint, vtique aliquis coru^, ad c^^smodi c^^rem sopiendum incubuisset, at
tatum abest, ne quis vnquam subuertere te^taret, vt confirmarit et^a^,
quotidieque magis ac magis huic operi studeatur mere metu^que increme^to
adiiciatur. Certainly if Note this fruteful saying.
this deed were vain and unprofitable to the souls departed, saying there
have been so many holy patriarchs, fathers, and teachers, which were full of
the holy ghost, some one of the^ would have endeavored him self to have put
down that error but it is so far from yt point, y^ ever any man assayed to
over throw it, yt they have much rather confyrmyd and strengthened it, and
every day more and more men labor to do it and also to encreace it. This
lesson overthrows oll our new brethre^s doctrine, and not only in this matter

S. Athanasius (as Damascene S. Athanasius.
witnesses) said in a sermon made for the dead. ^i quis diem, obieti^, licet
in aere^ deponatur inhumatus ne omiteris oleum and caeram inuocato christo d^o,
ad sepulchrum accendere. ^ccepta eni^ deo sunt, plurima^que referu^t secum
mercedem. ^lisi et cera in exequ^s mortuorum.
Oleum eni^ and caera holocaustu^ est incruentae autem hostiae oblatio,
propitiatio est

If any man depart out of this life, although he be not buried, do not thou
let pass to light oil, and Wax at his grave, calling upon god by Prayour.
For God does accept them, and they bring with them a great reward, For Oil
and wax The Mass is asacrifice prop^tiatorie
are sacrifice, but the offering up of y^ unbloody Sacrifice (which is y^
sacrifice of Christ offered in the mass without blood shedynge) is a
propitiation, or an obtaining of Gods mercy for the soul departed. Then
after he says that the holy apostels of God did teach the people to pray for
the dead, and yearly to make memorialles for the^, and that y^ thing pleasyth
God very much. How ygnora^t were then Doctor Richard Cox, and Christopher
Neuensun when they did give out an Inyunction in their visitacion at oxford,
that no ca^dels, torches, or other lyghtes should be vsyd at any burialles,
seeing. S. Candels ^ lyghtes ought to be used in the church.
Athanasius exhorts me^ to use the^ at the tombs and graves of the dead, and
says also that they are a sacrifice to God? It was a custom many years
sense, that lyghtes should be vsyd in the churches. For sayncte Gregorye
Nazianze S. Hieromes master writes of them, saying,

Lampades, quas accendis sunt venturae illuminationis Orati. in. 5. Lauachru^.
misterium, cum qua obui^bimus sponse splendidae ac virginalis ai^ae,
splendidis fidei lampadibus.

The Lamps, which thou do light or bourne, when Baptism is ministered,
does signifye the light to come wherewith we shall mete the spouse of the
bright shining virginal soul, with bright Lamps of faith. Again he says.
Proin de pulchra fuit nobis Oratione i^ S. pascha.
hesterna splendoris ac luminarium sancta celebritas, quam public, and
priuatim peregimus vniuersum genus hominu^ parua, dignissima tamen expe^sa,
igne nocte^ magni luminis instar, illumina^tes Therefore yesterdayes holy feast
of The pascal taper, and the blessi^g of the fire be no new things.
brightness and of lights, was to us fair and goodlye, which we did both
openly and secretlye, geuynge light to all mankind, with small charge, yet
most worthy and with fire making the night so bright, as it were day light,
and a little afterward he says.

Pulchrior d^nique hod^erna est festiuitas, quonia^ lumen hest^^num, magni
luminis exorientis praecursio erat, and tanquam laeticia quedam festu^
prae^cdens, hodie resurrectione^ ipsam celebramus.

To be short, this days feast is greater, and more solemn: because
yesterdayes light (the paschal taper he meant) was but a going before of the
great light, (christ) rising up from death, and as a certain joy and gladness
coming before the feast, but this day we do keep hye and holy y^ resurrection
of christ it self. yet ones again hear him saying thus of Oratione ^ in
Iulian^^
Constantius the emperor being dead. Co^stantius i^ oi^bus oi^m elatus est
laudibus, ac pompis, iisque venerandis ac nostris nec non cantibu^, totam
noctem resonantibus, and lumina ribus accensis, quibus Christiani transitum
honorare pium censemus etc

Constantius was brought forth with the praises of all men, and with a
worshipful company, and also with our songs that lasted all night, and It is
godly to burn lyghtes at burialles, and also other times.
with Torchelyght, with which we count godly to honor a Christen man's
passing out of his world. What can our new brethren say to this? will they
think, y^ we ought to believe the^ before these holy fathers? S. Hiero^
speaking of certain presents or gifts sent to him of one Marcella says. Vt
demonstremus aliqua mister^a Tom. 1. Epist. ad Marcella^.
esse in munisculis cerei. vt accenso lumin^, sponsiad ventus expectetur. That
I might declare some mysteries to be in thy prese^tes Good works.
I think that the candels sygnifie, that the spouses commi^ge to Judgment must
be looked for of us, with a burning light of godly living and of verteous
conversation. Were not then our new teachers very ygnorant, when they moved
men to have no lyghtes in the Churches.

Sayncte Austen writes also of Tom. 10, sermon, 7. de te^pore.
lights to be bourned in y^ churches, saying. Sunt multi quivouent, alius
palla, alius olium, alius ceram ad luminaria noctis. etc. Therbe many, that do
vow, some Libro. 1, Cap. 9. de institutione clericorum.
to give a pall to lay upon the dead coprs or bodi, an other oil, an some
other wax, to bourne all night.

Rabanus which was a boue seven hunderd years past, says. Cerei sole^t
accendi in signu^ laeticiae, vtque oste^datur lux illa qu^ illuminat omne^
hoi^em. etc. Candels are used to be lighted up, for a sign of gladness, and
that light should be showed forth, which lightened every man that co^mith
into this world. What mente then our new brethren John. 1.
to take all lyghtes out of the Temples? Came not that their doing of the
Prince of Darkness.

S Hierom wrote against one Vigilantius, because he spoke against lights and
candels accustomedlye then used in the Churches. Accensiante Tom. 2. Epist. 10.
Ripario.
tumulos martyrum cerei, Idololatrie insignia sunt. Are the candels, which do
burn^ before the martirs tombs, or shrynes, wax candels.
tokens of Idolatry? which is as much as if he had said, they b^ not,
albeit thou think yt they so be. Qui cumque accendunt cereos, inquit,
secundum Romans 14.
^idem suam, habent mercedem, iuxta^id, Abundet vnus quisque ^suo sensu. They
that light up wax Candels have a reward of God according to their faith, as.
S Paul says. Let every man satisfye his own Judgment, in things that are
indifferent.

Such wax Candels, or torches why candels are set up before the sayncts
combs and Images
are lighted and bourned, both to remember the holy Saynctes faith and their
verteous life, which did shine in this world like lamps and candelles as
also in sign and toke^ that they are now in the glory eternal. Wherefore such
lights are not set up prin^ipally to the saynctes Images but to the Saynctes,
and ^ynally to god, which made holy those saynctes, and endued there souls,
with the glory and brightness of heaven.

S. Hierom addith and says. Neque Math. 26
Christus indigebat vnguento, nec lumine cere^rum martyrs, and tame^ il^a
^ulier in honore^ christi, hoc fecit, deuo^oq^^ mentis ^ius recipitur Absque
marty^u^reliqui^, per totas orieutis ecclesias, quando legendum est eua^gelium,
accenduntur inminaria Read this ye swyngiyans and reca^t your error in time.
ia^ sole rutilante, no^ vtique ad fugandas renebras, sed ad signum laeticiae
demonstrandum.

Christ neadid not the oyntement nor the martyrs the lightinge up of wax
candels and yet that woman poured out yt oynment upon christ in honor of him,
and he accepted her deuor^^. why candels are lighted up when the gospel is
read.
without any martirs relics through all y^ churches of the Aeste, whiles y^
Gospel must be read, they the candels, although the son do shine, not to
put away the darkness but to show a sign or token of joy and gladness. How
blind then were our new bisshoppes, and preachers, when they would have no
lights at all in the churches? was this to restore the church of England (as
they pretendid, and bare men in hand) to the faith, religion and ordinances of
the primatife church of Christ? but to return again to our matier of
purgatory, hear now some other Doctors sayings.

S. Clement Pope. s, Peter's disciple, Epistle. 1
and successor wrytteth after this sort. Iustruebat mortuos se pelire and
diligenter eorum exequias peragere, pro eisque otare, and eleemosinas dare
Saynct Peter did teach us, (says Clement) to bury the dead and diligently to
make their exequies and diriges, to prai for them, and to give alms for their
souls, is this Doctrine then new?

S. Cyryll also, which was almost Lib, 8, in ieuiticum. cap. 12. 13.
twelve hundred years passed, declares evidently the same. with these words
spoken of the lepry, and diverse kinds of sin. Secondlye it must be
understand of those sins yt passith with us out of this world and remain
with us after this life of the which certain are so fyxed to men's souls, that
they can not be put away for ever.

Alia vero esse, que purgatione^ possunt recipere, secundum Purgatory is no
new thing
inspectionem and iudicium pontificis illius quem occulta latere non possunt,
quique dispensabit aias singulorum secundum hoc, quod in eis maculas leprae,
aut expiabiles, aut inexpiabiles videri. We most understand yt there are
other sinners, which may be purged Note well this.
after this life, according to ye loki^ge upon them, and the judgment of that
bishop (Christ) to whom hyd things cannot be unknown, which shall
dystribute every man's soul, according as he shall sethe spots of their lepry
(which signifies syn) to be either able to be cleansed or else not able.

S. Gregory, Nazianzen, s. Hiero^s in calce lib. basilii in^ carmina
sepulchralia.
master prayed for s. Basil being dead, saying. Deus ei beata donet. GOD
give to him the bliss of Heaven. Ageine he prayed thus. Nu^c domine Cesarium
suscipe peregrinationis nostrae primitias, etc. Now receive, o lord, Cesarius,
ye Orati. 7.
first fruit of our peregrination or pilgrimage.

S. Chrysostom confirms ye same Sermon. 3. in cap. 1. and Phil. homi ^4. in
Ioa^.
with these words. Iuuemus defunctos proviribus, procuremus eis aliquid
auxilii, precantes exhortemur and alios, vt pro ipsis ore^t, pauperibusque
indesinenter pro illis eleemosynas demus. Let us help the souls departed to
Mark. 9.
our pour, let us provide some help for them ye when we pray, we provoke
other to do the same for them Let us not cease to give alms to ye poor
contynuallye for them. Then Homi. 69. Populum Antiochenum.
he addyth these words. Non frustra ab apostolis san^tum est, vt in
celebratione venerandorum mysteriorum, memoria fiat little, qui hinc
discesteru^t, No^eru^^ illis multum ^molume^ti hinc fier^ multum vtilitatis,
statute siquidem vniuerso The mass is a sacrifice to pourchase grace and
mercy of God.
populo, manus in celos exte^dente, cae^u ite^ sacerdo tali, verendoque posito
sacrificio, quomodo deum non placamus pro ipsis ora^tes.

It was not for naught, that the Apostles enacted, that at Mass a memory
should be made for the souls departed. They did well know that it did greatly
profit them. For when all the people do stand holding up their hands
toward heaven, and the preistes also, and the dreadful sacrifice is present
before them, how can it otherwise be, but yt we appease gods wraeth, so
praiinge for them? what is this, if it be not prayers and the sacrifice of the
maste, to be means to obtain the mercy of God for the^ souls departed? we se
then evidently, that both the Greake church and also the latin Church
believed otherwise the^ Peter martyr, and other the protestants does.

Read. s. Chrisostom in the places Homi. in Math. 32 Homi. 69. ad populu^
antioch, lib 6. Cap, 4, de sacerdotio. Homi, 41, i^ 1. Cor. 15. Homi. 2. in
acta. Homi. 2. in Acta apost De ecclesiastica. Hiero^ Cap. 7.
noted in the mergent, here which I do pass over, to be short, addyng only
this, of them all. Non frustra oblationes pro defunctis fiunt, non frustra
preces, non frustra eleemosyne, hec ^i^a spiritus disponit, volens, vt nos
mutuo iuuemus.

S. Dionise Paul's disciple (who^ Damascene alleges in his sermon of the
dead) says. Deinde diuinus su^mu^ sacerdos, orationem sacratissimam super eo
facit. Afterward the high holy priest makes a very godli prayer over the
dead body, he adds also of the bisshoppes yt pray for the dead, saying
Precatur oration illa diuina elementia^, vt cunta dimittat per humanam
infirmitatem admissa peccata, Prayers made for the dead in the Apostles time.
defuncto, cumque in luce statuat, and in regione ^^^orum, in ^inibus Abraham,
etc, That prayer desires Gods goodness to perdo^ and forgive the soul
departed all ye sins, that he has committed thoroughe frayelty of the
flesh, and to set it in light, amongst the liui^ge, in Abraham's bosom, which
^^ heaven What will our bretheren^^ Christ say to this? ought not the makers of
tharticles annexed to the said catechism to be ashamed of there error when
they said yt pourgatory was set fourth only by ye schole doctors and that
they invented it?

S. Basil in his Mass says. S Basi^les mass makes mencyon of praynge for
souls departed.
Dia^onus viuo^um et little qui dormierunt, quorum vult, meminit, Sacerdos ait,
Memento domine oim qui predormieru^ in spe resurrectionis vit^ eterne, Hic
Sacerdos mentionem facit little, quorum vult and viuoru^ and mortuoru^ pro
mortuis aut^ dicit: pro requie and remissione ai^^ famuli tui. N. in loco
luminoso, vbi au^ugit tr^stitia and gemitus: fa^ cum quiescere deus ^oster,

The deacon remembrith which he will, both of the^ y^ are a live, and also of
them y^ are dead. The priest says in his mass. Remember, O lord, all men y^
are dead before time, in hope to rise up again to everlasting life Here y^
^^iest reme^breth in his prayers whom he will, both of the dead and of the
living. I pray, O lord, to y^ for the rest and remission of thy servants
soul Richard, John. etc. Make him, o our God, to take his reaste in the place
full of light. where is another sadness, another gro^ig or morninge at all. S.
Chrysostom has S. Chrisostomes Mass.
the same in his book of the Mass.

S Gregory bishop of Nissa. S. Basyls brother wrote a sermon of y^ 1. Cor. ^.
souls deproted, wherein the says plaily, some men shall be purged, by fire,
after there death: Who will yet believe these new teachers, y^ say there is no
Purgatory, saying the ancient Fathers of both the Greake church and Latin
do so manifestly set it fourth in their books? but hear one or two other
Doctors sayings, to conclude this matier.

Theodoretus which was above. ^ii Libro. 10, Cap. 6. tri part. Histo.
hundred years sense, thus writes of y^ godly Emperor Theodosius the younger,
praising his deeds, and acts. The relics of the Doctor ^. Chrysostom, were
afterward carried into the kings City Constantinople. And again, the most
faithful wax candels.
people, running thoroughe the sea, as through the land, did cover the waters
of Hosphorus, Lampadibus and cereis, with burninge Lamps and wax candels.
Wherefore the Emperor laid up secretlye this treasor Saynctes relics are in
treasour which the Heretic vigila^tius despised, as other do now wickedly.
of s. Chrisostomes relics in yt citi. which Emperor bears both his
grandfathers name, and also keeps his godliness undefiled. Is in Chrisostomi
loculum defigens oculos, atque frontem, pro Archa dio et eu doria genitoribus
suplicauit, vt ignoranter deliquentibus veniam deus condonaret As he looked
steadfastly upon the place wherein. s. Chrisostomes relyques were kept, made
humble peticion for his father and mother Archadius and Eudoxa, the^ departed,
yt god would pardon and forgive their sins, which they had committed
ignorantly.

Abdias the apostles scholar, which saw christ, testifies that s. Andrew Lib.
3, histo apostolece
prayed for one that was dead. At ille gra^s agens narrauit Nicholaum excess
isse de corpere, orans, vt in pace quiesceret. But S. Andrew Note this.
gave thanks and declared ye s. Nicholas was dead, and he prayed to God that
his soul might rest in peace. Lo one of the apostles prayed for the dead.

There are many other ancient writers, and great learned fathers, which does
set forth the same Doctrine by the scriptures, and the custom of the
Catholic church, ye ever has been, from the first begini^g of christ's
church hitherto, but I will pass over them, because these now before
alleged in this traicty are sufficient to teach every man, what has been
ever ye belief of christ's universal church, in this matier so that,
whosoever be not of that belife, he may yet return again to ye church and
embrase it, lest he be damned, being out of ye same, in which case, and estate
he y^ is, and so abides unto the end of his life, cannot be saved by christ,
which is the head of that his church, and the savior only of it, as S. Paul
plainly witnesses, Ephesians. 1. and. 2 and. 5. Colo. 1. 1. Petri. 3. John. 17.
and also. S. Peter, resemblyng christ's church to Noah's Ark, or ship,
wherefore I beseech God almightye the God of unite, concord, and consent and
christ our savior, which prayed for us to his father, that we might accord in
religion and in a godly charitable unite both of faith and manners, and died
for ye purchasing of the same, to grant us grace all together to agree in the
same godly unite, to whom be honor, and glory world with end. Amen

brief treatise of the sign of the Cross, and of the Crucifyxe.
To the Reader.
WHen I saw that the cross of Christ (good Reader) was not only cast out of
the Temples in this our country but also overthrown and destroyed clean
almost in all high ways as though it were a thing to be abhorred of Christen
people, I thought it good to set forth in writing, how much the ancient
doctors of the church of Christ, regarded and esteemed that sgne, and the image
of the crucifixe, that thereby men might well see, and perceive, how
shamefully they erred, and were dysceyued, which did cast down that sign of
the cross or destroyee the image of Christ crucified to the intent that they
might beware of that Heresy, and abominable opinion. Take therefore in good
worth, I beseke thee, good reader, this my labor, and endeavor, for if thou
so do, thou shall encourage me to set forth other treatises in semblable
matiers for thy instruction and edificatio^ in ye true faith of Christ unto
whom with the father, and the holy Ghoost, be all honor and glory, for
ever and ever.

Amen.
The beginning of this brief treatise of the cross, and the Image of Christ.
which the nevve brethren did cast down, and set up the hynges arms instead of it.
GOd said to the angel (,good christian reader) pass through Ezechi. ix.
ye midst of ye city Jerusalem, and make ye sign of Thau, upon ye
foreheades of me^, mourning, and sorowi^g kill not al them, upon whom ye shall
se, Thau. S? Hierome expoundyng that text of y^ prophet, writes thus. Tha^
litera, crucis habet similitudine^, quae in chri^^anorsi frontibus pingitur, et
frequenti manus insc^^ptione signatur The letter Thau, has y^ likeness of y^
cross, which is made in christen men's foreheades, and is marked with often
writing of hand. Also Saint Paul said, god fordid Galath. vi,
that I should glory or rejoice in any thing, but only in the cross of
Apoca. vii.
our Lord Jesus Christ. But now let us see, what the old doctors of Christ's
church judged in this matter, S. Damascene says, the cross Damas. li. 4 cap.
12, 17,
is a buckler and harnes against the devil, that he touch us not, we do
worship ye figure of ye precious cross^ not ye matier of which it is made, but
ye figure as ye sign of Christ. The honor of the image is referred to the
thing figured, or represented by that The worshipping of the cross.
image, Qui hanc adorant, participes sint Christi crucifix^, I pray god that
they, which do honor, or woorship the cross may be made partakers with
Christ Mark ye that hate the cross and call it an ydol,
which was crucified, Damascenus lib, (...) cap xii. ait Omnia, que deo
adiacuerunt adoramus, ipsi reuerentiam, p^etatisque cultum exhibentes. We do
woorship al things, which lay to Christ, very God, when he was crucyfyed,
g^^yng to him the ^^^erence and godly honor. The holy Emperor Constantine,
which was the first christened Emperor that ever was, except Philip, and
reigned about. M. CC. years sense, said In edicto eius inter opera clementis,
we have made the Churches, of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and
enriched them with gold, and silver, where we laying up in a secret place,
their most holy bodies with great honor, have made their shrines Relics of
saints and Shrines of them.
of wood, which no wether nor element can hurt, and we have put in every one
of their tu^bes, or shrines, a cross of most pure gold, and most precious
stones, and fastened them A cross of gold.
there, with nails of gold, unto the which we have given fermes of
possession, for the continuacion of the Lights of the church
lights. This Emperor, when he was in great care, and took much Li i. ca.
iiii. t^iper. histo.
thought, how he might withstand his enemies in battle, saw in his dream
the sign of the cross brightly appearyng in the fyrmamente, and Angels
standing by it, wondering at it, and saying to him, O Constantine in hoc vince
Overcome thine enemies, O Constantine, by this sign of the The right honori^g
of the cross.
cross. We see then that the sign of the cross has a great virtue, and
ought not to be despised (as it has been of late amongst us English men)
but rather to be had in great price, and woorship, so that the honor, or
veneracion, given to it, be referred to Christ, which was crucified upon the
cross.

That did the holy Emperor Constantine see. For^he caused the Li, i, cap, v
trip histo.
signs of the cross to be carried in (...) before his army, and his
souldyers did woorship it.

(...) habebit Eurropus. li. xi. Li. i. cap. ix trip histo.
He gave greatest honor or woorship to the most holy cross: This is written
of him to his great renoume and praise, and to their reproach and shame, which
do, or have despised that sign of the cross, yea destroyed it, but I will
let this pass and bring forth other men's sayings, in this marier.

Pauline which was in saint Austenshine, Paulinus Episto, xix.
almost it thousand two hundred years sense, thus writes The image of Christ
crucified was used in saint Austens time.
of y^ cross, and the image of Christ. crucified.

Sub cruce sanguinea, niuio, stat Christus in agno. Christ stands in a
figure, or picture ^^a^^hite ^^^ude; under ^s him^^e ^osse. Also he writes,
th^^he and y^ ye^^le desired help of Sai^^t ^^l^l^ when the^^ ^as great danger
amongst them by fire, and obte^^ned s^o^^^t by the syg^e of the erosse, ^or
^he^ are his words.

(...) impo^^t^^ sub^e^^^ alt (...)*
Ipse domum rem^^^, modum, sed gra^^^ (...), Matal^. x. diui Felicts

De crucis aeternae, sumptum mihi sanguine lignu^,
^romo tene^sque manu, a duertis pro^^ingero ^a^m^*
^^ el^p (...),
Arcorem^ue hostem ^onl^^o vmbo^^^ (...)*
Credit, nec donate mihi, sed ^ed dite, Christo.
Grates, et iustas date lauds omnlpo^en^,
(...) cri^ed ^^^isti et non^^ ^^stat,
Indefides nobis, and in ^^^er^ce nixa (...)
profui^, and nostram cognouit flamma salutem.
N^^ me^ vox, aut de^tra illum, sed vis cr^^cis igne.
Terruit in que loco, de quo ^urre^cratipse,
Vt circumseptam praescripto simine flammam,
Cedere et extingui, ^remitu moriente, coegit,
Et ^inere exortam, cinere remeare procellam,
Qu^ta crucis virtus? vt se natura relinquat, Qua^ta vis crucis.

(...)
Mu^a man us cre^^is, tun^ ill^ ^^cend^a (...)
A^pergens, larg^ c^^i^bat vincere Lymphis.
(...) fontibus ^^^res,
(...),
(...)
^ The ^^ect and sum of these verses is, that when no water could que^ch^
that great ^yre, (...) it did e^^^^^ it, than Pau^^ne took i^ his hand the
sign of the cross, and went into the ^^a^^e of it, defe^ding himself, ^^om
^^^yng, with the cross, (...) the ^y^e ceased clean, and ^^hust (...) ^^ne
by it, as he wryte^^ A notable historye of the cross and a miracle wrought of
god by it,
(...). Was not this ^ great miracle, which god the^ wrought by the cross? why
the^^ are men so blind to dest^^y that ^^gure, and sign by the which God did
work so notable a miracle? The said Pauline sent Epis^o, xi,
to Seuer^s a piece of the cross for a great gift; exhortyng him to lo^^e upon
it many times, for to remember what exceading pains and torments Christ had
suffered for us, that thereby he might be inflamed with devotion and love
toward him.

Cassiodorus an old writter tells Li, ii, ca. xix histo. triper. apud
Cassiodorum,
that a certain personage, called Probianus, when he was christened was helped
of a very great disease, which he had being an heathen man, and yet he would
not woorship the most holy cross, which was ye cause of all that his health.
Than god appeared to him, and showed to him the sign of the cross, which was
upon the altar of the church, declaryng An altar.
thereby, that he should not deny to honor the cross, for his sake which
dyed upon it for us.

Saint Athanasius writes thus of Li. de inc^^natio^. verbi
the virtue and puissance of ye cross.

Signo crucis magica omnis pellitur ^^s, omne venefi^um, omnis que irration
alis voluptas tolliner By the sign of the cross (says he) all witchcraft is
put away, all empoysonment is taken away, and all unreasonable pleasure, or
lust is kept away from manne. S Martial, which was Saint Peter's discyple,
has this sentence of the cross. Crucem domini, in quem credidistis, semper in
me^te in ore, in signo ^en^^e.

Hold ye ever the Lords cross, Martialis, epist. ad burde gale^ses, cap. ix,
in whom ye have believed, in your mind, in your mouth, in a sign, by this
only sign, heavenly victory is given to us, and with the cross baptysme is
sanctified, or hallowed hitherto.

Eusebius recites in his storye, ye Eule, lib, x, cap. xxxi^
many Jews were saved from burni^g and peril of fire, by the sign of the
cross. Epiphanius also writes, that a christen woman was styered of a
Epipha^, li. i, To. it, aduersus here^e^ contra hiere. iii.
Jew by incantation to sin, and that she was preserved from ye sin through
making upon her a sign of the cross. He also recites that a certain Jew
called Joseph, drieue away the devil from a mad man, by the sign of the
cross, made upon water, and that water sprincled upon him: Which Joseph being
a christen man, obtained license of the Emperor Constantine, to build upon his
despences, or cost, a church in a city named Tiberias, but the Jews by
incantacion and witchcraft empeched and stopped his fyers to burn, which he
had made in furnases, for the making of Lime, and other mattier necessary for
that his buildyng. The which thing Joseph seeing, to be water Holy water
in a vessel, and made a cross upon it, and called upon the name of Jesus,
for to help him against that the Jews incautacion, and ye done, he sprincled
the fire, and the fornases with that water, and than the inchauntmentes were put
away and ye fyers burned. Also we read in the Historye of the church, written
almost. M. CC. years passed, that a godly Bishop, called Marcellus, and Lib.
ix. cap. xxxiiii. triper histo,
an other head officer, commanded a temple of Jupiter, which was the
woorshipped as a god, to be throw down with fire, which thing, wha^ they went
about to do, there appeared a dreadful black devil, letting the fire to
burn, which thing the Bishop hearing, can thither hastily, and commanded
that a vessel of water should be brought to him, and to be put under the
altar, where that devil lay. Then he prayed deuout^ly to god, that he would
not suffer the devil to use that tyranny any longer; and after that he had
prayed, he made a sign of the cross upon ^he water, and badde his Deacon,
named Holy water
Equitius, to put fire under that altar, and to sprincle that water there
about.

Quod cu^ fuisset factum, Demon effugit, non feren^ aquae vir^utem. The which
thing being done (as the historye witnesses) the Holy water
Devil fled away, not suffering the virtue or strength of that water.

We read also in the same hystory, that one Julian, which had clean Lib. vi.
ca. i tri^ histo
forsaken Christ and his faith, asked of one that had a familier spyrit, and
used enchauntry, whether he should obtain the Empire, that he desired or not.
The which e^chau^ter brought Entropu^. li. xi. ^ex Romanor^.
him down into a deep den, under the earth, and there made invocation to the
Devils, and anon there appeared many fearful Devils, which when Julian saw,
he made the sign of the cross upon his forehead, and then the Devils ran
away incontinent, The de^^l cannot abide the cross, in which o^re new brethren
follow him.
because they could not abide the sign of the cross

What then shall I say of the^ which have cast down crosses? What of the^ which
do call the image of the crucifixe an ydoll, and do abhor it? may I not
well say, that they are therein folowers of the devil? But I will go forward
to the rehearsal of other Doctors sayings in this matier. Saint Hierome
thus writes of one Paula then dead: (...) Ad Eusto^iu^ (...)
quesi ipsum dominum pendent^ cerneret, ado^^ba^ She went a pilrimage to
Jerusalem, and prostrate or falling down upon her face before the cross, she
Read ye destroyers of crosses and Roodes.
worshipped as though she had seen our Lord himself hangyng upon it. Again
saynct Hierom says. Arm or defend thy forehead oftentimes, Ad demetr(...)
with the sign of the cross, that the devil find no place in thee. Saint
Basyll says. Figura crucis signare eos qui in De (...) sa^cto cap. 27
nomen domini nostri Jesus christi spem habe^t, quis scripto docuit (...) To
make a figure of ye cross upon the^ yt have (...), or A tradicio^ not written
in the scripture.
trust in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has taught by writing? As if
he had said, it is an ancient custom of Christ's church, left by tradition,
without any holy scripture. Saint Chr^^ostome also Home. xiii. ad Philip,
says, all things are made perfect by the cross, Baptism is also given
with the cross again he says, art In cap. 3. ad colosse.
thou a Christen man? use the sign of the Cross, say thou I have this thing
only a Bouclier, this only a medicyne. Also he says if a man say when he goes
out of his house, I Tom. 4. Homi. 21.
forsake the Devil, and do cleave to thee Christ, armynge himself with the
sign of the Cross, neither man, nor the Devil can hurt him. Furthermore he
says. Cum reg^neramur, Homi. 55. in Matheum.
crux domini adest, cum sacratissimo alimur cibo, cum in ordine consecrandi
statui^ur vbique, ac semper id victoriae insigne nobis assistit When Our new
brethren do not use this in the sacraments.
we are borne again in Baptism, the cross of our Lord is present or
helps us, when we are nourished with the most holy meat, wha^ we receive
holy orders, in every place, and at al times, that sign of victory is
p^se^t, or helps us, I te^ he says, have thou ever y^ cross before Tom. 5.
lermone de co^tinentia Iosephe.
thine eyes, and y^ at yt time shall deperte away pure from sine. For as y^
cloud, a figure of y^ Cross, defended y^ Hebrews Exodi. 14.
yt they should suffer no evil of y^ Egiptia^s, even so ye cross seen before
our eyes, does straight with drive away al evil lusts. Finally he Hom. 31 de
cruce, et latrone. Tom. 2. the church gives not ^o much unto the cross
says, ye cross is unto us ye cause of al blessedness. This has delivered us
from blidnes of error, this has restored us out of darkness to light, this
has joined us unto God, when we were separated from hi. This Cross gives us
al good things sufficiently. Than ye sign of ye son of man (says christ)
shall be seen i^ ye sirmame^t, have Math. 24.
y^ seen ye brightness of y^ sign of the cross, which ye co^paygni of
Angels, and the multitude of Archau^gels, shall bear on high, upon their
shoulders. etc? what excuse shall they have when y^ cross of christ shall appear
at do^es day, which have destroyed Crosses, or cannot abide to se the^? Does
not s. Chrysostom give here as much honor Upon good (...). 6. (...). hi. etc.
unto ye cross as ye church does sayi^g or siging before y^ Roode or image of
y^ crucifix? Aue crux. etc, Hail ^ cross. etc. S. Cyril also writes of y^
roode, or crucifix against one Julian ^Lib. 6 con^. Iulianum. No^e this.
which, wha^ he had forsaken christ, and was returned to ye worshippinge of
false gods, reproved (as heretics now do) christian me^, for ye honouri^g of
christ's image. Thus he has reciti^g Iulia^s words, o miserable me^ which
leave ye worshippi^g of great Note that our new men now do follow that heath^
man which had forsaken christ.
Jupiter our God, and do worship the wood of ye cross, maki^g ye images of it
i^ your forhedes, and before your houses To this reproach of Julian S. Ciryll
answers, saying. Moreover he calls them wretched, which do ever make a
sign, of the precious cross, both upon their houses, and forheades also. We
will declare with out labor, yt such words, which are comen out of evil
thoughts sauoure of extreme ignorance. Tha^ he recites the great, and diverse
benefits, which came to us by christ and his death and than says.

Hoec oi^a recordariuos facit salutare lignum: et suadet, 2. Cor. 5.
vt cogitemus, quod (sicut dicit Paulus) vnus prooi^bus mortuus est, vt
viuentes non vltra sibiipsis viuant, sed ei, qui pro ipsis mortuus est, et
resurrexit.

That is to say, ye wood, which brings This wicked July a^ destroyed the
Sign of the cross in the stagge or banner, which good constantyne had made,
and that he did that he might bring the soldiers to the Paynems Idolatrye,
unto the which our new brethren would have brought us, if god had over threw
the^ in time. Triper. hist Lib, 16 cap. 30.
health, causes us to remember al these benefits, and cou^selleth or moves
us, to think yt (as s. Paul says) one is dead for all, that they which are
living, should no longer live to their own pleasure, or after their own
lusts, but to honor and glory him which died for them, and rose up again
from death. See thou not here, good reader, that the Image of Christ
crucified was used in the Church before S. Cyrilles time, which was above. in.
C. lx. years past? See you not also, what profit cumeth to us, through the
beholdinge of that image, with a remembrance of christ's death? Thyrdly here
appears plainly that the new brethren in christ are followers of this
apostata Iulyan. Cyrill says Read ye which have destroyed crosses, or cannot
abide them.
also there, to the said Iulyan, Wylt thou yt we should cast away, and leave
the wood, which brings us into remembrance of al virtue, and set fourth to
women and children, thy ydols? Again he says to him, because, to live
honestly, and godly makes men most holy which have that endeavor, or desire,
therefore (as I have said) we do make the cross of the precious wood, for
the memory or remembrance of al goodness, and virtue, hitherto S. Cyril. S
Ambrose writes also thus of ye same matter. Infigimus oscula ligno crucis,
fateor, Ambros. lib (...) Theodosii.
^c coram eo genua fleetimus, at non ligno, vt ligno sed quatenus signo,
Christum nobis representanti, illam impendimus adorationem. We do (I grant)
kiss ye wood of the cross and do bow down our knees before it, but not to
the wood, as wood, but we do give yt wourship to the mark this wet gentle
reader and learn how so worship the roode or cross of Christ. Philippe i^ as
the first. Beda de hist anglorum. Ambros. de obitu. Theodosii inperatoris
wood of the cross, as a sign represe^ting to us Christ. Also he speaki^g
of S. Helene, (mother to the Emperor Constatine, which was the second
christened Emperor, that ever was,) says, yt she found by inspiration of the
holy ghost, the cross upon the which Christ our savior did suffer his death,
and than he adds these words. She found out this title of ye Cross, Jesus
of Nazarethe, the king of Jews, and she wourshipped the king (Christ) not the
wood, for that is the error of ye The right use of images and of the cross of
our savior Christ.
gentyles, or the Heathen, and ye vanite of the wicked men. She worshypped him,
which hanged upon the wood of the Cross.

Lactantius also stands upon our side, saying. It is sufficient for me^,
Lib. 3. ca 27 de vera sapientia.
at this time, to declare of what strength, or force the sign of ye Cross is.
How great fear it might be to the Deuylles, he shall know, which shall see,
how they abiured by christ, do fly out of the men's bodies, which they had
beseaged, or possessed. Anon after he says, christien me^ in christ's name,
with the sign of the cross, do chase away Deuylles, and that the heathens
do not make sacrifice to their Gods, if any be present having his forhead
marked with a sign of ye cross, and that their gods the Deuyls, seeing the
sign of the Cross do fly away. Again he says that the Devils dare not
come to him, or hurt him, which they see to have a sign of ye Cross.

Prudentius likewise writes of Prudens de passione Agnetis.
this matter saying.

Tam purpurea supplex
Sternitur Eneadoe, rectoris ad atria christi
Vexillumque crucis sumus Dominator adorat.
Cypryan has this saying.

Quicumque sint sacramentorum ministri, qualescu^ Sermo de passione Domini.
que sint manus, quae vel mergunt, accede^tes ad baptismum, vel vngunt
qualecu^que pectus, de quo sacra exeunt verba, oper^tionis authoritas in figura
crucis, omnibus sacramentis largitur effectum. etc.

Who so ever should be mynysters of the Sacraments, of what so ever sort the
hands should be, which should dippe in the water, those that Oil and the
figure of the cross were used in Baptism in S. Ciprians time.
come to baptism, or annoynte the breast of man, what so ever it be, of the
which the holy words are spoken the power or workyng in or by the figure of
the cross gives effect to all ye Sacraments. Again Cyprian Ad Iubatanum.
says, now also this is done with us, that they, which are baptized The
cross is used in confirmatyon of children.
in the church, should be presented by the rulers, or preuostes of the church
and should obtain the holy gooste, both by our prayer, and laying of our
hands upon them, and should also be made perfect with our Lords sign, the
cross. Linus Linus lib. 1 de passione Petriet Pauli.
(which was in the apostles time, and wrote a book of the passion of. S.
Peter and S, Paul,) shows that S. Peter gave as much honor or more, to the
Cross, tha^ the church gives, or has given to it in any song, or Prayer,
for he writes thus of it. When S. Peter came to the Cross, to be hanged upon
it, he said O grace unspeakable, for in ye name Read this diligently.
of the Cross is peace. This is the wood of life, by which the power of death
is destroyed. Let me have no Galath. 6,
glory, or reioysinge but in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ. O cross
which have joined man unto God, and delivered him from the Captivity of the
Devil. O cross, which dooste ever represente to mankind, the passion of the
savior of the world, and the ransom of ma^s captyu^ytie, safe, and sound,
when a very true faith follows. O cross, which workest daily peace
between the heavenly creatures. (Angels) Lo the right v^e of the cross is to
represe^t to us christ's death.
God, and man, and do diligently repair, and renew our mediators death,
before the everlasting Father, with a most faithful embassaderie the church
traualing for her sons. S. Gregorye, Hieromes Tripar History. lib. 6. Cap. 1.
Master, recites the same no table history of the Cross, which I rehetsed
before out of ye Tripartye O ra, 1. in Iu^^anum Apost.
histori, of iulya^, for thus he writes. Re inexpectata perculsus, ad e^^ce^,
et vetus confugit remedium Hacque ob timorem signatur, adiutoremque facit, quem
perfequebatur. Praeualuit Mark of what force and strength the cross is
signaculu^, daemones co^pefeu^tur, t^mores soluuntur.

Iulyan being in the De^ne, where Devils appeared veriterribly, was strike^
with fear by a thing not looked for, or yt chanced suddenly, and ran unto
the cross, and the old remedy and he for fear is marked with it, and he
makes him his aydoure, or Note readre that the sign of the cross fears
away Deuyls.
helper, whom he did persecute. The sign of the Cross prevailed, the
Deuylles are refrayned from doyinge evil, fears are put away. What blindness
were they in than, which destroyed all crosses, and would not suffer the
hosts, that should have been consecrated, upon what malicious blindness was this?
the Aultre, to have the figure of the Cross prynted upon them? Did not they
show themselves to be folowers of the Devil in, and by that their doing?
Prudentius, which was in S. Austens time, thus writes of Prude^tius Lib.
cathe^erinon.
the Cross, made in Christ's holy name.

Fac cum vocante somno,
Castum petis cubile,
Frontem, locum quo cordis
Crucis figura signet,
Crux pellit omne crimen.
Fugiunt crucem ter^brae.
Tali dicara signo,
Men's fluctuare nescit.
Discede, christus hic est,
Ch^istus hic est, liquesce,
Signum, quod ipse nosti,
Da^nat tuam caternam.
O tortuose serpens, etc.
When sleep calls upon thee, and thou go to bed, se that thou make a
sign of the Cross upon thy forehead, and thy breast. The cross puts away
all sin, the Deuylles, which are full of Darkness of sin do fly from the
Cross. A man's mind given to serve that Sign cannot doubt or waver. O
Crooked serpent, depart away, christ is here, faynte, or cease thy cruelty,
for christ is here. The sign which thou know, condempneth thy garrison,
band, assemble.

Add to these the sayings of Tertulyan, which was almost. m. cccc. years
se^ce, he says. Qui e^ucis nos pu^a^ Tertulianus in Apoleg. ca. 16
religioses, consecraneus noster eri^.

He which thinks that we christian. people have devotion to the Cross,
shall be our compaignio^ in the says. This he wrote against the Heathen, which
did blame, and reprove christien men for worshippynge of the Cross. Also he
reciti^g many traditions Tertulianus. Decorona ^^lit^s. what so ever we do we
should make a ^igne of the Cross upon our foreheades.
of the church, not written in the Scripture, saying thus.

Ad oe^m prog^es^um, atque promo^u^, adoe^m aditum, et exitum, ad vestitum et
calceatum, ad lauacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ^d sedilia, quacunque
nos conuersatio exercer, frontem signacul^ (crucis) ferimus.

At every goinge forward, and anauncinge of our selfs, at every cominge to,
and going out, when we put on our clothes, and shoes, wha^ we baythe or wash
us, when we sit down at the Table, when lights come in, when we go to our
chambers, when we sit down at the sieges, with what thing so ever we do
exercise our selfs. we do make the sign of the Cross, in our forheads.

With these Authors agrees S. Tonatius. Epistle. 5.
Ignatius, John the Evangelists scholar, saying. Crucis tropheum est contra
principis mundiv^^tutem, quod videns expauescit, et audiens timet. The victory
or y^ virtue and strength of the Cross, is against of worldly ^yuers.
the power of the Devil, y^ is called y^ prince of this world, which sign he
saying dreadeth, and hearig it fears. Lacta^tius which was xii. hundredth
years passed, and of who^e I wrote before, writes largely of y^ virtue and
force of the Cross, recytinge the great proffite, which we may have by
dylygente and Godly beholdinge of the crucifix, or roode, for he says thus

Quisquis ades, mediique subis in limina templi,
Siste parum, insonte^que tuo pro crimine passum,
Respice in me, me conde ai^o, me in pectore serua,
Ille ego, qui casus hoi^m miseratus acerbos, Lac. lib. carminum, de passione
christi*

Hunc veni, pacis promise interpres, et ampla,
Co^is culpae venia, hic clarissima ab alto,
Reddita lux terris, hic alma salutis imago,
Hic tibisu^ requies, via recta, redemptio vera,
Vexillu^que dei, signum et memorabile, fari,
who so ever thou art, which entrest The English of these verses.
into the midst, or myddle of the temple, stand still a littyll while, and
behold me an innocente, which suffered for thy sin, lay me up in thy mind,
keep me in thy heart, I am he, which having pity upon the bitter fall of man,
came hither an expou^der, and a mediator of the peace which was promised to
man, and ca^ hither a large pardon of the common fault here is a light most
clear given to men on the earth from heaven, here is a fair or holy image,
here I am to the rest, a right way, and a very ransom, and an estendart
sign, and a thing to be remembered, and spoken of, anon after he adds these
verses.

Vertice adusque pedes me lustra: en aspice crine,
Sanguine concretos, et sanguinolenta sub ipsis,
Colla comis, spinis que caput crudelibus haustum,
Vndique diua pluens viuum super ora cruorem.
Compressos speculare oculos, et luce carentes,
Afflictas que genas, atentem suspice linguam,
Fell venenatam, et pallentes funere vultus,
Cerne manus clauis fixas, tractosque lacertos,
Atque ingens laterivulnus, cerne inde fluorem,
Sanguineu^, festosque pedes. artusque cruentos.
Flecte genu lignumque crucis venerabile adora, Animaduerte lecte^

Flebilis innocuo, terramque cruore madentem,
Ore petens humili, lachrymis suffunde subortis
Et me non numquam deuoto in cord, meosque,
Fer monitus, sectare meae vestigia vitae,
Ipsa supplicia inspiciens, mortem que seuaera^,
Corporis innumeros, memorans animique dolore^
Disce aduersa pati, and propriae inuigilare salut^ etc,
Consider me or look upon me from The effect of these verses in English,
the croune of my head, to the soole of my foot, lo, behold my here joined
together fast with blood, and under my bushe of here my bloody neck and my
head cruelly crouned with thorns, that the blood raime Helpeaketh in Christ's
person hauging upon the cross,
out of it, and bleadyng upon my godly face, quick blood on eueryesyde. Look
upon mine eyes closed, and lackyng the sight.

Look also upon my chekes, and my dry toungue, empoysoned with gall, and
payle countenance, as it What profit comes to us by the crucifixe.
were of a dead corpse.

Behold my hands fastened to the roode or tree, with nails, and my arms
stretched out to the extremity.

Look also upon the great wou^d of my side, and the blood which did issue out
of it. Behold my wearye feet, and the bloody limbs of my body. Thou
weaping, bow down thy knee, and honor the worshipful Referryng that honor to
me, which was cr^cified upon it.
Roode of the cross, and falling down upon the earth, which is moyest with
mine innocent blood, kiss it humblye with thy mouth, and sprincle it with the
tears of thine eyes.

And remember me sometimes in thy devout heart, and bear in thy mind my
commandments or warnynges, follow my life, beholding my pains, and sharp
death, remembryng the innumerable dolours both of my body and soul, learn to
suffer pacie^tly aduersites and to be dilligent about thine ownsaluacio^
Hitherto Lactantius, writing of and upon the image of Christ, or the Roode,
and declaryng openly, what Lessons, and profit we may geat by the devout and
godly beholding of it, and honoring of the same ever lookyng with a perfect
faith, upon Christ, and honoring him, and bearyng in mind his bitter passion,
which he suffered upon the Roode, for our salvation. This dooyng we shall not
offend God, but greatly please him, and be much encouraged, and moved, to
forsake our sinful life, and to serve god the better. Which thing the seuente
general Actio^e. 17
counsel, and the second (holden at the city Nicea, at the which were
assembled three hundred Bisshops) did approve, sayi^g: An Do. vii. C. lxxxxi We
following the doctrine of our godly fathers, and obseruyng the tradicion of the
catholic Church, in the which the holy ghost dwells, do determyne with
all diligence, and care, that images made after the manner and form of the
holy cross are to be set up and had in holy vessels, Holy vessels,
vestementes.
in vestementes, in waules, and tables, in private houses, in common ways, but
chiefly the image of our Images of Christ and of Saints,
Lord Jesus Christ, and than of his mother our Lady, of Angels, and al holy men.
That through the looking upon those images, all they which do behold them,
may come to the memory, and remembrance of y^ things fygured, and salute
them, and give unto them an honorable worshipping, not that the service, or
worshipping, which is called in ye Greek tongue Latria, and is due only to the
y^ deity, or godhead, but as we come reverently to the figure of the cross to
the holy gospels, to y^ holy smokes of encence, and also to the Lights of
Lights of the church. Honor of an image. Note this gentle red^r
the church. For the honor done to y^ image, retourneth to the thing
represented by it. With what face or countenance do thou resist (says
Leontius in his fifth book of his defense made for christians, against y^ image
of the cross, seeing y^ know that Abraham did worship Idolaters, Moses,
Ietro, a worshipper of Idols, Jacob Pharao, Daniel The worshipping of the
cross.
Nabuchodonoser, and will thou despise me (said this learned man about vii. C.
lxx. years past) worshipping the cross of Christ? S. Austen writes August To
v. li. 10. ca. 8 ^^ ^^^ii. dei.
much of this matter, of whose sayings this is one. Moises pra^ed his hands
being stretched forth, in the form of a cross, and thereby he ^yd overthrow
gods enemies, not Exo. xvii.
one of ye Israelites being killed. Also he says when the people were sto^g
with fiery serpe^tes for their sins, god commanded Moises to hang up To. v.
ii ^ ca, viii, de ciu^ta, dei. Number. xxi,
ye figure of a brase^ serpent upon a poole y^ they beholding it, might be
healed again, and death destro^ed, as it were by the sign of the cross, as s.
Aust^n says there. The which being done, y^ serpent was reserved in
remembrance A graue^ image commanded of god to be made. Nume. xxi,
of y^ gods benefits done to the^. This was a graue^ image, or asimilitude and
se^bl^ce of a creature, which notwithstanding god himself bad Moises make.
Therefore he did not forbid us to make any similitude, or graue^ image, of a
creature without addicio^ Ex^. xx. what God me^t forbiddyng us. ^o make a
graue^ image.
but y^ we should not make us any similitude, or image of any creature, to
honor it as God, as the text of Exodus declares plainly.

Again this brazen serpente was a figure of Christ, and sygnified him to be
(as he said himself) exalted Joan. iii.
or lifted up upon the cross, at y^ time of his death, which serpent
whosoever did look upon, understanding by it Christ, and his most bitter
passion, and believing in him, tha^ to come, and to dye for us, with a perfect
faith, had remission of their sins, and not only health of their bodies.
Wherefore Note this.
why may not we christen men have the figure or image of Christ crucified, yt
we beholding it, might remember Christ's death, and by y^ forsake our si^nes,
and live more devoutly, as well as the Jews had a picture of him to come, and
to be crucified, and that picture was profitable to them? But to Saint Austen
Austen.
again, which says: the cross is honored, and remains in glory. A locis
suppliciorum fecit transitum ad frontes imperatorum, Tom. x, viii Psa. xxxvi.
Qui tantum honoris dedit paeni^ suis, quid seruat fidelibus suis?

The cross has made a passage In Ioa^. tract. xxxvi
from the places of pains, to y^ foreheades of Emperors. What reward does
Christ reserve for his faithful people, which gave so much honor to the
cross, upon which he suffered his pains? Again he says. Qui cruce^
irrident, a daemonibus tanqua^ a best^is deuora^tur They that scorn ye cross
are devoured Note this reader.
of the Devils, as of beasts. Also he witnesses that a holy woman, called
Innocentia, which dwelt at Li. 22. ca. 8, de ciu^. dei.
the city Charthage, was cured of a ca^cre, y^ she had in one of her breasts
and is incurable by nature, only by making a cross upon it. Moreover he
writes after this sort of the cross Except the sign of the cross be put
either to the foreheades of the^, that To. ix. ^r^. exviii. in Io^nnem.
believe, or to the water, by which they are borne again, or to the oil, with
(which cream) they are anointed, Oil and cream.
when they be baptized, and confyrmed, or else to the sacrifice, with which they
The sa^^yfice of the mass.
are nourished, none of these things is well and perfectly done. He says in
an other place. The secrets of To. ix. de visitatione infirmorum cap, ili.
christen me^ have, as it were, a certain worshipful monumente, or a thing for
memory of our Lords cross, that they call a cross, which we also do
confess, to be most worthy of all worship, and we do worship it for a
remembrance of Christ, which was crucified upon it. For there is set upon y^
cross a certain image of a man as he were suffering there, by y^ which our lord
Jesus Christ's passion is renewed in our memory. Embrace ye and worship, this
picture, mekely and humbly, but yet remember these verses. Note the right use
of the rode or of images.
Nec deus est, nec homo, praesens qua^ cerno figura Sed deus est, et homo, quem
signat sacra figura.

The figure of the crucifixe, which I do see present, is neither god nor man.
but he is both god and man, which this holy figure signyfyeth. The Mat. xxiiii
sign of the son of man, that is to say the cross of Christ (as
Chrisostom, Hierom, S. Austen and other y^ doctors judge) shall appear at
Aug, To. ^ ser. xl. de sa^ctis. Note this,
domes day, and be carried in the air before him, coming to y^ last judgment
by the light, or brightness of which, al ye world, ye su^ne, ye moan, and
stars shall appear very dark. What will they the^ say, for themselves, which
have despised ye cross of Christ i^ this world. They will bewail and lament
there evil doi^g, To. x. ser. cxxx. de tempore.
but ouerlate. Here Is. Auste^ agein sayi^g, before Christ was crucified, ye
cross was a name of condemnacio^, The honor of the cross
now it is made a thing of honor, before that time it stood in the
conde^nacion Mark reader.
of the cursed person, now it is erected or set up, for an occasion of
salvation. For this sign we keep holy day, in remembrance of y^ cross. Holy
roode day was holy day the^, and it was taught by. s Pault. 1. Corint, v.
So also S. Paul teaches feasts, or holy days yearly to be made for the
cross, sayng: Pasca nostrum. etc Christ is offered up our pascal Lamb, therefore
let us keep holy day, or make good chere. etc. Christ when he went up into
heaven (says Saint Auste^) To, x. in festo inue^tionis crucis,
left to us the cross for a remembrance of his passion, he left the cross
for our health. This sign is an aid to To. x. ser. xix. de sa^ctis.
Christ's friends, and a let to his enemies, by or with ye mystery of this
cross, the rude are instructed in the Note reader.
faith before they be christened. The font of baptism, by which men are The
halowing of the font, which our new brethren did contempne utterly.
Confirmacion of children gives grace which our new ghospellers deny. Halowe
aultars. The cross used in the mass, Making of Priests and Deacons
Priesthode is a sacrament against our Lutherans and Swi^glians.
borne again, is hallowed. By the sign of y^ same cross, those that are
baptized do receive the gifts of graces, through the hands laying upon
them. Churches are also dedicate with the figure of y^ same cross, aultars are
consecrated or hallowed, the sacrament of the altar, by putting between of our
lords words, is made with this figure. Priests and Deacons are with this
sign promoted to holy orders, and generally all the sacraments of the church,
are made perfect through the virtue of this sign. This sign destroys
witchcraft, it brings to naught all engines, or enterprises of the deuyls. And
that thing, which the presence of Christ's body upon earth did, the
remembrance of the victorious cross with a faithful calling upon y^ name of
Christ, now does, to be brief s. Auste^ writes thus. Before Christ To. ix.
trac. ^xxvi. in Joan.
was crucified, there was nothing to man's flesh more intolerable tha^ y^
cross, now there is nothing more glorious in y^ forehead of man. Quid seruar^^
The honor of the cross
de^ suo, qu^ talem honor^m dedit suplicio suo. What does christ keep for his
feithful servants, which has given so gre^ honor The honoryng of the cross^.
to y^ cross, upon which he suffered pains of death? To conclude (says s.
Auste^) the cross is not now used at Rome in y^ pains of y^ gilty, for wha^
the cross of our lord is honored, it would have bee^ thought yt y^ offe^der
was honored, if he were hanged upon a Tom. 7, li 2 cap. 26. de peccatorum
^^^riti^* et ^em^^^.
cross. Moreover s. Auste^ writes aft^ this manner intreati^g of the^ yt were
taught Christ's faith before baptism Catechumenos, secu^du^ que^da^ modu^,
psignu^ christi, and cratione^ manus impositionis, puto sa^crificari, and qui
acc^piu^t, qua^uis no^ sit corpus christi, sa^ctu^ est tame^, and ^^^tius, qua^
cibi, quibus alimur, quonia^ sacri^e^tu^ est Iiudge (says he) yt they which
learn Christ's faith before they be baptized are made h^lithrow y^ sign of
Christ (y^ cross) and prayer of layi^g hands upon the^, and y^ thing which
theido receive, although it be not Christ's bodi, yet it is (...) br^^^
holy, and more holy the^ y^ meats, with which we are norished for it is a
sacrament, y^ is to say, a sign of a holy thing, verily of y^ body of christ,
which ^hy we d^ receive holy bread ever: sunday
y^ people should receive every so^day, aft^ y^ godly counsel of s. Auste^, and
therefore they y^ do not so rece^e chris^s body Epist. cxix. ad Ianuat si
sondyily, they receive holy bred, as a sign of it, and of a charitable
unity, which should be emo^gst us, christen me^, ioini^g us fast together, as
in the bred y^ greines of corn are unseperably ^. Cor. 10. ^nus panis sumus.
etc, Epprianus,
co^ioined together. Therefore holy bred ought not to be despised, but received
of men as a godly sign of Christ's blessed body, contained in the holy
sacrament of the altar. Also Sainet Austen says. Antequam christus To. x.
se^. cxxx. de tempore.
in cruce pependit, crux nomen condemnationis ^rat, nunc vero facta est res
honoris prius in da^natione maledicti stabat, nunc in occasionem salutis erecta
est, Before Christ hanged upon y^ cross, the cross was a name of
condemnation, but now it is made a The honor of the cross
thing of honor. It stood before in the condemnation of the cursed man, now
it is set up for an occasion of man's salvation. Than he adds saying: this
cross has been ye cause of innumerable good things. The Angels shall bear
the cross before Christ coming to the last judgment, Note this reader.
and it shall make the lyghtes of the firmament dark, the sun, y^ moon and
the sterres. Who is then so unwise to believe our new brethren teaching men to
abhor the cross and image of our savior crucified.

S. Bid our country man, which Lib. 2. cap. 20
was about. D CCC. years passed in the Historye of the Church of England,
speaking of one pauline Bishop of yorcke fleing away from thence into Kente
says. Attulit secum vasa preciosa Edu^ni regis perplura, in quibus et ^rucem
magnam auream, et calicem au^eum co^secratum ad altaris ministerium, que
hactenus i^ ecclesicantii conseruata monstra^tur, attulit.

He brought with him from yorcke to Ca^torburie very ma^y precious vessels of
the king Edwine, amongst which he brought thither a great Cross of gold,
and a chalise of gold consecrated or ha^owed to serve at the altar, which
things are se^ne yet reserved in the church of kente. Our new brethren lead
with couuetousnes took all such vessels out of the temples, and turned them
to profane and worldly vsages, but le^ them beware of Gods vengeance which
punis^hed balthazar for dri^king Dani. 5.
in the vessels of the temple taken away by his father Nabuchodonazor, but of
this I will speak at large shortly in an other treatise S. Beda also witnesses
that Oswalde Lib. 3. cap. ^. Hist. anglorum.
a king of England did set up a cross in a place, where he should fight
against Christ's enemies, and kneeled down upon his knees before it prayinge
to God, that he would aid him, and his soldiers in yt great neade. In the
which place many miracles were wrought, and men continually unto this day do
take chippes of that Cross, and cast the^ into water, and then sick men,
women, and beasts drinkinge of that water, or that being sprincled upon them,
were healed thereby. Also he says that a ma^s arm, which was broken, was
healed with the old Moss of that Cross, which man is now living. Do thou
not se now by these old Doctors sayings, good Christie^ Reader, in what
reverence, estimation, and honor y^ sign of the Cross, was had amongst all
Godly Christen people? were not then our late proceders, the new brethren,
shamefulli deceived, when they preached, and wrote also against the sign of
the Cross the Image of Christ, and caused men to cast down the
Roode-Lo^tes? Our Lord of his most tender mercy call them again out of
that their great ygnoraunce, and blyndnes, unto the veraye light of Christ's
true faith and religion, and to the unite of his Catholic church.

Eutropius, which was almost Lib. ^^ reru^ Romana^u^
M. CC. years sense, says. It is reported that Christ appeared unto
Constantine the emperor, when he should fight against y^ cruel tyra^nt
Maxentius a persecutour of christians, and said to him, when he had first
showed him the sign of the Cross make a like figure, and commanded him to
use it as an aid in battle, that he might get the victory. Also this
ancient writer and Eusebius do testify that constantine y^ noble christien
Emperor, the second Philippe was the first christian Emperor.
Emperor, that believed in Christ, caused the sign of christ's cross to be
carried ever before his soldiers in battle, that they by the offten seeing and
beholding of it, might cease worshipping of faulse gods, and honor the very
true god, which he himself worshipped. Wherefore he appointed certain sta^derd
bears, which should bear upon their shoulders y^ figure of the Cross by
course through out all the ^inges of his army. And our new teachers said, y^
sign of the Cross of Christ was an ^dol, and brought men into Idolatry, but
that came of the devil that w^lde have me^ utterly forget christ and his
passion, which he suffered upon the cross, and to fall unto Idolatry. Also
the said authors do witness, that when one of constantines soldiers, which
did bear the standered in battle, in which the (...) of christ's cross was
made Euse^ius, Hist. eccle.
did for fear flee avoaye was slain ^^^^daynlye, and he, to whom he gave the
standerd eschapped all peril, A miracle wrought of God by the Cross.
Eutropuis Lib. ii reru^ Romanaru^
when many Darts did sty^ke in the standerd. More over these historiographers
do record, that when Maxentius came fearsly to fight a gaynste the said good
Emperor Constantine, the Emperor commanded a cross of Gold, which he had
made to be carried before him in that battle, and so he obtained the victory,
many of Maxentius soldiers being slain, and that tyrante him self runnynge
away was drowned in the myer of a water, into which he fell. Eutropius also
and Eusebius do witness that Helena found the Cross by gods aduertysment.
Helena Consta^tines good mother admonysshed in her sleep, made have unto
Jerusalem, and at the length found out (albeit with great difficulty,)
christ's Sepulcher covered with filth,) and Venus Temple being bylte upon it,
and that place being made clean, and that Idols Temple being overthrown, ^he
found there three Crosses, upon the which christ and the two thefes hanged,
and when they began to doubt, which of them was the Cross of Christ, the holy
Marcharius Bishop of that City, leyed one of them unto a noble woman, that
had been long sick, praying most devoutly to God, that it might be known,
which was the cross of Christ, and as soon as y^ cross touched her, she was
healed clean of her disease. How deuellishe were then our Gospellers, y^
destroyed the crosses of Christ, and did put down the feasts of the holy
cross, seeing Read this and note it well.
christ's cross was invented by inspiration of y^ holy ghost aduertising the ye
Godly woman Helena Co^stantin^, mother, to seake it out, and to find it, and
seeing it was known from the.ii. other Li. 14. re^u^ To. anno. d 7^0.
crosses, upon ye which ye theefes did hang, by a notable Miracle? Paulus the
Deacon witnesses that the Emperor Theodosius sent his wite Eudoxia to
Jerusalem to give thanks unto God for his benefits. Quae plurima dona
eccles^is co^tu ^it, et adoratis tar^ sa^cta cruce, qua^ colendis locis,
reuersa est ad regali^ Justinian the Emperor, which was in Agapitus and
Sylu^ri^s the Popes time, sent one Bilisar^^s a noble captain in war into
Italye to deliver it from the oppression Lib. 16. re^um Romanarum.
of the Goths, which having victory of them, at the length subdued (as Paulus
Diaconus witnesses) the Vandal^ans unto the Romans. Exin de i^le victor
Roman venit, auream cruce^ centum librarum, preci^sissimis gem^is exornatam, in
qua suas victorias descripserat, beato, Petro permanus Papae Vigilii obtulit.
After that time Bal^sarius (says Paulus) came a conqueror to Rome, and he
offered unto sayncte Peter by the hands of the Pope Vigilius, a cross of
Gold of a hundred pounds weight, Lib. 11. Cap. 29: Hist. eccle.
garnisshed with stoanes moast precious, in the which he had written his
victories. We do r^ade also not in History scholasticall (as Angel says)
but in the History of the church written by Eusebius almost D. CC. years
before that other story, that when the great Idol Serapis was destroyed by
Christen me^, the sign of Christ's Cross was made, and set up in the place of
it. Which the learned Payny^^s saying, anon bele^ed in Christ, affir^inge that
they learned of there elders, that y^ Idol Serapis should stand and be
worshypped until a sign should be set up in the place of it, in which sign,
or figure (that is the Cross of Christ) salvation of man should consiste;
See thou not then, good Reader, that ye cross of Christ has been ever
much esteemed of all good christen people in all ages, and that it has been a
mean to withdraw men from Idolatrye, and to lead the^ unto christ's faith:
were not then our new brethren very blind, when they called it an Idol, and
caused me^ to cast it down, setting up for it the kings arms? wherefore let
us use y^ sign, figure, and Image of Christ, as a sign of him to put us in
remembrance of his bear passion, ever referringe the honor done to it, unto
Christ our savior, y^ we may fulfill that Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 4.
which GOD commanded to be done, saying. Thou shall worship thy Lord God,
and serve him only with that service, and honor, which is due only to him, as
the creat^re, governor, c^nseruatour, redemer, and glorifier of al, that shall
be saved, through his great mercy, and his son Jesus christ's death, unto
whom and the holy ghost b^ ^. Tim. ^.
all glory, and honor. forever and ever,

Amen.
The Rogation week.
IT is no new th^g which our new brethren did put down
good Reader, y^ we do yearly go in Procession the Rogation week for of that
usage, or c^ustome this writes one Alch^^nus A^^tus archebisshop Alchuinus
Homilica de ^o fest^
of V^enua, which was the year of our Lord God five hundred Currit quidemi
(...) non per Gallias modo, sed, pene per orbem totum rogationis obseruantiae
flumen irriguu^, et infectam vitis, terra^ vberifluxu annuae satisfactionis
expurgat.

The river or ^^ood, which makes moist, of the keaping the Rogation runs
with a lively path, not only through France, but also almost through the
whole world, and it pour geth or makes clean with a ple^teous flowing of an
yearly satisfaction, the earth, infected with vices. Anon after he shows the
cause why it was instituted saying. Vier^nae incendia Crebra te^iae motus
assidui, nocturni sonitus, cuidem totiu vrbis funeri prodigiosum quoddam
minitabant^ Nam populo^is hominum conuentibus domestica fyluestrium ferarum
species obuersabatur, gladiu^ et ignis visi erant etc. That is to say, of^e
fyers burning, and destroyinge things at the City Vienna, contynuall earth
quakes, noyses or soundinges in the night, did often threte^ a certain strange
or a wonderful thing signifienge before, the destruction of the whole City.
For the asse^bles of mani men saw a familiar, or an homely appearance kind or
figure of wild Forest beasts, a sweard and fire was seen etc.

Tunc S, Marmertus praecessor meus coram festiuis alta^ibus, atistes, inuietus
persistit, lachrymis ac precibus inecudium compescuit, et concep^t animo r^
gatione^, definiuitque, quicquid hodi^ palmis a^ precibus mundus inclamat, d^o
inspirante, ^ligitur pr^sens hoc triduum, quod est inter assensionis sac^ae
cultum; et diem dominicum. Et ne obseruatio rogationum vilesceret, ad
basilicam, quae menibus ^^at vicinio^ ciuitatis, orationem primae processionis
in dicit. ^tur celebri alacritate, copiosa multitudine, ^t maxima compunctione,
vt reuera populi la^hrvmis, et laboribus breuis atque angusta processio
videretur.

Than the holy Marmertus my predecessor a bishop not vainquisshed, stood
still before the solemn aulters, Aulters.
and he ceased ye fire with weaping tears and prayers, and conceived in his
mind the Rogations, and determined all that thing, for which the world cry
out this day with holding up of hands and with prayers by the inspiration of
God these present three days are chosen, which are between the worshippi^g
Procession in the Rogation week.
of the holy ascension, and the sunday And that the keaping of the Rogations
should not be lyt^e ^et by, he denounces by Proclamacyon commands or
ordained, that the prayer of the first processyon should be made unto the
Church, which was near to the walls of the City They go with solemn
Joy, courage, reddynes, good will, and chau^gement of chere, for the esperaunce
or hope, that they had in ye thing, with a great nombre of people, and with
great repentance, in so much that the procession appeared short and bryef
through the peoples tears, and peynes. Statim episcopus instituit quo die
proximo, id est, martis, et tertio die procedere^t, Tota haec festiuitas est
rogatio pro delictoru^ venia, by and by yt bishop ordained to what place the
procession should go upon the next day, that is to say upon the twisday, and
upon the wensdaye.

All this whole feast is a praying for pardon or forgeuenes of sins Hither to
that ancient Archebisshop a thousand years before our time wrote of the
procession now used in the Rogation week. Therefore our new Gospellers ought
to be ashamed, that they took away so ancient, and so Godly a thing,
especially seeing they said that they would restore Christ's Church in England
to the Religion of the premitiue church. Our lord turn their hearts unto his
true faith again Amen.

Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the Sign of the Hand and Star,
within Temple Bar, by Rychard Totell

The second part of the book called a boucklier of the catholyke fayeth,
conteyninge seven chapiters: Made by Rychard Smyth doctoure of divinity of
Oxforde, and reader of the same there

EXCVSVM LONDINI IN aedibus Roberti Caly, Typographi: Mense Ianuarii. Anno.
1555. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum folium.

The co^tentes of this second book, which is divided into seven chapiters.
THat it is not laweful for a man to forsake his wife but only for aduoutrie,
and that, if he forsake her for that cause, yet he may not marrye again, as
long as she lives, although Peter Martyr, Johan Hoper, and such other did
teach the contrary, against Gods law and man's.

ii. A co^futation of an abominable error of Peter Martyrs setti^g forth,
which William Tyndale taught in his preface upon the Epistle to the Romans
before his translation, which is that our salvation consists only in God,
and nothing in us, which wicked opinion takes clean away man's free will
from him.

iii. The baptism of children, against all the Swinglians, and not Peter
Martyr only, and the Anabaptists.

iiii. That the souls of men departed do not sleep, but either they ^oe to
heaven for their good works, or else to Hell for their evil before dom^s day.

v. That it is lawefull and good to put fi^unce, esperaunce, or trust in our
good works, next after God, a^ in his gifts, which thing Luther, Bucer,
Peter Martyr, and semblable others deny. Also that we may live godly for the
heavenly reward.

vi. That Baptism is not only a sign and a mark of our justification and
profession, nor only a seal and confirmation of the same, as Peter Martyr and
the authors of the catechism, and articles setfurthe in king Edwardes the.vi.
time falslye and wickedlye do say, and teach.

vii. That all godly vows, as the vow of virginity, of continual
chastity, promised by a wydowe, the vo^ of wylfull or voluntary poverty, and
^emblables, ought by Gods law^ to be observed under the pain of everlasting
damnation*

Finis.
The first chapter. That it is not lawful for a man to forsake his wife but
only for aduoutrie, and that, if he forsake her for that cause, yet he may
not marrye again, as long as she lives, although Peter Martyr, Johan
Hoper, and such other did teach the contrary, against Gods law and man's.
Christ plainly says. Ego dico nobis Math. v.
etc. But I say unto you, who soever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornication) causes her to commit aduoutrie, and who soever marries her, that
is de^orsed, breaks matrimony. Which thing Mark and Luke do expou^de Mar.
x.
after such sort, that we may Mar. x. Luke. xvi.
perceive evidently that Christement, that if any man should leave his wife
for aduoutrie (for which cause only it is lawful to forsake her) yet he ought
not to marrye an other wife L^ra. Gloso interli. Hay^o in. i. Cor. vii.
whiles she lives. For Mark says, who soever puts away his wife, and
marries an other, breaks matrimony against her, and if a woman forsake her
husband, and marrye an other, she commits aduoutrie. S. Luke declares the
same saying thus. Ois qui dimittit uxo rem sua^, et aliam ducit, maechatur, and
qui dimissam a uiro ducit, maechatur. Every man, that forsakes his wife and
marries an other, commits aduoutrie, and he that marries her, which is for
saken, commits aduoutrie.

The holy and great clerk S. Austen did writ against Pollentius, because
he said a man might lefullye marrye again, when he had forsaken his wife
for aduoutrie, and he did allege these two places of Mark, and Luke to prove
his purpose, which writes of that matter after this manner, expou^ding these
words of S. Paul. I say not to them that are married, i Cor. vii. Tom. iiii
lib. lxxxiii. quest. ix. lxxxiii.
but our lord commands that the wife go not from her husband, if she do,
she should remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband. Vbi etiam
oecumenus ide^ habet.
in telligitur, quod si una illa causa, qua sola relictio co^iugi^ permittitur,
mulier a uiro recesserit, innupta perseuerare debet, aut si fe no^ co^tinet,
uiro potius reco^ciliari, uel correctouel tolera^do, quam alteri nubere.
Sequitur aute^ and dicit. Idem habet Tom. iiii. lib. i. de sermon. domini in
monte ca. xxv. and xxvi.
Et uir uxorem non dimittat, breuiter eandem formam intimans in uiro, quam
praecipiebat in foemina, quae ex praecepto dn^i insinuauit. Haec ille. In the
which saying of S. Paul it is understand, that if the wife go away from her
husband for that only cause, for the which alone the leaving of marriage is
permitted, she ought to continue unmarried, or if she live not continently,
she ought rather to be reconciled unto her husband, either amended, or else to
be tolerated, then to marry unto an other man. It follows in S. Paul,
saying: And let not the man leave his wife. By which words S. Paul do the
brieflye show, that the same form ought to be in the man which he did
command to be in the woman, that is to say, that he leave his wife only for
aduoutrie, and if he leave her for that cause, he marrye not again.

Saint Hierom also, is against Peter Martyr and Johan Hoper, Tom. ix. in Mat.
xix.
when he says thus. Quia poterat accidere, ut aliquis calumniam faceret
innocenti, and ob secundam nuptiarum copulam, veteri crimen impingeret, sic
iubetur priorem dimittere uxorem, ut secu^dam, uiuente prima, non habeat. For
as much as it might have chanced, that some man should Note this against John
Hoper the white monk
pick a quarrel against his wife, or falselye accuse her of aduoutrie, and
find fault with the first marriage, to be married again. He is so
commanded to forsake his first wife, that he may not have the second,
whiles the first is alive. The like he says of the woman, who is in this
point equal with her husband, as S. Paul me^t, i. Cor. vii.
saying, that the husband has not power of his body, nor the wife of hers.
He reproved a woman very sharplye because she In epitaphio fabiolae.
forsook her husband for aduoutrie, and was married to an other man. Also he
says expou^ding S. Paul's words to the Corinthiens written of this mattier.
Docet apostolus iuxta Tom. ii. lib. i. contra Iouinia. ^. Cor. vii.
sententiam domini, uxorem, excepta causa fornicationis, non esse repudiandam,
and repduia^am* uiuo marito, alteri non nubere, aut uiro suo reco^ciliari
debere. Thapostle teaches (says he) that the wife ought not to be put away,
after the mind of our lord Christ, except for her aduoutrie, and that she
being so forsaken of her husband for that, ought not to marrye an other, while
her husband lives, or else she ought to be reconciled unto her husband.

Also he says, I found abriefe Tom. iii. epist. ad. Amandu^.
letter joined unto thine Epistle, and thy commentary, in which these words
were written. Ask or demand of him, that is to say of me, whether a woman,
which, her husband being forsaken for aduoutrie, and another married through
force, may without penance be received in to the communion of the church
that man yet alive, which she had forsaken for his aduoutrie. The which thing
when I readde, I remembered this verse of David. Psalm. 140.
They do it to find excuses for the defense of their sins. We al are men
that favor our own vices, and do impute unto the necessity of nature, that
thing, which we do commit through our own frewyl. As if Man's free will.
a young man should say: I suffer force, or violence of my body, the heat of
my fleashe drives or inforceth me to sin. The instruments of my privy
members, and the complexion of my body desire a woman's company. Answer
therefore to the sister, which asks of us touching her estate, not with
mine, but with the Apostles sentence. Mulier quae sub viro est, viuente viro,
astricta est legi: quod si mortuus fuerit vir eius, liberata est a lege viri.
Ergo viuente viro, adultera est, si duxerit alterum virum. Mark this well,
reader.
Et in alio loco. Mulier alligata est legi quanto tempore viuit vir eius: si
autem dormierit vir Romans vii.
eius, liberata est, cui vult, nubat, tantum in domino. Omnes igitur
causationes Apostolus amputans definiuit apertissime, viuente viro, adulteram
esse mulierem, si alteri nupserit. That is to say, the woman that is married,
is bound to the law, as long as her husband lives. But if her husband be
dead, she is fre from the law of him. She is then a breaker of wedlock, if
she be married to another husband, her first husband being alive. And in
another place S. Paul has the same, affirming that there is no cause, but
death ^. Cor. vii.
only, to break the bond of marriage. Wherefore the Apostle taking away all
causes, that can be alleged, determines most plainelye, that the woman
commits aduoutrie, if she do marrye another man, her husband living. S.
Hierome ^. Hierom.
adds these words there. I will not that thou bring forth to me the
rauishers violence, the mothers persuasion, the authority or styrringe of the
father, the company of the kinsfolk, the deceit of the seruitours, and the
contempt of them, or others, the endomages of the household goods. Quamdiu
viuit vir eius, licet adulter sit, licet Sodomita, licer flagi^ijs omnibus
coopertus, and ab vxore propter haec scelera derelictus, maritus esus
reputatur, cui alterum virum ascisere non licet. Nec Apostolus haec propria
authoritate decernit, sed Christo in ii. Cor. ^iii.
seloquente, Christi verba secutus est, qui in euangelio ait. Qui dimit^it
Math. xix.
vxorem suam, excepta fornica^ione, facit eam maechari, et qui dimissam
accepiret, adulter est. Animaduerte quid dicat, qui dimissam acceperit, adulter
est, s^^e ipsa dimiserit virum, sieve a viro dimissa sit, adulter est qui ^am
acceperit. As long as her husband lives (says S. Hierom aunsweringe to the
question before spoken of) although he be an aduouterer, although he be a
sinner against nature, or else Note this against all y^ whole rablement of the
^utherans and Sw^^glians.
full of all kinds of vices, and be also forsaken of his wife for these
sins, he is judged her husband, and she may not lawfully marrye another,
whiles he lives. And the Apostle decreed or determined not this thing of his
own authority, but he followed Christ's words, whiles he spoke in him, which
says in the Euangelie. He that puts away his wife, except it be for
aduoutrie, makes her commit aduoutrie, and he which marieth her, that is so
put away, is an aduouterer. Note well what Christ says. He that receives
her to his wife, that is put away from her husband, is an aduouterer,
whether she had forsaken her husband, or else her husband had forsaken her, he
which takes her, commits aduoutrie. Then S. Hierom making an end of this
doubt, in the which his judgment was required. Says: Ergo and ista soror,
quae vt dicit, vim passa est, vt alteri iungeretur, si vult corpus Christi
suscipere, non adultera reputari, aga^ poenitentiam, ita dumtaxat vt secundo
viro, qui maritus appellatur, sed adulter est, a ^empore poenitentiae non
copuletur. Wherefore, let this sister, which, as she says, was enforced and
compelled to marrye unto an other man, do penance, if she will rece^ue
Christ's body, and be not counted an aduoutresse, but so only let her do
penance, that from the ^yme of it, she be no more coupled with the second
man, which is called a husband, but he is an aduouterer. Heather to S. Hierom.
Is not this manifestly written in this mattier? What man that is wise, will not
believe S. Hierom following y^ scriptures, rather the^ the lutherians having
for their opinion no scripture rightlye taken?

S. Bid our countreye man i^dged the same, writynge thus: Nulla causa est, dei
lege praescripta, vt viuente ea, quae relicta ^ib. 3 in Marcu^ fol. xxx.
est alia ducatur. There is no cause written in Gods law, This was written
above viii. C. years past.
that another wife should be married whiles she lived, which was left or
forsaken. What madness was in Peter Martyr, John Hoper, and such other of that
forte, to teach and defend the contrary to this doctrine grounded upon the
holy Scriptures, the old godly Doctors, and the Counsels? Is this to
refourme Christ's religion (as they pretend) to her pureness, which they
falsely affirm that she had lost here? But I will go forward, for the further
confutation of this opinion.

Adam by inspiration of the holy Ghost, said of his wife Eve. Hoc nunc os ex
ossibus meis and ce. This bone is of my bones, and this f^eashe of my flesh,
for which thing the man shall forsake his father and mother, and he shall
cleave fast to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. The which words
declare (as Christ witnesses) that marriage ought not to be broken for any
cause, touching Math. xix.
y^ band and knot of it. Christ adds to these words of Ada^ and says: quod
Deus coniunxit, homo no^ separet. Man can not or ought not to divide the^,
which God has joined together in matrimonye. Then the Pharisees said to
Christ. Why then did Moses bydde the man to give his wife a byl of
diuorsement, and so to leave her? He answered to them and said: Moses did
permit you to forsake your wives for the hardness of your hearts, but it was
not so at the beginning. These words last written (but it was not so in the
beginning of marriage, declare plainly that Christ would marriage Peter ma^tyr
says that God badde them forsake their wi^es i. Cor. vii.
should not be broken for any cause touching the bond of it, although for
ad^outrie it were broken concerning the man's and woman's keeping together, and
the use of marriage in rendering the duty one to an other. Moreover S. Paul
says Romans vii.
thus. The woman, which is under the man, or in sub^ection to him: is bound
to the man by the law, as long as he lives. If the man be dead, she is
losed from the law of him: where fore whiles the man lives, if she be with an
otherman, as her husband, she shall be judged a breaker of matrimony, but if
her husband were dead, she is free from the law of the man, so that she is
no wedlock breaker, though she be with another man, as her husband. This
text makes evidently against them that say, a man may put away his wife for
aduoutrye and marye an other. For he says that the wife is so bound to her
husband, during his natural life, that he being yet alive, if she marie to
another man, she breaks marriage, and she is an ad^outresse: he says not,
she is bound to him by the law vnti^ he commit aduoutrie, but as long as
he lives. Which is to be understand of the new law, and of the bond of
marriage of the same law, which can not be losed until death of the one
party, as saint Panle affirms, i. Cor. vii.
saying again: The wife is bound by the law to her husband, as long as her
husband ^iueth. If her husband do sleep, that is to say, if he do dye, she
is at liberty, to marye with whom she will, only in our lord, that is, to
a Christen man and godly. Saint Hierom, saint Austen, sa^nt Bid, and many
other great lea^ned me^, and more godly then Peter Martyr, Johan Hoper, and
such others are, so have (as it appe^eth before) taken these places of ^ainte
Paul, as I have used them here now. What ^un be^ moore plain^ye spoken of
sa^nte Paul, then this is, against Peter Martyr, John Hoper, and such others,
that defend the contra^ie opinion in this mattier? Again saint Paul sa^eth
i. Cor. vii.
unto them, which are married, I command not but our lord does, that the
wife depart not i. Cor. vi^.
from her husband. If she be separated, let her abide unmarried, or let her be
reconciled unto her husband again. And let not the husband put away his wife
from him, except it be for aduoutrie (as Christ says) and if he put her
away for that cause, yet let him remain unmarried, as y^ wife must neades
do. This mente saint Paul, as the letter it self declares evidently. And
also saint Austen, Ser^. du^i in ^^nte. cap. xxv xxvi. xxvii.
sa^^t Hierom, Chrysosto^, Origin, and many other ancient, and noble clerks.
Paul meant not of a woman's departing from her husband, for any lyghter ^^use
than for aduoutrye (as Peter Martyr says fa^slye that he did) for that was
the only cause which Christ did except, and it is not lawefull for any
other cause, the wife to forsake her husband, and to be from him, because she
is bound to cleave unto him, and to render his duty to him (as Paul
witnesses) and not to defraude him of it.

A counsel called Mileuitane, at the which saint Austen was present,
determined this controversy, saying. Placuit ut secundum Cap. x^^.
euangelicam and apostolicam disciplinam, neque dimiss us ab uxore, neque
dimissa a marito, al^eri coniungatur, sed ita maneant, aut sibimet
reconcilientur, quod si contempserint, ad poenitentiam redigantur. It pleases
us, that according to thee learning or doctrine of the Gospel, and of Mat.
xix. i. Cor. vii.
thapostle, another the husband forsaken of his wife for aduoutrie, nor the
wife, which is put away of her husband for the like crime, be married to
another, but let them so remain unmarried, or be reconciled amongst them
selfs. The which law or act, if they do or shall despise, let them be
brought to do penance. This was also enacted of many other counsels, and
Aphricanum cap. lxix.
namelye in the counsel holden in Aphrica of. CC^vi^. bishops, at the which
saint Austen was present.

Origin was of the same ^om. iii. ^omi. vii. in Matthew.
mind and judgment, when he said. Scio quosdam qui praesu^t ecclesijs,
extra scriptura^ permisis se aliquam nubere, uiro priori uiuente, and contra
scripturam quide^ ^. Cor. vii.
fecerunt, dicentem: Mulier alligata est legi, quamdiu uiuit uir eius. Ite^
Romans vii.
uiuente uiro adultera uocabitur, si iuncta fuerit alteri uiro. I know Idem
habet. Augus. lib. ii. cap. xii. de coningijs adulterinis.
that certain rulers of the churches, have with out y^ scripture suffered a
woman to marye, her first husband being alive, and they have done it, plain
against the scriptures, saying: A woman is bound to the law, as long as her
husband lives. Also Paul says, the woman shall be called a breaker of
wedlock if she marye an other manne, her husband being yet a live. Hither to
Origin, which wrote a boue thirtene hundredth years paste before our time.

Christ mente even the same thing, saying: Who soever puts away his wife,
except it Mat. 5. and 19.
be for her aduoutrie, and marieth another wife, he breaks marriage, and
commits aduoutrie. And he which marieth her so put away for aduoutrie,
commits aduoutrie. For Christ teaches us here three leessons. The first
is, that a man may i.
not lawfullye put away his Lira.
wife, and that concerning bed and bourde only, but for her aduoutrie only,
and for no other cause at all. The second is ii.
that if he forsake his wife for aduoutrie committed of her, than he may not
marrye again, as long as she lives: as saint i. Cor. vii. Romans vii.
Paul intreatynge of the same mattier witnesses plainly. The third lesson
is, that whosoever iii.
marieth a woman divorced from her husband, for aduoutrie, he commits
aduoutrie, because he marries another man's wife, for the band of marriage
remains still, and shall as long as both parties live. These three things
are directly against the belief of the Pharisees, which thought that it was
lawful for them to put away their wives for every light cause, and to
marrye again, and that he committed not aduoutrie, which married a woman so
put away from her husband. S. Austen answers to an argument made upon
Christ's words, after this Tom. vi. lib. ii. cap. viii. de adulterinis
nuptiis. cap. x. xi^.
manner. Who so ever puts away his wife, but for aduoutrie, and marries
another breaks matrimony, ergo, he that puts away his wife for
aduoutrie, and marieth another, breaks not matrimonye. To this reason S.
Austen (I said) answers refuting it, by another like made upon s. James
words, saying: scienti bonum et non facienti peccatum est Iaco. iiii.
^lli. He sins that knows what is good, and does it not. This argument
made of the contrary sense, ergo, he sins not, that knows not what is
good, is naught: Because a man synneth through ignorance as Christ witnesses.
Wherefore Christ meant that he synneth ^uc. xii.
more greuouslye, which puts away his wife without aduoutrie, and marieth
another, than he does, which puts her away for aduoutrie, and marteth
again, like as he sins more that sins wittinglye, than he which synneth
ignorauntly, and yet both does offend God. This S. Austen Lib. 2. cap. 10. de
adulterin^^ coniug^is.
gathers very godly and lernedlye out of the Euangelie of Mark and Luke,
which as it were, expoundinge Matthew, affirm absolutlye, that whosoever for
any cause, puts away his wife, and marieth another, commits aduoutrie
in so doing.

S. Austen confirms this Lib. de bono co^iugali. cap. 3.
saying when he expounded S. Paul's sentence to the Romans above recited.
Confaederationem maris and feminae. etc. The scripture so does commend the
ioyninge together of man and woman in marriage. That it is not lawful to the
woman to marry again another man as long as her husband lives, nor the man
may marye an other wife, as long as his wife deuorsed for her aduoutrye
lives. Interuenie^te deuortio, co^faederatio illa non aboletur nuptialis. ita
vt sibi coniuges sint etiam separati, cum illis autem adulterium committant,
cum quibus fuerint post suum repudium copulati. The co^ioyning together of
marriage is not abolished or taken away through diuorcement between the man
and woman, in so much as that they are man and wife, yea when they are
separated. For they do commit aduoutrie with them, whom they have married,
since they^ diuorcement.

S. Austen has again, semel Lib de bono coniugali cap. x^.
autem initum connubium in ciuitate dei nostri, vbi etiam exprima duorum
hominum co^ula, quoddam sacramentum nuptiae gerunt, quod nullo modo potest nisi
alicuius eorum mor^e, dissolui. The marryage once entered or begone in the
city of our GOD, where, yea of the first couplynge together of man and woman,
the marriage bears a certain sacrament, or a sign of a holy thing, which
band can not be undone but by death of one of Tom. vij. li. ^^ nuptiis. ca.
x. li. 2. ca. 13 de coni^giis adulteri^s et de sermon, dei in monte, ^^ 2^^
them. He holds in many places of his works manyfestlye, that death only of
the man, or of the woman, and no other thing or cause, dissolueth and breaks
matrimon^e once perfited through carnal dealing, except they con^ent to vow^
chastity.

I^nocentius the first Pope of that name, which was in ^ibro decretorum suorum
cap. vi.
S. Austens time has the same. Wherefore we see euidentlye, that Peter Martyr,
and John Hoper, which was a white monk, and such others erred sha^lefullye,
when they did ^eache, preach, and se^te forth the contrary unto this doctrine
grounded upon the scriptures, the counfails, and old Doctors of the church.
But of this question let this be said.

The second Chapter. A confutation of an abominable error of Peter Martyrs.
setting forth, which William Tyndale taught in his preface upon the Epistle to
the Romans before his translation, which is that our salvation consists
only in god, and nothing in us, which wicked opin^on takes clean away man's
frewyll from him.
This great Prophet of our new brethren, amongst many other detestable
opinions and sayings which he has in his commentaries written upon the
first Epistle to the Corynthians, thus he sets forth. Est prorsus vt
nostra, ita liberotum nostrorum salus ex mera dei electione, et misericordia.
etc. Both our salvation, and our childrens also is utterly of the only
election, and mercy of God.

Again he affirms the same with these words. Tantum ex Romans ix.
dei gratia atque electione, sieve promissione (ut dicit Paulus: Non omnes, Fol.
clxxvi.
qui sunt ex Israel etc.) Nostra salus constat. Our salvation consists only
(says he) of or by the grace of God, and his election or promise, as S. Paul
says. All that are of Israel etc. Is not this a perilous doctrine, and a
pestilent error, which Wylliam Tyndall taught in his preface upon the
Epistle to the Romans, and one Barnardyne, an Italian in his book written in
the Italia^ tongue, and translated in to English by a young gentlewoman. This
opinion is not only against man's free will, but also against many euidente
places of the scripture. For if our salvation stands only in Gods
election, Gods promise, mercy, and grace: than it consists not in any
work of man, not in the hearing of Gods word, not in his faieth, not in
his repentance, or penance, not in his prayinge to God for the pourchasinge
of it, not in geuinge of Faith only does not justify man.
alms, not in fasting, not in his fiaunce to God or hope of salvation, not in
the receiving of baptism, not in the dread of God, not in charitee, finally
not in good works, which all together are mani^tly against Gods holy word.
For touching the first, Peter said: Thou have, O Lord words of everlasting
life. Paul said: I have showed i. Cor. xv.
to you the Euangelie, through the which ye are saved. Whereunto agrees, that
he says: I am not a shamed of the Euangelie, for it is the power of God Romans
x.
to the salvation of every man, that believes. Again he affirms the same
thing saying: This word is the word of fayeth, which we do preach, For
if thou confess with thye mouth that Jesus is our lord, and believe with thy
heart, that God raised up him from death, thou shall be saved. Cord enim With
his heart, that is to say, freely and volentarilie.
creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem. For a man does believe
with his heart, to receive righteousness, and confesses with his mouth to
obtain salvation. What can be more plainlye Read ^e, that do think, Peter
Marty^ is a great clerk.
said against this erroneous opinion? For affirms he not here manifestlye
that we do bebeue with our heart to pourchase our justification. and with our
mouth confess or acknowledge Christ, and his truth, that we may be saved?
Is it then true, that our salvation depends only upon Gods election,
promise, grace, and mercy? Depends it not upon our faieth, and confession
of it, and of Christ? How often times Mat. xv. Mar. x. Luc. vii. Ephe. ii.
said Christ: Thy fayeth has saved the? Says not alsoo Paul: Ye are saved
by grace through faieth. Many times Peter Martyr affirms that only faieth
does justify man, and save him: and now he says that his salvation
consists only in Gods election, promise, mercy, and grace. What
disagreinge is this with himself? Is it any marvel that he agrees not with
us, Which agrees not with him self, what mad men are they, that will yet
follow his ungodly opinions, when he erreth thus plainly, and so shamefully
against the scriptures? David says: Thou, o Psalm. xvi. Psalm. xxxvi. Psalm.
xxxi.
Lord, sauest them, that trust or hope in the: And God saves them which
have their affiaunce in him: And they shall obtain mercy of God, which do
trust in him. S. Paul says, that Abraham did believe against hope under hope
to be justified, and saulued, and that hope is the helmet of salvation, and yet
Ephe. vi.
Peter Martyr was not ashamed to say that our salvation stands only upon
God. Christ said, who soever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mar^i.
Vltimo. Tit. iii.
Saint Paul witnesses that God saved us by his mercy, through baptism. And
S. Peter affirms also, that baptism saves us, and Peter Martyr says that
our salvation comes only of God. O ignorant Baptism is not amar^e only
of our justification, but a cause of it.
man: he says that only faieth saves us, and that baptism is but a sign,
mark, or seal of our justification, and salvation. But Christ, saint
Paul, and saint Peter, affirm that we are saved by baptism. What folly is
it then to give credence to Peter Martyr, or to any other of that sect, the
Swinglians, and Sacramentaries, which are deceived after semblable manner.

David prayed to God, that Prayer saves us. Psalm. lxxxv.
he might be saved, saying: Saluu^me fac deus meus sperantem in te. Save me, o
my God, which do trust in the. Is this our salvation to depend only upon
God? How blind are they, which say, that Peter Martyr was a singular
learned man in diuinitee, and that his commentaries are very learned lie made?
Has not affection blinded them? But hear further the Prophet Ioell says.
Ioelis. ii. We obtain our salvation by prayer and by not ^^^eth only.
Who soever shall call upon thee name of God, shall be saved: declaringe thereby,
that our salvation consists in prayer: and Peter Martyr, Wylliam Tyndall, and
the Italian Barnardine, say, that it is only in God, and nothing in us, nor
in our doings. God says by his prophet. Conuertiminiad me, and salui Isaye.
xlv. We are saved by penance, and not by faith only. i. Lor. vii.
eritis oe^s fines terrae. Turn ye to me, all the coasts of the earth, and
ye shall be saved. Saint Paul says that repentance works in us our
salvation. How ignoraunte are these men then?

Zacheus promised to Christ Luc. xix. W^e are justified by alms, and not by
faieth o^lye.
to give half of his riches to the poor, and if he had done wrong to any
man to restore to him four times so much. Than Christ said. Hodie salus
facta est huic domui, quia and hic filius Abrahae est. This day, health or
salvation is common to this house, because he is also^ the child or son of
Abraham. Which our saviors words, declare that we are saved by restoring of
goods gotten wrongfully, and by alms, and not by only faith, and that our
salvation stands not only in god, as Pe. Martyr most falsely says that it
does.

Jonas the Prophet said. Quaecunque uoui, reddam pro falute mea domino. I will
render Vows.
to our Lord for my salvation, every thing, that I have vowed. But Peter
Martyr said our salvation consists only in God, and that no man is bound
to perform his vow made unto God, that he may be saved. One of the causes
of this his error, was that he was a Chanon of saint Austens order and yet
married a wife, not withstanding he had vowed chastity. And God requires of
Psalm. lxxv.
us the perfourmau^ce of all godly vows, as the holy scripture Eccle. v.
witnesses playnelye.

The prophet said I will show to the, o man, what thing Mich. vi.
is good, and what our Lord does require of the. Truly, to do right or
justice, to love mercy, and with care to walk before God, that is, to serve
him diligently. This is the voice of our lord to the city. Et salus We are
saved by the fear of god
erit timentibus no men eius. And health, or salvation shall be to them which
fear his name. Is this our salvation to confist only in faieth, or in God
only?

Malachie the prophet treating malach ^iii.
of Christ's coming, says. And the son of righteousness shall rise unto
you, that fear my name, and salvation in his feathers. Zachary said by the
inspiration of the holy ghost: ^uc. i.
His mercy shall be from progeny to progeny, unto the^ that fear his name.
Solomon said. Timor domini fons uit^. The dread Prou. xiiii.
of our lord, is a fountain of life. Again, fear puts away sin Was
not then Peter Martyr plainly ignorant, to say, that our salvation stands
only in God, or that only Faith does not only justify us.
faieth is the mean to obtain of God our justification and salvation? S.
Paul says Gala. v.
that, that faieth avails, which does work by charitee, and that with out
charitee, faieth can not same us. He also says, the woman shall be saved through
i. Tim. ii.
bearing of children, if she do continue in faieth, charitee, and holiness with
sobriety. Also he said unto Timothe the bishop. i. Tim. iiii.
Take heed to thy self, and unto learning, or teachinge of the people, and
continue therein. For if thou so do, thou shalt save thy self, and them, that
hear thee. Brieflye, he says. Work ye your own salvation with fear and
tremblinge. O how blind then was Peter Martyr to say, that our salvation
consists only in God, or in faieth alone, and not in us, and the works of
our freewyll, aidid of God by his especial grace? But I will make now an
end of this traicte, and in another book set forth diverse other shameful
errors, and detestable heresies of this man, and of some others also. Moreover
Peter Martyr says. I^ico ut quis credit, and salutem habet, and iustificatur.
Strayghte after a man believes, he is boeth saved, and also justified. Which
his saying is clearlye against the scriptures alleged in the last
chapter, and these also.

Miserere mei deus etc. Have mercy upon me o God, according Psalm. ^.
to thy great mercy, and after the multitude of thye merciful works, put
thou away mine iniquity. Who can deny but David the prophet believed when he
thus prayed, seeing S. Paul witnesses, that no man Romans x.
can pray or call upon God for remission of his sins, and his salvation,
except he believe before, and yet David was not incontinente justified and saved.
Says not y^ prophet Joel, that whosoever shall call upon thee Joel. ii.
name of GOD shall be saved? Which saying proves that a man must neades
first believe in Christ, before he can be saved through his prayer. The same
thing, appears most euidentlye, by the Publican, that believed Luc. xix.
before he went into the temple to pray, for to pourchase his justification
and salvation through his calling upon God to have mercy upon him.

Did not the Jews believe Act. ii. and iij*
when S. Peter badde them turn to God, to repent, and to be baptized, that
they might obtain their justification, by remission of their sins? Says
not Paul also, let us go with an affiaunce, hope, or boldness, Heb. iiii.
unto the seat of Gods grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace
for our help in due season? Who sees not then that we must needs believe, and
put our affiaunce and trust in God, to obtain of him mercy and grace,
through our prayers, before ^e do pray to him therefore? Said not likewise
Christ: Quecum que petieritis in oratione credentes, accipietis. What things
Math. xxi.
so ever ye shall ask in your prayers, ye shall have them, if ye do believe.
S. James says that we must ask in faith, if Iaco. i.
we will obtain our petition. Must we not then have first a belief in God,
and a confidence or hope to obtayn our petition, when we desire of God to
forgive us our trespasses, and to save us, and than after through our prayers,
and repentance purchase those benefits of him? S. Austen says in many
places of his books. Fides primum datur, ut caetera impetrentur. Faith is
first of al given to man, that other things necessary for his salvation, may
be gotten through it. But this is sufficient for y^ confutasio^ of this gross
and perilous error taught of Peter Martyr. Now I will re^ute and improve
another abominable heresy of his, which he defends in his commentaries
Fol. 27^*
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians. And it is of the baptisynge of
children, which he defends to be saved, if they were never baptized, but
departed without baptism.

The. iii. Chapter. The baptism of children, against all the Swinglians, and
not Peter Martyr only, and the Anabaptists.
SAynct Austen In i. Cor. 7. Fol. 173. ^t 174. 175. 176.
in this matter is manifestlye against Peter Martyr, which defends He made
baptism but a sign or a mark of our justification. fol. 177. and. 178.
in his commentaries upon the Corinthians, that a christian man's child has
remission of his sin, and the spirit of God, before he be baptized, and
shall be saved although he were never baptized. Which doctrine is against the
scriptures, and all the old doctors sayings, and not only against these
sentences folowinge. In paruulis gratia Dei per Aug. lib. i. cap xxxix. de
peac^ torum et ce.
baptismum eius qui venit in similitudine carnis peccati, id agitur, vt
euacuetur caro peccati. That thing is done by the grace of Read you that
favor Peter Ma^tyr ou^x muthe.
God, through the baptism of him, which came in the likeness of synneful
fleashe, that the fleashe of sin should be taken away.

Item he says, because S. Paul affirms that through Epistol. lxxxix. Romans
v.
one man's sin (Adam) all were condemned, the baptism of children is not
superfluous, for as much as they which were condemned through their by^the,
should be delivered from that condemnation through baptism. Again he
says. Potest Lib. i. cap. xvi. de peccatorum.
recte dici paruulos sine baptismo de corpore excuntes, in damnatione omnium
mitissima ^uturos. Multum enim f^llit and fallitur, qui eos in damnatione
praedicat non futuros. It may be well said, that the children which do die
Than Peter Martyr beceaued men, and he him self was much deceived.
without baptism shall be in most easy damnation of all others. He is much
deceived him self, and no less deceyueth other, which says that they shall
not be damned. Also he says. Periturus erat paruulus, nec habiturus vitam
aeternam, si per Lib. i. ca. xxxiii. de peccatorum.
sacramentum baptismi no^ crederet in vnigenitum filium. The child should have
perished, and not have had everlasting life, if he had not believed through
the sacrament of baptism, in the only begotten son of god. Lib. i. cap. 27.
de peccatorum. Joan. iii.


Item upon these words of S. John, he that has the son, has everlasting
life. Non igitur regnum caelorum, sed nec vita^ aeternam habebunt paruuli, si
filiu^ non habebunt, quem nisi per baptismum habere non possunt.

Therefore young children shall Tha^ Peter Martyr ^^reth shamefully and so do
all that follow him.
not have the kingdom of heaven, nor yet everlasting life, if they have not
the son of God (Christ) which they can not have, but by baptism.

Omnino in remissionem peccatorum bapti^antur et paruuli, alioquin non habebunt
in regno c^lorum uitam. Young children are Lib. v. Hypon^*
baptized utterly for to obtain ^emission of their sins, or else they shall
not have life in y^ kingdom of heaven. Likewise in the same book he says.
Paruulo nisi baptis mi gra^ia subuenerit, disperie^ de populo suo. If the
sacrament of baptism shall not help the infant, he shall not be saved Tom.
iii lib. i cap. xxiii. de. p^ccatoru^ etc.
with other folk. Again he writes. Nulla ex nostro arbitrio preter baptismum
Christi salus ^terna promittatur infantibus, quam non promittit scriptura,
omnibus humanis ingeni^s preferenda. Let not eternal salvation be promised to
infantes, after our own will, without the baptism of christ, which salvation
the scripture, which ought to be preferred before all men's w^^tes, promises
Aug. Tom. ii Epist. xxviii. et lib. de origin ai^ae cap. xviii. and xxi.
not to them. In an other place thus he says. Quisquis dixerit, quod in
Christo uiuificabu^ tur etiam paruuli, qui sine sacramenti eius participa^ione
de hac uita exeunt, hic profecto and contra apostolicam praedicationem ueni^,
and totam condemnat ecclesiam. Vbi pro^terea cum bapti^andis paruulis
^estinatur, and curritur, quia sine dubio creditur eos aliter in christo
uiuif^cari non posse. Qui autem no^ uiuificatur in Christo, restat ut in eadem
condemnatione maneat, de qua dicit apostolus, per unius Romans v.
delictum in omnes homines in co^demnationem. Whosoever shall say, yea that
children shall be made alive in christ (spiritually) which do depart out of
this life, without any partaking of Christ's sacrament of baptism, he without
doubt does both against S. Paul's preachinge, and also he condemns the
whole church. When men and women therefore, do haste and run to have their
children baptized, because they without doubt believe, that other wise they can
not be made alive in Christ, but he that is not made alive in or by Christ,
it rests that he abides still in the same damnation of the which the
apostle speaks saying: Through Romans v.
one man's sin judgment came upon all men to their condemnation. Who sees
not now that Peter Martyr, and his disciples err manifestly in this matter,
and ought not therefore to be believed in other their naugh tie opinions. In
fa^tes a peccato originis Aug. ^pist. 89.
immunes esse non possunt, nisi ab eius reatu per Christi baptisma resoluantur.
Young children can not be without original sin, except they be absolned
from it, by the baptism of Christ. Noli credere, noli dicere, Lib. iii. cap.
ix. ai^a et eius ^rig. ad Vincentiu^.
noli docere, infantes antequam baptizentur morte preuentos, posse ad
originalium peccatorum indulgentiam peruenire: siuis esse catholicus, Believe
not says saint Austen, say not, teach not, that infantes which The^ Peter
Martyr was not catholyke. Lib. iii. car. xii de peccatorum.
depart before they may be baptized, can have forgiveness of their sins, if
thou will be catho^yke. Nec paruuli de quibus libet sanctis iustisque
procreati, originalis peccarireatu absoluu^tur, nisi i^ christo fuerint
baptizati, pro quibusta^to impensius loqui debemus, quanto prose ipsis minus
possu^t. Young children that be borne of never so holy and righteous
parents, are not absolved from original sin, except they be Peter Martyr
teaches the contrary
baptized in Christ, for whom so much the moore we ought to speak, because
they can not speak for them self.

Nos dicimus, aliter infantes salutem Aug. Tom. x. Sermon. xiiii. de verbis apost.
and uita^ aeternam non habituros, nisi baptizentur in Christo. We say, that
young children shall not have otherwise salvation and life everlasting,
except they be baptized in Christ. Partrulus non baptizatus pergit in
da^natione^. Apostoli enim sunt uerba: Ex uno etc. Et domini est se^tentia:
Romans v. Joan. iii. Lab. de gene. x. cap. xliiii. Lege. Aug. epi. 47. 107. 15^.
90. 102.
nisi quis renatus fuerit etc. Cui no^ resistit, nisi non christianus. The
young child not christened goes into damnation. For Paul says: Through
one man's syn all are damned, and our lord says, Except a man be borne
again of the holy ghost, and Tract. xxxviii. in Joan. de genesis ad literam
lib. x. cap. xiiii. ser. de te^p. xlv.
water, he can not enter into heaven. The which thing, no man again says,
but he that is no christen man. How blind is then Peter Martyr to say that a
christen man's child is justified, before it be borne and christened, and that
it shall be saved if it were not christened? Remembered he not, that David, and
saint Paul says: We are Ephe. ii. Romans v. i. Cor. xv.
borne originallye the sons of Gods wrath, and in syn? Can any person
which is dead through Adams offense (as Paul witnesses all men are) be made
alive, with out his own faieth in Christ, or else the fayeth of his Godfathers
and the church, applied to him by the scrament of faieth (baptism)? Saint
Austen testifies euide^tlie in sondrie places of his works, Lib. i. cap.
xiij. contra duos. Pelag. Lib. de pe^cat. cap. xxvii.
that original sin hurts al children, not yet baptized, and that they are
not gotten of christen parents, in that, that their parents are baptized,
which thing touches the soul, but in that, that they are men and women,
they are begotten and borne in sin, and shall be damned for ever, except they
be through baptism borne again the sons of God.

Saint Cyprian was of the same belefe, saying: Ad remissionem Lib 3. epist. 8.
ad fidum*
peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso facilius ad baptisma accedit, quod illi
remittantur, non propria, sed aliena peccata. The young child comes to
baptism so much the more easly to receive remission of his sins, because
Origina^^ sin came from Adam.
an other man's sin and not his own is there forgeuen him. Peter Martyr
defends that the child has remission of his sin, before he be baptized.
Oh blindness of the man, and of his scholars.

Saint A^brose is of the same judgment saying. Neque Lib 2. cap. 8. de
vocatione gentium.
credi fas est, eos, qui regenerationis non adepti sunt sacramentum, ad ullu^
beatorum peruenire consortium, ueruntamen quare tanta infantium multitudo, non
regeneratorum, a perpetua alienatur salute, no^ conturbabitur cor nostrum, si
firma Read ye Swinglia^s and Martyrians.
and stabili fide omne iudicium dei iustum esse credamus, nec appetamus habere
cognitum, quod uoluit esse secretum, ut ubi in uestigari non potest, quare ita
iudicet sufficiat scire quis iudicet and ce. Yt is not lawefull to be believed,
that they which are not baptized, do go to heaven. But yet, we neade not to
trouble our selves to think, why so great a number of babes unchristened
should not be saved, if we do surely and stedfastlye believe, that all Gods
judgments he righteous, and desire not to know that thing, which God would
have secret, that where it can not be searched out, why he does so judge, it
should be sufficient, to know who judges.

Saint Gregory Nazianzene, In. S. Lauacru^.
saint Hieroms master, says. Melius est infantes, si periculum aliquod
imminet, non dum rationis co^potes sanctificare, quam non signatos, and
initiatos uita excidere. It is better that young children, which have not yet
the usage of reason, be made holy (through baptism) if there be any danger
at hand, rather than they should loose everlasting life, being not
christened, before they do depart out of this life.

Saint Austen would, that To. xvi. ser. xv^ de tempore.
baptism of children should not be differred, but be ministered to them, as soon as they are borne. Also he says that saint Cyprian, not making a new
decree Lib. iii. epi. viii Lib. i. ca. xx. de origin ai^ae ad Hieroni.
of it, but kepinge the most steadfast faieth of the church, to correct them,
which judged that the child should not be baptized, before theight day of
his birthe: said, that the soul, not the body, should perish, if he were
not baptized, and he with other bishops thought, that the child streighte
after his birthe might be well baptized. Saint Hierome confirms this
belefe, saying. Infantuli baptiza^tur, Lib. 3. dialogoru^ contra Pelag. Adlatu^
idem
ut eis peccata in baptismate dimittantur. Young children are baptized, that
their sins maye^ be forgeuen by it. What can Peter Mar^yr and his disciples
say to this? Will they have us believe them before the scriptures, and the old
godly doctors of Christ's church? What blyndnes is this? Our lord of his
tender and great mercy open their eyes, that they may see the truth of his
word, and seeing it, recule and retourn again to y^ catholyke church, out of y^
which no man can be saved.

Origin believed even as these other fathers did, part of whose Hom. xiiii. i^
Lucamo
sentences are now recited, for he says thus, upon these words of Job. No
man is clean from the filthynesse of sin, no^ although l^ys life were but
of Ca. 25. iuxta. 7^
one day upon the earth. Et quia per baptismi sacramentum natiuitatis sordes
deponuntur, propterea baptiz^ntur and paruuli. Nisi enim quis renatus fuerit
etc. Because the filthynes of man's natural birthe is put away through the
sacrament of baptism, children are for that cause also baptized. For except a
man be borne again Joan. iii.
of water, and the holy ghost, he can not enter in to the kingdom of heaven.
Innocentius the first, which was in S. Austens time, and to whom he wrote,
holds the same belief, saying, as saint Austen recites Lib. ij. cap. iiij.
contra duas epist. pelagiorum. Epist. rescripta ad council. Carthag. and Mile
uitanum.
Illud uero, quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit predicare, paruulos aeternae
uitae praemijs, etiam sine baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est. It
is a very foolish thing, that they do preach (as your brotherhoode
affirms) that children should be saved without baptism. It appears then
now most playnelye how this opinion, which Peter Martyr, folowinge the
Swinglians, has taught, to defend that only faith justifies man, is
against the holy word of God, and the holy doctors both of the Greek
church, and also of the Latyne, and thereby it is evident that Peter Martyr,
and his scolers are not members of the catholic church, but schismatiques. I
beseech God of his gracious goodness turn their hearts, that they may
embrace the truth again, and continue therein to his honor and glory, and
their own salvation. But hear once again Origin, which was about. Orig. lib.
vi. Coment. in ca. vi. ad Romans
M. three hundred years passed, and writes after this manner: Pro hoc, scilicet
corpore peccati abolendo, and ecclesia ab apostolis traditionem suscepit etiam
paruulis baptisma dare. Sciebant enim illi, quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa
sunt diuinorum, quod essent in ^mnibus sordes pe^cati genuinae, quae per aqua^
et spiritum ablui deberent. That is to say. For this body of sin to be
defaced or put away, the An unwritten veritee of our belief
church has received also a tradition of the Apostles, to give baptism,
yea, to children. For they, to whom the secrets of Gods mysteries were
committed, did know that there should be in all men natural fylthines of
sin, which ought to be washed away through water and the holy ghost This
authority is against Peter Martyr, the authors of the articles annexed unto
the Catechism set furthe in king Edward the vi. time, and all them, that
say either that children not baptized should be saved, or that baptism is no
cause of our instification, but faith only, or that baptism is but a sign
or mark of our justification, or finally that the baptism of children is set
furthe in the Scripture, where it is left to the church by the holy Apostles
without writing De eccles. Hierar. ca. xii.
only by tradition, as Orige^ here says manefestlye, and S. Dionise S. Paul's
scoler, of the which S. Austen writes thus. Lib. x. ca. xxiii in cene ad
^^eram. Lib. iii. ca. xiii. de lib arb. Lab. iiii. cap. 4. de bapti. s. contra
donatistas.
Consuetudo matris ecclesiae in baptizandis paruulis nequaque sper nenda est
neque ullo modo super flua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi apostolica
esset traditio. The accustoinaunce of our mother the Church in baptisinge of
children is in no wise to be despised, nor to be reckened superfluous by any
means, nor utterly to be believed, if it had not ben a tradition of y^
Apostles. What ca^ our new teachers, and the makers of the articles before
mentioned, say to these authorities for the defense of their doctrine, that
men are bound to credit and believe nothing, but that only, which the
scripture sets furthe? Would they, that men should believe them before these
auntiet, godly, and great learned fathers? But of this mat^ier I have written
moore at large in my book of traditions, and therefore I now make an end of
this chapter, wisshinge grace and the knowledge of the truth unto all that
err in Christ's religion, that they may come at the length unto y^ joys of
heaven thorough Christ our saviors glorious passion, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost be honor and praise for ever Amen.

The fourth chapter. That the souls of men departed do not sleep, but
either they go to heaven for their good works or else to Hell for their evil
before domes day.
Touching this matter I will be very short, because I think that few of
our country men are infected with this opinion. Christ said to the theife
hanginge with him upon the cross. Hodie mecum eris Luke xxiii.
in paradiso. This day thou shalt be with me in paradise, that is to say (as
saint Austen expounds it very truelye^) this day of my death thy soul
being departed out of thy body, shall see the deite, and godhead clearly. Also
saint Paul said Phil. i.
Cupio disolui and esse cum Christo. I desire to die and to be with Christ,
which is as much as if he had said, when I shall depart out of this world,
I shall be streighte way with Christ, as he himself declares to the
Corinthians, saying thus. ii. Cor. v.
Scimus quod si ^errestris domus nostra etc. We know that if our earthlye house
of this dwelling be brooken, we have a house of God in heaven not made with
man's hand. Again he says. Audemus and bonam uoluntatem ii. Cor. v.
habemus, magis peregrinari a corpore, and praesentes esse ad dominu^. We are
bold, and we have a good will, rather to be strangers from the body, and to be
present with our lord. Which is as much as if he had said, when I shall goo
out of this world, than I have a house in heaven, and shall be present with our
lord God. Which saint Hierom Hieroni. To. i. epist. ad Marcellam de obit^ Leae.
affirms saying thus. Nunc illa pro breui labor, aeterna fruitur
beatitudine, excipitur a^geloru^ choris. Now she has. the pleasure of y^
everlasting bliss, she is received with the compaignie of Angels. Saint
Austen writtinge Aug. in psalm. 10. Phil. i.
upon this Paul's sentence. Cupio dissolu^ etc. says. Viuit Paulus nunc cu^
christo, si^cut illi prophetae omnes viuunt cu^ christo. Saint Paul lives
now with Christ, as all those Prophets does. Again Saint Austen speakinge
of the gate or port of paradise, which Christ opened the day of his death,
writes thus. Per ha^c ingressus est Petrus, per hanc ingressus est Paulus, per
hanc omnes sancti Martyrs intraueru^t. Through this port S. Peter entered into
heaven, through this gate s. Paul went into heaven, through this gate all the
holy Martyrs entered into heaven. Saint Basil believed the same, Basil. epist.
67.
when he said thus. Mortuus est uir, qui columna erat, and stabilime^tum
ecclesiae, imo magis ad beata^uitam sublatus a nobis, abscessit. The man is
dead, which was the pillar, and the establisheme^t of the church: Nay
rather he taken from us, is goone into heaven. Abdias, which was of the Abdi.
lib. i. ^ist. apostilic^.
lxxii. disciples which Christ sent in to the world before him to preach,
says that Saint Peter said, when he should be crucified: Quare scitote me
ad hoc ipsum fest^nare, ut carne exutus, domino assistam. Wherefore know ye
that I make haste unto this same thing, that I being unclothed of the
fleashe, may be present with our lord.

Again he witnesses that S. Lib. v. hist. ap^.
John evangelist said unto, one Andronicus, weping much for the death of
Drus^ana. Ita ne fleueris, quasi ignores, quo illa concesserit? Nescis illam
conuersationem esse meliorem, quae in coelo est ad quam sa^cta and fidelis,
Drusiana tra^siuit, expectans spem resurrectionis ex mortuis? Do thou so
weape for her as though thou knew not, whether she is goone? Do thou
not know that that conversation is better, which is in heaven, unto the
which the holy and faiethful Drusia^ is passed out of this life, looking for
the risinge up again from death unto life? Oecumenius a Greake writter,
expou^ding these words of s. Steven: Ac^es. vii.
receive O lord Jesus, my spirit, says. Hinc ostenditur iustorum animas a
corporibus liberatas nequaqua^ in infernum desce^dere, sed tra^smitti in manus
Dei viuentis*

The fifte chapter. That it is lawful and good to put fiaunce, esperaunce, or
trust in our good works, next after God, as in his gifts, which thing
Luther, Buce^ Peter Martyr, and semblable others deny. Also that we may live
godly for the heavenly reward.
THe Prophet did put trust in his good works, when he said. Memento Psalm
cxxxi.
domine David, and omnis mansue tudinis eius. Remember David, O lord, and all
his mekenes. Even so did the good king Ezechias iiii. Reg. xx,
saying. Meme^to, domine, quomodo ambulauerim, coramte in veritate and in
cord perfecto etc. Remember, ^ Lord, how I have walked, that is to say,
how I have lived before thee with a perfect faieth, and have done those
things, which pieaseth Phil. iii.
thee. Saint Paul confirms this doctrine, when he says: Nostra conuersatio
est in coelis, vnde and expectamus dominum nostrum Iesum Christum and ce. Our
living is heavenly, and therefore we look for our lord Jesus Christ, which
will refourme our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body.
Christ said. Sun^ Matthew. xix.
eunuchi etc. There be some men, which have chosen a continent life for the
kingdom of heau^, as their stipende, and reward. Mooreouer, sa^ed not the
holy Prophet David. Inclinaui cormeum etc. I have bowed mye Psalm. C. xix
heart to keep thy righteous commandments for a reward. Commends not
saint Paul the Colossians, because they exercised Coloss. ^. Hebr. ij. xii.
charitee, and gave alms, propter spem repositam eis in coelis, for a reward
laid up in heaven, which they so doing hooped to have? Says he not that
Moses preferringe the He. xi. and xii.
reproaches, which he suffered for Christ's sake before the riches of Aegypte,
looked upon the reward to come Says he not also, that Christ, when he
suffered, looked upon the joys, which he should have by his passion Now
hear what some The doctors sentences.
of the old doctors say in this matter, and first saint Austens mind,
which says. Si pro remissione Tom. ser. lx, de tempore.
peccatorum, and amore vite aeternae, eleemosyna dederis, totum dextera facit.
If thou do give an alms for to obtain remission of thy sins, and for the
love of everlasting life, thy right hand does altogether, that is to say, it
is well done.

Saint Basyl says. Iustus est is, qui nos ad tolerandos agones, Basil. epist.
lx. Lege Bas. de vera virginitate et ad interrogationem. 135.
praemijs inuitat. God is righteous, which sterreth us with rewards to suffer
fightes. How often times did Christ move the people to live godly by
promysing to them everlasting life? Says he not amongst the rest, Hoc fac,
and viues? Do you this, that Luke. x.
is to say, help thy neadie neighbor with alms geuinge, and thou shall live
ever? Why then may not I leafullie live well, upon hope of that everlasting
life which he promises to us that do well, and continue in doing well unto
our lives end, as Paul did? Saint Paul, says. Non sunt condign passiones
etc. The afflictions, or tribulations Romans ix.
of this life, are not worthy the glory to come. Which he wrote to provoke
us, to suffer aduersitees patiently, hopyng to obtain thereby that reward.
This is manifestlye taught by the scripture, saying: Fiducia Tob. iiii.
magna erit omnibus, coram Deo summo, eleemosyna, facientibus eam.

S. Chrysostom expresses the same playnelye writynge Chrisost. hom. v. in
Math.
thus. Vnusquisque nostrum in nulla re alia, spem suam, nisi post dei
misecordiam, in morum honestate constituat. Let every one of us put his
affiaunce and trust in no other thing, next after Gods mercy, but in the
honesty of manners. Again he says Homi. lxvi. in. Ioannem. Math. xx.
expoundinge these Christ's words Non est meum dare vobis and ce. Dominus illo
compellebat, in gratia Dei primum, deinde in laboribus proprijs, omnem salutem
and spem gloriae reponere. Ou^ Lord moved us thither, to put first all our
salvation, and all our hope and esperaunce of the glory to come, in Gods
grace, and then afterward in our own labors. Thirdelye To. ii. co^tione. 4.
delazaro.
he writes after this sort. Ingens bonum in tuis ipsius benefactis collocare
spe^. It is a very good thing to put trust in thine own good deeds. Vt
scires quod eleemosina est beneficium, opusque tuu^ non simpliciter in bonorum
amicitijs sed in ami^itijs per ma^mona partis, Christus iuss^^te co^fidere;
di^^ns. Facite v^bis amicos etc. Christ commanded thee to trust in amities
got^^ throw Luc. xvi.
alms, saying. Make you friends by the mammon of iniquiti^. etc. To make an
end of this E^apt^r, did not S. Paul ii. Tim. ii^^.
both trust in h^^ good works, and also look ^^ have a reward in heaven for
them, and not only for his faith, when he said? Bonum certa^^^^. (...). I
have foughten a good battle, I have kept my faith, and have ended my course
of prea^hy^ge and of good living, there ^owe rests a (...) of ryghteousnes,
which God a ryghteous judge: shall, render to me at that day, and not only
unto me, but unto them also, which do love his coming unto that judgment*
Whe^fore I most humbly and heartelye beseech. God of his great mercy give
them grace, that are against this Catholic doctrine, to return unto the
verity again, and lead^ their lives godly in obseruyng of Gods holy
commaundeme^te^, that they may iustlye put their fiaunce and trust in their
own good works, as God^ Peroratio.
gifts, and look stedfastlye to have and inioye the glory of heaven thereby
through the m^^tes of Christ ou^ sau^^^ blessed Passion, to whom w^it the
father and the holy ghost be^^ praise, and honor for ever. Am^.

The sixte chapter.
That Baptism is not only a sign and a mark of (...) justification and
profession* nor onl^^ a scale an^ confirmation of the same, as Peter Marty^ T.
Cr^me^ Rydleye. Catechism fo. 35. 36. and art. xxvi. and. xxix.
and the a^thours of the catechism, and articles (...) the (...) king
Edwardes the ^^ time (...) wickedlye do^ say, and teach.

This ^r^^ure, good christian reader, is so manife^lye against Gods word as
nothing can be more The^^ or (...) any grace, and regard to Gods t^ (...) his
honou^^, and their own souls health, or salvation they will, that yet are
(...) f^rce^ with these (...) beware of them, and abhor^e (...) teachers of
them, and they that are poisoned with any such doctrine, will forsake it, and
embrace again the very true doctrine of the catholyke church. when they
shall see that their guides, teachers, and preachers do so evidently err
against the word of GOD, as they do in this present matter of Baptism: but
to entreprinse and begin this treatise, said not S. Johan Baptist, that
Christ should bapt^se the people in the holy ghost* What is that, if it be
Math. ii^.
not Christ, as (...), God, to give his holy spirit through grace, and
forgeuenes of sins, to th^^ personage that is baptized in baptism? Again,
was ^ete^ Martyr, and the makers of the articles annexed to the above rehearsed
cathechisme, either so ignorant, that they knew not, or so malicious against
the truth y^ they would not believe this christ's, saying? Quisquis crediderit,
and baptizatus ^uerit saluus erit; Who soever shall Mar. vlt^.
believe and be bapti^ed, shall be saved? Is not this plain enough against this
heresy, and also against Peter Martyr, with all others the Lutherans, and
Swinglians, which say that Faith only justifies not man.
we are justified, and saved by faieth only? For does not Christ join here
faieth, and baptism together for the pourchasemente Read ye that are infected
with Peter Mar^^rs doctrine and repent in time.
of our salvation? See thou not then, reader, that our new brethren were
very blind to say, that baptism is but a mark of our salnation and a
sealyng of it only. Will any man be yet so madd^ to follow their doctrine,
or to believe their teachinge, and corrupted books? But hear Christ again to
their further reproach, and confutation, saying. Nisi qui^ etc. Except a man
be borne again Joan. ii^.
of water, and the holy ghost, he shall nor enter into the kingdom of heaven.
What is it, I beseech the, Christi^n reader, here to be borne again, of the
water and the spirit, if it be not a man to be borne spiritually through
grace, and forgeuenes of his sinues the child of God, which was borne
naturallye of his mother the son Psalm. ^.
of Gods ire, or wrath, as saint Paul witnesses plainly? Affirms Ephesians.
it. Note this.
not also Christ hear that a man enters into the realm or kingdom of
heaven through his new birth in baptism, and that without it, he shall not,
^e can enter into it? Is this baptism to be but a Faieth one lie sau^th us
not, as our new breth^en s^^ it does.
sign and a confirmation of our salvation, or faieth only to justify man? Is
it any other thing a man to be justified, than to be borne again through the
workinge of the holy ghoost, which is given to us in baptism? ^i. iii.
See thou not the^ ones again, reader these Gospellers blindness, and
ignorance in the scriptures? Moreover, says not S. Paul, that we are granted
into Romans vi.
Christ's mystical body, the church, through baptism: Says he not in an
other place that the Corrinthians were washed, made holy, and justified This is
against Peter Martor which says that a child is a member of the church before
he be ^e baptise^.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of god, meaning by
that washinge of them, their baptism? See we not then, that saint Paul
believed a man to be made righteous, or justified through baptism, and not by
^ayeth only. Is this baptism then to be but Faith only justifies us not.
a mark of our salvation, and justification? O notable and strange blyndnes
of these proceders, yea of these go^rs backward from the truth, and new
preachers. Why wynked they at this saying of saint Paul, Gala. iii.
Ye all are the sons of GOD, through faieth, which is in Christ Jesus? Quot
quot nam^ ^^ in Christo baptiz^ti estis, Christum induistis.

For as many of you as be baptized in Christ, have put on Christ. What else
meant saynct Paul here, by putting on of Christ in Baptism, but the
receauinge of him by grace, that we made the children of God his father, not
only by faith, (as this letter declares) but also by baptism, should be
clothed with him, and our sins so remitted through his deserts and special
grace, that they should be thereby as it were covered and hid from the sight
of God, that he voyll not look upon them to punish us for them? Did these men
never read, and understand sayn^t Paul, affirmynge, that Christ Ephe. v.
cleanses us through the fountain of water, and the word of life, to make us
glorious without spotte, and wrin^le of sin? Will then any^ learned wise man
yet believe this doctrine, Faith only ^ust^^eth us not.
which is, that only faith justifies man, and that baptism is but a sign,
or a mark only of it? Add to these sayings this testimoine of S. Paul,
Cum apparuerit benignitas etc. After the ^ounteousnes and love of our savior
God, which he bare toward man appeared, he of his mercy saved us, and not of
our ryghteous works, through the fountain Baptism is not only a mark of
our ^ustification but a cause of it.
of renewynge and regeneration, or bearyng us again of the holy ghost, which
he powered into us plenteous^ye, through Jesus Christ our savior, that we
being justified by his grace, should ^e heirs of eternal life, through
espetaun^e or hoope Who may not see here most plainly, that S. Paul affirms
a man to be^ saved, tenewed, borne again, and justified by baptism, and the
holy Ghost also to be given to us in it? Where was then these men's learning
in the scriptures, when they so ignorauntlye taught the contrary, saying:
that baptism is but a token, mark, seal, and confirmation of our
justification Faith only justifies not man.
and salvation, and that only faith does justify us? Our Lord turn their
hearts to his troth again, out of this strange blyndnes, in which they
are. Finallye touching the rehearsal of the Scriptures. says not s. Peter
that as Noes ^. Peter. iii.
arc or ship saved him, and feuen other from brownynge in the floude: even
semblablye baptism saves us Wherefore return ye Swinglians and Lutherans to
the Catholyke church, and forsakynge your errors and naughtye opinions,
embrace the truth again, which the holy and notable doctors has taught us
in their books, as it appears manifestlye by some of their sentences, which
I have annexed to these scriptures, that thereby men may playnelye see, that
our new brethren are not members of Christ's catholic church, nor believe as
those fathers did, which are now Saints in heaven. Certain of some of the
ancient writers minds, and judgments, touching the force and strength of
baptism, against Peter Martyr and all the whole nombre of the Swinglian^ ^
^utherans, which do affirm that it is but only a si^ne and a confirmation of
our justification, and no cause thereof.

Saint Austen writes after Sermo. xvi. ^^ verbis apost.
this manier. Vnusquisque ^am in iustificatione constitutus, accepta scilicet
remissione peccatorum per ^auacrum regenerationis, accepto spiritu sancto,
proficiens de die in We doo^ receive forgeuenes of our sinne^ and the holy
ghost in and by baptism
diem, uideat, ubi sit, Let ever man, when ^e is justified, and remission of
his sy^ues being received through the fountain of baptism, in which man is
born Again, and also when he has the (...), Ghoost through the same
baptism, take heed, look or considre in what ^ sta^e he is profitinge or
goinge for ward daily in grace, and virtuous lyu^nge. This is veraye plainlye
written, but hear him again writing more plainly in To^. Lib^, contra
lu^anum Pelagianum.
this matter. lustificatosin hac uita secundum ista tria confer^ur, prius
lauacro regenerationis, quo remittuntur cu^cta peccata. Deinde, congressione
cum uitijs, a quo^^^ reatu soluti sumus. Tertio dum ne^stra exauditur oration,
qua dicimus, Dimitte nobis debita nostra and ce. That is to say, justification
is Mat. ^^.
given to us in this life by these We are justified ^y i^ things and not by
faith only as our ne^ ghoos pe^^rs do sai falslye.
three things. First through baptism, in the which we are bori^e again,
and a^ our sins are forgeuen us. Secondlye we are made righteous by fightinge
with our vices, from the gylte, or fault of which, we be loosed. Thirdlye
justification is given to us, when this once petition is gratidusiye hard:
Forg^ue us, O father, which act in heaven, our trespasses committed against
the, as we do forgive them, that trespass against us. Aqua exhibet
forinsecu^ Grace is g^uen by baptism.
sacramentum gratiae, and spiritua operatur intrinsecus benefici^m gratiae,
soluens uinculum culp^^, reconcilians bonum naturae, regenerat hominem in vno
christo, e^ uno Adam generatum. The water exhibiteth outwardly the sacrament of
grace, and the holy ghost works in wardelye the benefit of grace, loosynge
the bond of sin, and recon^^^^ the goodness of nature: it does regenerat a
man in, o^ through one Christ, begotten of one Adam. What can our brethren
Faith only justifies not man.
say to this, which defend that faieth only iustifeth man* and that baptism
is but only a mark of our justification, and a seal of it? Hear him again
saying. Illo sacrosancto lauacro in choatur renouatio, noui hominis. Lib. i. de
moribus Manichaeorum, ca^xxxv.


The renewinge of the new^ man is begone through the holy lauatorie, or
fountaygne of baptism. Dicimus baptisma dare Then our new brethren are not
catholyke me^, but plain scismatikes.
indulgentiam omnium peccatorum, et auferre crimina, no^ radere. We catholyke
men do affime, that baptism gives to us remission of all our sins, and
takes clean away our sins, and not as it were to shaueth en^, that the
roots of them remayn ^tyll: Baptisma ablui^ peccata omnia; prorsus omnia,
dictorum facto^um Lib. i. ca. xiii. contra duas epist. palog^^norum.
ac cogitatoru^, sieve originalia, sieve addita etc. Baptism wassheth away all
sins utterly al, of words, deeds, and thoughts, whether they be
originales, or added, that is to say, or actual Baptism puts away our
sins, and not faieth only.
sins, committed by man's own act and free will. How shamfully then are
Peter Martyr and all the new brethren deceived, which say that baptism is
no cause of our justification, but faieth only, and that baptism is but a
mark of it, and a confirmation, and yet say that they do set forth the faieth,
and religion of the fathers and of the old catholyke church? He that lusts
to read more of this matter in s^inte Austens Lib. de s^mb^^ ad catech. lib.
^* cap. x.
works, let him goo to the places alleged here, and noted in To. ix. tract.
v. in primam. Io. epist. To. x. ser. 128. de tempore tract. 80. in Io.
the ma^gent of this treatise, and he shall be fullye satisfied of his belief
herin, not withstanding, that these sentences already recited, may satisfy
every good man ^ Hear now what was saint Hieroms belief in this matter,
which says. Eu^ gelij mih^placet religio, vt bapti^^ Hierom. in ca. i.
Esaiae.
mini in sanguine meo, per (...) regenerationis, quod solum potest dimittere
peccata, iuxta illud. Nisi quis renatus fuerit etc. The religion of the
Euangelie (says Hiero^ in Christ's person) pleases me, that ye be baptized
in my blood, through the ^auatotie of regeneration, which only can remitte
sins, according to this saying of Christ. Except a man d^ borne again of
water and the holy ghost, he Joan. iii. Note this reader.
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. What can Peter Martyr and his
followers (...) to this plain sentence?

Will they arrogantlye deny these doctors sayings and those that follow
here, desiring that men should rather credit and believe them, than those holy
aunciente great clerks, as Latymer did of late in the disputations kept at
Oxforde; Latimer.
when he could not answer to them? Saint Hierom says, only baptism is
the mean to obtain forgeues of our sins, and Peter Martyr says, faith
only is, and that baptism is only a sign of it, and no cause. He says
again. Christ^s baptisma in lord a (...) (...)
in (...) quasi poenite^s, qu^^esset ^ pecc^tis liber, accepit, ut c^teros
edoceret mundandos esse per baptisma, and in filios no^ra spirit^^ adoption^
regenerari: Christ re^eaued baptism in the river of Iordan^ therefore, as a
penitent person, although he was free from sin, that he might thereby;
Note this good reader well.
teach other ^enne, that they must be made clean from the filth^nes of sin
through baptism, and be borne again the sons of God by the adoption of the
holy ghost. Origin was of the self same belief in this Origenes hom. ^. in
Joshua.
matt^er, which wrote th^s. Per baptisma regener^tion is expurga^ae s^n^
animae nostr^. Our s^ules are cleansed through baptism of a now birth.
Again he Homi. ii. in Le^^ticum. C^^llus.
and saunte Ey^ill followynge him, do say thus. Audi nun^, quantae sunt in
euangelijs peccatorum remissiones. Est prima, qua baptizamur in remissionem
peccatorum. Hear now how many ways there are in the euangeles to obtayn
remission of sins. The first is, by which we are baptized to pourchace
forgeuenes of sin. Deus abolet sine dubio uitium primae natiuitatis per
rege^erationem. God without doubtaunce puts away the syn of our first
birth through our new birth in baptism. Chrysostom establishes this
Chryssost. hom. xxxv. in euan. Ioann^s.
doctrine saying. Futuru^ erat baptisma plenum maximae potestatis, and gratiae
purgaturum peccata, pro mortuo vi^um effecturum. Baptism was to come, full of
greatest puissaunce, or power, and of grace, which should pourge or cleanse
men's souls from their sins, and make a man alive spirituallye, which was
dead before through sin. Again he says Aufert quide^ Sermon. iiii. in ca.
ii. ad Ephesios
deu^ in praesenti uita iniquitates, et per lauacrum regenerationis, et per
poenitentiam. God takes away men's sins in this Note this against the
solifidians.
present life, both through baptism, and also through penance.
Iustificauit deus per lauacri Sermon. xv. in ca. ix. ad Romans
regenerationem. God has justified man through the lauatorie of
regeneration. He says also that our circumcision (baptism) brings to us
goods Hom xxxix. in Geneseos ca. 17.
without number, and that it fills us full of the holy ghostes grace, and
that it has no time appointed for the administration of it? Tertullia^
believed y^ same, saying. Caro abluitur, ut anima Tertul. de resur. carms.
^maculetur. The body of man is is washed, that his soul may be made clean
from the spots of sin. Saint Cyprian, consents to these fathers, when he
says thus: Gratia de baptismi Lib. i. epist. iii
sanctification^ percipitur. Grace is received through the halowinge of man's
soul in baptism. per baptisma spiritus sanctus percipitur. The holy ghost is
received by or through baptism. Oportet mundari, and sanctificari Lib. ii.
epist. iii. and lib. i. epi. xii
aquam prius a sacerdo^e, vt possit baptismo suo peccata hominis, qui
baptizatur, abluere. The water must be first made clean and holy of the
priest, that it Halowinge of the foute Lib. iiii. epi. vii
may through the washinge of it, wash away the man's sins which is
baptized, To be short he says that all the Deuels might and power is taken
from him in baptism, and the grace of the holy Ghooste is equallye given to
us in it.

Sciat diaboli nequitiam pertinacem Lib. 4. epist. 7.
usque ad aquam salutarem valere, in baptismo autem omnes vires nequitiae
amittere. Let a man know that the dyuels stubborn euelnes or malice is
strong continually unto the water of salvation, but in baptism he loses all
his power to do evil. Quos parentalis labes infecerat, sic lauat baptismus, vt
Mark this saying.
nec actualis, nec originalis macula aliqua post ablutionem illam vestigia
derelinquat. Baptism does so clean wash them, which Adams sin had
infected or defiled, that no spotte another of original sin nor of The^ the
co^cupisence remaininge in the child baptized is no sin.
actual after that washing away of fylth, leaves any print, token, or sign.
Is this baptism to be but only a mark of our justification, or a sealynge
of it? Is this faith only to justify us, and baptism to be no cause of
our ryghtuousnes, and justification? O how blind are these brethren, which
do teach that, and semblable other wicked doctrine. Our lord give them grace
to recule and retier to the troth from their heresies. Hear S. Basyll, which
Bas. de exhortatione ad baptismum.
was almost twelve hundred years sense. Baptisma captiuoru^ est redemptio,
debitoru^ remissio, mors peccatorum, animae regeneratio, amictus splendens,
character indeprehensibilis, coeli i^er, regni coelestis conciliatio, adop^onis
gratia. Baptism is a raunsom Many benefits obtained by baptism. Mark. Joan.
iii.
of prisoners, a forgeuenes of debtes, the death of sins, a regeneration of
the soul, a bright apparel, a figure that can not be perfitlye perceived, the
iourneye of or to heaven, the purchasyng of the heavenly kingdom, the grace
of adoption, or choosing of a man to be the child of God, and his heir. He
has also these sentences amongst many more.

Tempus aliud ali^ opportunum negocio quaerunt, ad baptismi vero salutem,
tempus quodlibet acco^modum Ho^, 12. ^^ 13. de baptismo.
sit, sieve dies, sieve nox, sieve hora, sieve quodcunque temporis momentum. Men
do seek diverse times convenient for diverse busynesses, but every season Our
new brethren appoy^ted a time to receive baptism.
may or should be meet to receive salvation through baptism, whether it be
day, or night, hour, or any other short time. Again he says. Peccatum
gratiam nobis per baptismi regenerationem datam abo Hom. 2. in psalm. xxviii.
let. Sin puts away grace, given to us through baptism, in which we
are borne again. Seruamur, autem, De exhorta, ad baptisma.
quomodo? Nimiru^ regenerati per gratiam, quae confertur in baptismo. We are
saved, but how: Undoubtedly through Gods grace, which is given to us in
Faith! only saves not, how be it our new brethren say that it does.
baptism. Was not then Peter Martyr very ignorant, when he affirmed and
defended that our salvation consisted only in God, and that baptism is but a
sign, and an establishm^t of our salvation? S. Martial Epist. i. cap. 5.
S. Peter's disciple says. Reuiui^cit anima per baptisma. Iam sanctificati,
and mundati estis aqua regenerationis. The soul of man waxes alive through
baptism: You are now made holy and clean from the fylthynes of sin, by or
with the water of baptism, in which ye are borne again. S. Gregore, Hieroms
master, affirms the same thing saying Lauacrum little qui peccauerunt, non
Cra^ione in s. lauacrum.
qui peccant, remissionem continet. His scoler Eucherius was of the same
belief, which wrote thus. Salutis vnda nos a primi parentis culpa absoluit. The
water In libros regu^.
of salvation louseth us from the sin of our first father Adam, which is
original sin. Erred not then Peter Martyr when he taught at Oxforde, that a
Christian man's child obtayneth remission of original fynne before he be
baptized, and that he shall be saved if he be not baptized at all? Which
doctrine ryseth of that other, that faith only does justify us. Arator an
old writer holds Lib i. cap. ii^^ in act. aposto^
with this catholyke doctrine saying:

Si soluere cura est
Faecundi crenient a mali, faelicibus vndia
Extin^t^^ re^^rate gen^^, spes un a remitti,
Debita supplicii, post crimina velle renasci.
S. Alchymus Archebyshop of An. domi. ^^. ^^b 5. cap. 23. ^^ Genes.
(...) an anti^^ writer has thus.

(...) purgata sacris debetur culpa (...); noua^ parientis lympha lauacri,
^r^^post vet^ros, quos ^didit E^a, re^^us. Cl^^dius Varius Victor, whi^he was
a^oute xi^ hundred years passed, has set furthe Lib ^. in Genesis
this godly doctrine, when he wrote thus.

Posse perire homin^s docuit mergentibus Vndis.
(...) flammis, a^ v^^dis posse ren^sci.
S. Pauline, that was in Austens time and wrote to him, Natali. x. f^licis
is in this matter against Peter Martyr, and such others, writynge thus.

Sic pari^er templu^^ (...) hosti^, g^at^^ ^ontem,
^onsque nouus renouans homines. etc.
Euse^ius confirms this catholic L. b. 9. capit, ^^ Euangel^c^ demonstra.
doctrine, when he says, Non amplius per legitima. sacri^icia Mosaicae legi^,
remissi^ illi^ peccatorum conciliatur, sed per lauacri purgatione^, quod in
collecta ex gentibus ecclesia tradebatur. Remission of sin is no longer
purchased of them through the lawful sacrifices of Moses law, but through
the cleansynge of the fountain of baptism, which was given in the church
assembled of the Gentiles.

This is playnelye said, and as plain is this sentence, pronounced and
published in the first counsel holden at the ^itle o^ N^ce^, almost twelve
hund^ed years ^e^ce. Con^iteor vn^^^ baptisma in remissionem peccatorum. That
is to say. Note this reader.


I do confess, or acknowledge, that there is one baptism, or that a man must
be ones baptized to obtain remission of sins. This is the Creed and belief
Ephesians. iiii. Peter martyr and the new brethren believe not as the holy
catholyke church does.
of al christian nations, and therefore. I may well conclude against Peter
Martyr, and the makers of the before recited catechism, and the articles
a^i^yned to the same, that they are not members of Christ's holy^ church,
because they say that baptism is but a sign, token, mark, and confirmation
of our justification, and of the remission of our synn^s, but that they are
forgeuen us by fayeth only before we be baptized, yea we being children
latelye borne and having no faith of our own. Saint Ambrose agrees herein
Ambros. in i. Cor.
with the other fathers speaking of our wasshing in baptism, of our being
hallowed in baptism, Fa^eth only boeth not justify man, but baptism also.
and o^ our justification obtained therein, as Paul witnesses in that place.
Haec omnia beneficia pu^^tatis, in baptismate consecuti noscuntur, quod est
fundamentu^ e^angelicae ^eritatis. Illic enim omnibus peccatis depositis, ab
luitur c^eden^, and iustificatur in nomine domini, and spiritu dei nostri,
filius deo adoptatur. The people are known to have gotten all these benefits
of pur^nes in baptism Note this, r^ader, diligently.
which baptism is the foundation of the truth of the e^angell. For in
baptism he that believes is washed clean from his sins, and is justified
in the name of our lord, and through the spirit of God is chosen the son of
God, al his sins being put away from him. See thou not here playnelye*
reader, The virtue and strength, of baptism.
that saint Ambrose expounding saint Paul's words, declares that he mente,
that we are justified in baptism, and do receive thereby the holy ghost,
obtain remission of al our sins, ^^ are made the sons or children of God
by adoption, which altogether Peter Martyr denies ungodly? Ought he then to
^e credited and believed in his other opinions, which does so ignorauntlye
err in this mattier against the holy scriptures, the general cou^selles, the
doctors, the ancient custom, and the belief of the catholic church? Hear
the holy man Leo the first Pope of that name, which Leo. sermon primo de
nati^^tate Christi.
was above M. C. years since, and says. Per baptismatis sacramentum, spiritu^
sancti fa^^us ^s templum. Thou art made the temple of the holy Ghooste
through the s^^^amen^ of baptism. Maximus an anu^ie^t great learned man was
of the Homi. de symbolo apost.
same b^leife, when he wrote thus. Sancta ^st ecclesia, quae baptismi
sacramento; peccator^m contag so^^ deter^a, terrarum in colas transmient ad
coelum. The church is holy, which sends the dwellers of the ^arthes unto
heaven, through the sacrament of baptism, the infectio^ of sins being
thereby wypp^n or taken away. This is manifestlye spoken of those holy
doctors. I pass over all the rest of the old doctors sentences, boeth
because th^se are sufficient to persuade every man, that is not obstinat^^e
given to abide in his error, and also for that, that I would not be over
tedious to the reader. Our lord of his infinite goodness, and most ^endre
mer^ye grant them grace to amend, and to forsake this wicked error, and all
others their abominable opinions, and to return agayn^ unto Christ's
catholyke church leauinge their schism, to the honor of God and the
salvation of their own souls, which Christ bought most dearly with the shed
^ynge of his precious blood* (*)

The preface to the vii. chapter. That vows ought to bekent both of men, and
also of women, which is against Peter Martyr, and the whose ^ablement of the
new brethren, and especially against the married monks Chanons, Freers, and
Nume^^^
WHen I perceived, reader, that many, which had made vows to God of
perpetual chastitee, were married through the ent^cement and a^luringe of the
deuell, the fleashe, and the world, and that their doings was against the
word of God, to their own uttermost damnation, I thought it good, and
needful breifelie to treat of this mattier, that they, which are offenders
therein, might plainly se^, in what perell they stand, and avoid it in time.
And for as mu^he as many men; especially such as are detained, and empeched
with many great affairs, delight in things brefelye se^furthe, I will use in
this treatise a breuitee of words, and allege but a certain of the old
doctors sentences written in this controversy. But I will commence and begin
with the scriptures, and then address to the^ the holy fathers minds thereof,
that every man may see thereby, both that this doctrine is not new (as our
new men say) and also how abominablye M. Luther the friar, Marte^ Bucer the
friar Peter Martyr the chanon of saint Austens rule, Johan Hoper the white
mo^^, Couerda^e the friar, Ferre^ the ^hanon, ^^ ^emblable others ^otaries,
erred, and brought many moo into their errors, and heresies, God permittynge
them so euidentlye and shamefullye to fall for the punishment of their sins,
as he suffered the Gentyles to run headlynge, as it were into vices mo^st
detestable, and into a reproved mind (as saint Paul Romans ^.
witnesses) so to be avenged on them for their former offe^fes. But I will set
upon this entreprise, and dispatche it breifelye, because y^ right worthy
doctor Thomas Marten, has written Doctor Martens book against priests
marriages.
thereof both learnedly and largely. Thou shall good reader, understand that
all such places of the scripture, which do, require of us generallye the
perfourmance and accomplisheme^t of our vows godly made unto God, does show
that men^e must neades upon pain of euer^astynge damnation, keep, not only the
vow of chastitee, but also of poverty, of obeisaunce, and of al others.
Wherefore let no man be offended with me, that I am so plain in this mattier
against their breakinge of their vows, for the truth ought to be pleasant
to every good man, which regards Gods glory, and his own salvation. Saint
Paul reproved the Galathians Gala. iiii.
very sharplye, because they were offended with him for teachinge them the
truth.

I^ any man be displeased with this my setting furth^ of Gods holy verity,
he shall give to me a just occasion to say unto him, as S. Paul said unto
the Galathians. Who has be witched and empesched Gal. iii. iiii.
thee, that thou obeyest not y^ truth? Our Lord Jesus Christ, which is (as he
said) y^ John. xiiii.
verity, give the^, against whose faults this traicte is written, grace to
remember that Christ said. Si veritatem dico. etc. John. ix.


If I tell you the truth, why do you not believe me? He that Note this.
is of God, does here the words of God, ye therefore do not hear Gods
words, because ye are not of God. What man is so stonye hearted, that these
words can not move him?

Does not these Christ's words declare, that they are not Gods children, nor
the children of salvation, which will not believe and follow the truth opened
to them? I speak against them here, that vowed poverty, and renounced utterly
y^ propriety of goods, when the^ were professed, and do no^ accomplish that
their vow, ^^t are benefi^ed, yea have (...) benefices, dignities, and
promotions, and do gather together thereby much riches. But this should not
offend any man, for I teach them Gods wor^, and truth. Which embrased of
them, and followed, shall (as Christ said to the Jews) deliver them from the
peril of John. ix.
damnation. Will not such v^taries call to their minds this Christ's saying
^^ What John, xvi.
(...) profit (...), if he gain ^ll the world, and thereby lo^^ his foul?
What exchange shall a man make for his soul? Were we not al borne naked, and
shall bear nothing out of this world with us, a^ S. Paul says*

Wherefore let every man continue i. Tim. vi.
(as Paul commands us) in his own vocation, and i. Cor. vii.
serve God therein godly, let no man look back ward with Lothes wife lest he
perish. Let every man remember, that Luc. ix.
Christ said. No man putting his hand to the plowe, and lokynge bahynde him,
is meet for the kingdom of heaven.

S. Paul says again, that ii. Tim. ii,
no man shall be crowned, except be fight ^^wfullye, that is to saye^ no man
shall obtain the crown of bl^sse, except he fight against the Deuell, the
flesh, and the world, manly^ and couragiouslye, in his own calling, degree,
and estate, according to the laws, and ordinances of his vocation, and
profession. Therefore to end this preface, I advise, yea God does advise, every
man and woman, Psalm. lxxv.
which has vowed chastity, and poverty to perform that their godly
vows to the advancement, and increase of Gods honor, and to their own
salvation, that at the ^^de of their mor^all lives, Christ may say unto
them, amongst the res^: our good and Math. xxv.
faithful seruanntes, enter ye in to the joys of your Lord. Unto whom be
laud, and honor for ever, and ever. Amen.

The seventh chapter.
That al godly vow^^, as the vow of (...) of continual chastity promised by a
wydome, the vow of wylful or volunta^^^ (...), and semblables, ought by Gods
law come observed under ^he ^ayne of ^uerlastinge damnation.

WHen I saw, good reader, that very many of our cou^treymen and women now of
late in the miserable alteration of Christ's holy religion, which was of late
in this Realm) were run headlynge into a dampnable estate through breach
of their vows, I thought it needful, and my bounden duitie to advertise them
thereof, that they seeing in what peril and danger they stand in, might by
Gods succor and aid avoid it in time. Wherefore let them waygh diligently
these places of the holy scripture, which are manifestlye against their
doings. Si quis virorum votum domino Number. xxx.
vouerit, aut se constrinxerit iuramento, non faciet irritu^ verbum suum, sed
omne quod premisit, implebit. If any man shall make a vow to our lord God, or
shall bind him self with an oath, let him not break his word, but ^e shall
fulfill all that he has promised. Can there he any thing more plainlye Note
this ye votaries and beware of danger.
spoken against them, that do break their vows and promysses made to God of
chastity, and voluntary poverty* Se^st thou not here reader, that religious
perfon^es, which have vowed poverty, and have willynglye forsaken the
propriety of worldly goods, The vow of poverty.
do break that their vow, and promise, when they take benefices, prebendes,
and such other promotions, enrichynge them selves thereby, as much as other
do, that never made any such vow? Why read they not this verse of David?
Vouete, et reddite domino deo Psalm. lxxv.
^ estro omnes, qui in circuitu eius offertis mun^^a. Vow and ^^^der your
vows to your lo^^^ God, ye all men that do^ offer gifts unto God in his
citeuit^. Does not GOD require her^ the accomplishement and perfourmaunce of
all godly vows made to him? Solomon sets forth the same doctrine, Eccle. v.
saying. Si quid vouisti Deo, he moreris reddere, displicer enim ^stulta et
infidelis promi^^io, sed quodcunque voueris read, and ce. If thou haste vowed
any thing A vow of poue^tie ought to be kept, and all others lawfullye made.
to God, tarry not to render it. For a folyshe and an unfaithful promysse
displeases him, but what thing so ever thou haste, or shall vow, perform
it. Who sees not here euidentlye (except he be blinded with carnal
affection) that the holy ghost forbids here ye breaking of all leafull vows,
and godly promises, both of chastity, and volu^tarie pouerte? What mean
then our vow breakers, when they can not abide him that teaches them their
duties to god for their salvation? Ought they to be angry with him, that
tells them the truth? Why remember Matthew. xvi. Mar. viii.
not they these Christ's words? What shall it profitte a man, though he
should win all the whole world, if he loose his own soul? But let them
hear the scripture again, for a further, and a more sufficient proffe of this
mattier. Quum Deuteronomy. xxiii.
uotum uoueris domino deo tuo, non tardabis reddere, quia requiret illud
dominus deus tuus, and si mo^atus fueris, reputabitur tibi in peccatum, and
nolueris polliceri, ab^que pecca^o eris. Qu^d autem egressu^ est de^^bijs t^^s,
^bseruabis, and fac^es, Mark this ye vo^aries and repent the breach of your
vows in time
sidu^ promisisti domino deo tuo, and propria voluntate, and ore tuo so^utus
es. When thou haste vowed a vow unto thy Lord God, thou shall not be slack
to pay it, because thy lord God will require it of thee, and if thou shall be
slow or slack, to per^^^me thy vow, thou shall sinn^. If thou will not make
a vow, thou shalt be without sin, concerning this point. But thou shalt
keep, and do that thing, which is ones gone out of thy lyppes, as thou haste
promised to thy lord God, and haste spoken with thine own free will, and
mouth. Oh how manifest is this text against the breakers of their vows of
chastitee, volun^arie pouerte, obedience, Read this.
and all other that are good and godly, as these three are? Why remember they
not that Christ would not suffer a man, which he had called to be a preachour
of his word, to bury his Matthew. viii The^ph. Luc. ix.
own father, declarynge thereby that every man should serve God in his own
vocation, and not leave it, or do any thing repungnaunt to the same Does not
Christ exhort us to remember Luc. xvii. Genesis xix.
Lothes wife, that we look not backewarde from our v^ca^io^, and calling?
Said not Christ also to one that said, I will Luc. ix.
follow the o Lord, but let me first take my le^ue of them that are at home
in my house? No man puts his hand to the plowe, and looks back, or
behind him, is apt to the realm, or kingdom of God? And does not they look
behind the^, which forsake their profession, and kind of life wyllingly
chosen to serve God in Saint Paul commands, yea Christ speakinge in i.
Cor. vii. ii. Cor. xiii.
him, that every man should a bide in his own vocation, Does they so, that
break their vows of chastitee, and poverty? Did not saint Peter by the
puissaunce, and power given to him of God, stryke Ananias, and Saphyra to death
for breaking Act. v. Fulgentius epistola i. Cyprianus lib. i. ca. xxv. aduersus
Iudaeos.
their promise, and vow made to the holy ghoost, which was in reseruinge to
themselfes a piece of the money gotten by sale of their field, where they
had promised to give the whole unto thapostles, for their sustina^ce and the
pooers, as then had done many good men, willynglye Act. iiii.
without any commandment of God, followinge therein only Christ's counsel?
Saint Basyl Matthew. ^ix. Lib. de institutione ad vitam perfectam.
proves by this place, that men ought to keep all their vows of virginity,
contine^ce, chastity, pouerte, of abstine^ce, of fasting, and semblable others.

Saint Bid, which was Lib. i. ca. xxiii. hist. anglorum
our countreeman, and lived above. DCCC. threscorre years passed, witnesses
that saint Anno. do. ^8.
Gregory the first Pope of that name, sent one saint Austen with almost
forty other learned good men into this our country England to convert it
unto the faith of Christ again, and that when the king Edilberthus, and many
others hadd^ received the faieth of Christ, the said Austen was made bishop
of Cantorburie, and that then he wrote to the Pope Gregory, to be instructed
of him, how the Bishops and the clergy should live amongst the people,
or how many portions should be made of the things, which through the Lib.
i. ca. xxvii hist. ecclese. Anglorum.
faithful peoples oblatio^s came to the altar, and how the bishop should use
himself in the church. Unto which demaundes the Pope saint Gregory made
this answer. The accustomau^ce of the apostles seat How bishops should
despende their goods
at Rome is to teach bishops created, or made, that of every stipende, which
comes to them, four parts or portions ought to be made, one for the bishop,
and his family, and to receive strangers, and to keep hospiralitie with. The
second for the nourriture and sustentation of y^ clergy. The third part
should be given to the poor people. The fourth ought to be reserved and
despended upon the repayringe of his churches: But for as much as, says he,
thye brotherhoode has been instructed in the rules of solitary lyuinge,
Religious men, albeit they were bishops ought to have nothing proper.
and of religion, you may not live seuerallye from your clerks, ye must
ordeyne this conuerlation, and thus lead your life in England, as the fathers
did even at the beginnynge of Christ's church, amongst the Act ii. et iiii.
which every thing that they had, was commen, and they had nothing propre.
This leasson gave that holy father saint Gregory the Pope unto that bishop,
which was before a religious person, and to his companions, that were monks.
Which counsel being grounded Note this
upon the scriptures, and their vow, all religious men and women ought to
follow upon pain of damnation. But I will recite some of the old godly The
old doctors upon vows.
fathers sayings, written of them against priests pretensed marriages, that
they may see euidentlye, how they err in the defense of them, and that they
stand in danger of everlasting damnation continuynge in that opinion.

S. Fulgentius writes these Fulgentius epiprima de debito coni^gali.
words. Sayncte Paul pronounces that my dowes are in danger of damnation,
because i. Tim. v.
they have a mind to marrye after they have p^^f^ssed chastity. Quam sit
autem malum, quam ^^ folli^^e effugien dum, si quis de hoc quod domino vouerit,
aut ^et in^re, aut rep^tere aliquid, mortificatione, p^rtentet, exemplo sunt
Ananias and Acts. v.
Saphyra, quos de precio agri quan dam partem infoeliciter subtralientes, non
solum vox apostolica, tanque diuini iuris peruasores increpuit, sed etiam
seueritas iustitiae coelestis occidit. Si quis igitur rem iam deuotam, carnali
victus ille^e bra, crediderit denuo reposcenda^, non est legitimus rei
possessor, sed diuini iuris pronunciatur inuasor. Nec immerito continentiae ^am
deuot^ vi^l a^ of immun^^^ ^udit, quod pocuniae aua^^^ (...). haec ille. Is not
this manifestly Mark this ye votaries and possessours of church lan^es and
goods
written against breakers of their vows of chast^^^e, and voluntarye poverty?
See we not also here does by the scripture, and also by S. Fulgentius, that no
man may lawfullye take again to his own use that thing which he gave to the
church, the service of God, or to the poor people? How much less is it then
lawful for any other man to enjoy such goods, revenues, rentes, houses,
possessions, or lands, given of godly people to Gods service, to monasteries,
churches, chapels, hospitals, and to semblables others? But of this matter I
will by Gods help, speak more at large in another treatise.

Some of the ancient doctors sentences, written against the marririages of
them, which had made a vow of continual chastity, and conti^encie.
Oecumenius an old Greake Oecumenius i^ i. Cor. 7.
writer thus has, declaringe these Sayn^te Paul's words: If a Vyrgen do
marry she synneth not. Virginem ho^ loco appellat, non eam, quae Deo
consecrata est, sed innuptam puel ^am. Nam quae Deo consecrata est, Photinu^.
si nupserit, Christo reddit ^um adulterum, cui nubit. When S. Paul says, y^
if a virgin marrye, she offends not God, he calls not her in this place a
virgin, which is whollye given to God by a vow of chastity, but a damsel or
a wench^ unmarried. For if she marry, Read ye married no^nes and beware of
danger.
which has vowed chastity, or virginity, she makes him, to whom she
marries, an aduoutrer against Christ her husband. The godly and good
Christian Emperor, Iouinian Tripar. histo. lib. 7. cap. 4.
made a law, that who so ever married a nonne, or a virgin, that had vowed
chastity, should suffer death therefore. S. Hierom is plainly against Hierom.
lib. i. contra Iouin^anum.
the marriages of them, that have vowed chastity, writing after this sort
upon these words of Paul. If a virgin do marry, she does not sin. ^ Tim.
v.


Non illa virgo, quae semet cultui Dei dedicauit. Harum enim si quae nupserit,
habebit damnatio n^m, quia primam fidem irritam fecit. Paul saying, if a
virgin marrye, she synneth not, did not mean that virgin, which had once for
ever given her self by a vow of chastity, or virginity, to serve, or
worship God. For if any one of them shall marrye, she shall be damned,
because she has broken her first faith, given to God, when she vowed to him
virginity. Peter Martyr following therein the friar Oecolampadius, Bucer, and
other the Lutherians, and Swinglians, which married against their professions
and vows, affirms and defends with a shameless face, that it is not
lawefull to vow continual ^hastitie, and that men and women may without
fault martye, although they had vowed ch^^stifie. Is this to refourme
Christ's religion defaced (as they at the least do pretend) and to restore it
again to her fourmer estate and pureness, which was at the beginning of the
church? But hear S. Hierom again, saying: Virgins quae post consecrationem
nup Lib. i. contra ^ouini anum.
serint, non tam adulterae sunt, qu^ incestae. The virgins which do marry
after their profession, are not so much aduoutresses, as sinners against their
promise made to their spiritual espouse Christ. Read him ad Sabinianum,
where he says, that he which marries a no^ne, commits aduoutrie against
Christ her spouse, had husband, Hear word (...), whi^he was al^idste xii.
handyeth Epiphanius ^^tra apostolicor^ haeresi^. anno d^mini. 369.
years passe^, and says. (...) ostoli, pec^^tum ess^post decretam virgi^^^^,
ad nuptias conuerti: Et ^^ripsit apostolus. Si nupserit virgo non peccauit.
Quomodo igitur hoc cum illo concordat? ^mo ^^iam illam virginem dicit, quae non
est dicata Deo. and ce. The holy The apostles law that vows should be kept.
Apostles of GOD have taught, that it is sin, to to^^^ne unto marriage after
virgin^^e is decreed to be kept. And the Apostle Paul has written. If a
virgin do martye she has not sinned. How then does this saying of S. Paul
agree with that the Apostles teaching? Yea the Apostle rather speaks of that
(...), which is not offered, or ge^^^ to the service of God by a vow of
chastity. (...) accords with this godly doctrine when he says. Melius est
nubere, quam Ambrosius ad virgine^ lat^ sa^. cap. 5. tom. i. de iustificatione
virginis. cap. 15. et lib. 3. de virginitate.
uri Hoc apostolicum dictum non ad pollicitam pertinet, ad non du^ velatam.
Coeterum, quae se spopondit Christo, and sanctum velamen accepit, iam nupsit,
iam immortali iuncta est viro. Et iam si voluerit nubere communi lege connubij,
adulterium perpetrat, ancilla mortis efficitur. It is better to marrye then to
burn. This saying of the apostle appertains not to her, which is promised to
god by a vow, to her that is not yet covered with a vele. But she, which
has promised herself to Christ to be his espouse, or wife, and has taken
the holy ^^yle, is now married, is now joined unto an imortal husband. And if
she will now marie by the commen law of marriage, she commits aduoutrie, she
is made the bond servant of death. Is it not then a great madness to follow
Peter Martyr, August. lib. iii ca. (...) pec^catorum etc. Lib. de hares. ca.
lxxxii.
doctor Thomas Cranmer, and such others defending the heresy of Iouinian,
condemned by saint Austen, saint Hieroin and many other notable clerks and to
forsake these holy fathers lessons, the determinations of diverse counselles,
Con. Eliberin^^ ca. xiii. sub Si^ uestre. Con. Chalce. cap. xvi.
established with the word of God? Our lord God of his tender goodness, and
great mercy take this blyndnes out of men's hearts, that they may return unto
the catholyke church, ou^ of the which they are gone, and are clean divided
from it by a ^e^sme most damnable, when they fors^ke the mother church (as
fainte Ironeus and saint ^yprian calls it) which is Rome. The great
learned (...) saint Basilli wrote much Basillius lib. (...).
against this heresy, for he faith; V^^ginitatem domino professae ^ de^^de
carnis vol^p^^tibus con^^ta^^, scortationis peccatum, nupe^ a^^m nomine uolun^
uela^e. (...). They have professed virginity to our Lord, and after ward
Read ye Nuns, that have married.
being sterred by the lusts or pleasures of the flesh, would cover their
horedome with the name of marriage. What can Peter Martyr the ^hanon, and other
votaries, that have married women, say to these ancient doctors sayings
Would they that men should rather believe their ignoraun^e judgments, tha^
these fathers excellent learned sentences? Does they not plainlye declare
themselfes to be schisma^ikes, and no me^bres of the catholyke church, when
they dissent from these, and the other holy writers belief and teachinge?
Again saint Basil Taii. ad. int^^rogati^^e xiiii. and xv.
speaking of religious persons, which had de vowed chastitee such as are
Monks, Nuns, and Chano^s, says, Horum vnusquisque si posteaque inter
reliquorum fratrum societatem adscriptus f^erit, factam a se professionem
^esciderit, is perinde aspici (...), ut qui in deum peccau^^it, q^^m uidelicet
profession is rest ma^^^buerit, cuique se uoto folemni obligarit* Etenim qui
s^ipsl^m deo semel deuouit, hic s^^d al^ud deind^ uitae genus transierit,
sacrileg^^ ^^ scelere obstrinxit, quippe qui seipsum deo, cuise consecrauerat,
ueluti super^uratus sit. If any one of these, after he is ones chosen into the
co^pa^gnie of the other brethren, shall break his profession, Read this ye
votaries and repent the breaking of your vows.
he must or ought so to be looked upon, as he, which offended God, whom he took
a witness of his profession, and to whom he bound himself with a solemn
vow. For he, which has made to God a solemn promise, or vow, if he go
afterward to an other kind of life, has bounden himself with the heinous
sin of sacrileage because he as it were, steals Lege Basilium epi. lxiii.
libro constitutionum monasticarum ca. i. and ad monachu^ lapsum.
himself from God, unto whom he had wholly given himself. Is not this plainly
spoken against the chanon Peter Martyr, and semblable others, that have broken
their vows of chastitee, and voluntary pouexte? In an other place saint
Basil lays Epist. ad virginem lapsam.
a great reproach to a virgyn, that had brooken the solemn vow of her
profession made with the vesture, or habit of a professed Nun. I let pass
many other sentences of this holy doctor. To be breife sa^^t Auste^ is
against this heresy, which writes thus. Quod cuique ant^que uouisse^, August.
lib. i. cap. xxiiii. ad pollentium.
licebat, q^um i^^ se nu^quam facturum vouerit, non lice^ it. Si ^d uouerit,
quod uouen dum ^uit, sicut est per petua virginitas vel co^tinentia, post
experta connub^a ^o^ lucis a uinculo coniugali ^^uel ex consens^iuonentibus
etc. He that The vow of poverty. ought to be kept.
has, says he, made a vow of perpetual virginitee, or of contiuence ever
to endure al his life* or else of poue^te, he may^ in no case breeke that his
vow, because our Lord has commanded that vows should be kept, saying
thus* V^^ete, and Psalm. lxxiii.
reddi^^ domino deo^^estro^^^ Make ye a vow; and render it to your lord God.
Also he proves by this sentence of Daui^ now all eaged here, that it is
against* Gods commandment to br^eke a vow of chastitee, and other vows,
when he says after To i^* epist* ad Armentariu^ riparium and paulinam epi. xlv.
this manier. Non te vouille preniteat* imo gaude iam tibi sicmo^ licele, quod
cum de trimento tuo lic^isset. Do thou not repent, that thou haste vowed, nay
rather rejoice, and be glade that that thing is not now leeful for the to do
which thou myghtest have done leefullye with thye d^mmage* To be breife, and
to let pass many of his sayings in this matter, he says* Quid ai^
apostolus de quibusd (...) To. viii. in psalm. lxxv. i. Aime^^.
^^^erunt and non ^ed ^derimt? Hal^entes in quia, dam nationem, quia prima^
fide^ ^irritam fece^^nt. Quid est (...) fecer^nt. Vouerune, (...) di^^tum. What
says the apostle. Iege cum in psalm. lxxxiii. de bono viduitat^s ca. ix. x. xi.
So Paul of (...) which have vowed (...) have no t^ ^ent (...) vowed ^ They
have, says Paul^^ damnation, because the^ have broken their first* fayeth,
what (...) Note this ^eader dili^entlye.
is that, they have broken (...) first faieth? They have vowed, and kept not
their p^^misse, or vow. Who will the^ give any further c^edence to our new
gospellers in any one point of their damnable opinions, saying they do
heru^erre so manifestly both against the holy scriptures, and the ancient
doctors expoundinge the same to us? Also he affirms that n^ Lib de bono
viduitatis ca. 8
woman, which, has vowed ^hastitee may leefullye afterward marrye, but she
runs thereby into everlasting damnation: and groundeth his saying upon the
text of saint Paul last about rehearsed. But hea^e now saint Timo. v.
Chrysostom. homi. de fide, spe, and charitate.
Chrysostom in this mattie^ saying thus. Si aliud gesseris, ^ voueris, and
fideinomen perfida ^olun^ate dissolueris, non modo pr^^miorum composesse non
poter^^ sed^^ dest^^to suppli^io, necess^ est sub^uge^is. If thou shalt do
Read this votaries
any thing against thy vow, ye and shall bre^ke the name of ^aith, or
faithfulness, with an unfaith full will, thou shall not one^ye lose thy reward,
but thou must needs be punished accordynglye as God has determined. Again
he writes thus expoundynge these S. Paul's words. If a vyrgin do marrye T^mo.
4. homi. xix. in. i. Co. vii
^he synneth not. Ne^^ de ea, quae sibi virginitatem elegerit. Ioq^^tur, quippe
quae iam peccaui^ Nam (...), quae secu^dis se nupr^^s alliga^une, ^^dicium
subeu^^, (...) ^^duitare in elegerint, (...) magis virg^^es. Saint Paul
saying, if a virgyn ^o marrye, i. Tim. v.
^he sp^^neth not, speaks not of he^, that has on^^ chosen to herself
virginitee, because she^ hath^ now sinned. For if w^^ d^wes, which h^ the
^ound^ themselfes to the second marriages, are under the perell of dampnation,
i^ they ones have chosen by a vow to continue widows* and a fr^^ that do
marye* much more virgyns* Wha^ can be moore playne^ye sp^ken against the
votaries* Nuns, Monks, Chanons, and Freer^* that have married against them
vows made to God* Chrysostom says also that the marriages of Monks are
worse tha^, Tom. 2. hom. 21. ad Theodorum monachu^, vbi di^ monachum
contrabentem nup^^ (...) rere adulteriu^, et e^ peius cri designare.
ad^outrye. See thou not the^, good reader, evidently that Peter Martyr*
doctor Thomas Cra^mer late archebishoppe of C^torbu^^^ Ridlye, La^yme^* John
H^^er, Rogers, doctor ^rome, and all the rest of that sort are not of the
catholyke church, out of the which there i. Pet. iii.
is ^^ salvation, but schismatykes, and d^u^ded clearelye from the ^companie of
them that shall be saved, seeing they believe not as these holy fathers did,
which are now saints in heaven? Is then any man so folishe to believe their
doctrine, touching the blessed sacrament of the altar, the holy Mass, and
such other mattiers of our faieth, lately called into question, and doubt, by
them, after they had forsaken the unity of the catholyke church? But hear
Cyprianus lib. i. epist. xi.
saint Cypria^, which was almost (...) ^yeres sense, and a holy Marty^. Q^u^
christus virgine^ sua sibi de^^icat^ ^et (...) destinata^ iacere cum altero
cer^it, quam indignatur, et irascitur, et quas paenas incestis eiusmod^
coniunctio: nibus co^minatur? When Chryst^ sees his virgin, given to him by a
vow of (...), and appointed to his holiness, lie with an other, how much is
he moved and angry? And what peynes threteneth he to such an unlawful marriage,
which is worse then aduoutrie? Again he ^ayeth. Cypria. de dup^^c^ martyrio.
Lege eu^ de habi ^^ virgin^^.
Nonne uidemus tot^ ecclesiae coetum vultus dimit^ere, at ^^erubescere quoties
aliqua virgo, quae christo nupserat, dilapsa ex angelico contubernio, defecit
ad stuprum, aut coniugium? Do we not see all the whole compaignie of the church
look down with their countenaunces, and to be ashamed, as often as any
virgyn, which had married to Christ by a vow of virginity, fallen down from
the company of angels, forsook her profession by committinge of horedome, or
by marryage?

The holy Pope Leo first of that name, which was above. xx. hundred years
passed commended wonderfully of the general counsel holden at Calcedo being
there in assembled D C. xxx. learned fathers, says this of Monks. Propositum
Leo primus Epist. 92.
monach^ proprio arbitrio, aut voluntate susceptum, des^ri non potest absque
peccato. The purpose of a monk taken with his own arbitriment or will, can
That had vowed chasti^^^ and poverty.
not be left undone without sin. But let this be said in thy^
controversy, as sufficient to establish^ the t^o^th the (...), and to over
throw the con^^^rie. Now hear a little (...) of the vow of pouerti^, (...)
of the keeping of it. albeit, that which is already spoken thereof, mygh^ de
sufficient, for the ignorant to learn the truth of this matter, and to see
in what danger they be, which do break that vow.

That the vow of poverty ought to be observed of monks, ^onnes, chanons,
freres, and all other religious persons upon the pain of damnation.
For as much as, good reader, many good men think that this lawefull for a man
that has made a vow of voluntary poverty, to enjoy rych^sses in propre,
or (...) have the proprle^^e ^f go^des, (...) thought^ i^ be (...) to (...) of
th^^ (...) tha^ men might the ^ett^r kno^^ the t^^eth the (...), for the (...)
of their (...) God.

The (...) written, out of the ^^^iptures tou^hinge vows, do pr^^^
sufficientlye that if a man, or woman has vowed willingly poverty, to have
nothing proper, he or she is bound to keep this same vow under pain of
everlasting damnation: and the same does ye holy doctors of the church ^^ach,
amongst the which these are some of their sayings that here follow: S. Austen
intreatinge of m^n^es, L^b. i. cap. 31. de moribus eccl^siae.
says. Nemo quidquam to said^^ propriu^, nemo cuiqu^^ o^^er o ^us est. None
of them poss^sseth any thing as his own proper goods, no man is onerous to an
other. Also he says Aug. lib. 17. ca. ^ de cruitate dei.
that the Apostles (the life of whom monks should follow in that point)
professed and vowed poverty, which S. Peter declared, when he said to Math.
xix.
Christ. Behold, we have left all things. Alius vult reli^quere Aug. in
psalm. 7^
omnia sua, distribuendo ea pau peribus, e^^re in communem vitam^, in
societatem sanctorum, magnum voru^ vouit. Vnusquis^ reddat deo, quod vouit. An
other man does vow to forsake al his goods, distributinge and deuidynge them
to the poor, and to go into a common life, wherein all things are common, and
nothing propre, and to go into the fellowship of the holy, he has made a
great vow to God. Let every man pay, or re^dre to God, that thing, which
he has vowed to him. Saint Chrysostom was of that same Tractatu aduersus
vituperatores monasticae (...).
mind, saying. In Monasteries all things are comm^n, meum, and tuum, mine,
and thine, which do trouble all the whole world are taken away there. Item
he says: In monasterijs no^ To. v. homi. ^^iii ad pop. Ant^^ ochenum.
est meum, and tuum, sed hoc uerbu^ eliminatum est, infinitorum causa bellorum.
In monasteries is not mine and thine, but this word, which is the cause of
infinite battaylles, is put out of those houses.

The holy Pope Vrbane, an Vrbanus p^^ lib. de bonis eclesiarum and ru^
co^mu^^c.
ancient great clearke writes after this sort. Quicunque vestru^ communem
suscepit uitam, et nih^^ se habere vouit, videat ne pollicitationem suam
irritam faciat, se^ hoc, quod domino est pollicitus, fideliter custodiat, ^e
damnationem, sed praemium sibi acquirat etc. Which so ever of you, says Note
ye beneficed votaries.
he, has taken upon him a common life, and has made a vow to have nothing
propre, let him se^, or take heed and beware, that he break not his promise,
but keep faithfullye that thing, which he has promised to our Lord, that he
get not to himself damnation, but a reward of God. Our lord give that
grace to all votaries, which have made a vow of poverty, to beware of
breakinge of it, least they for lu^re and gains of a little worldly goods,
loose the eternal, and heavenly ry^hes. Amen.

But hear saint Hierom saying. Non est ^ibi eadem causa, quae To. i. epis. i.
ad heliodorum.
coeteris. Dominum ausculta dicente^. Si uis perfectus esse, vade, and vende
omnia, and da pauperibus, and sequere me. Tu autem perfectum te fore pollicitus
es. Nam cum derelicta militia, te castrasti propter regna coelorum, quid aliud
quam perfectam secutus es vitam. Perfectus autem seruus Christi, nihil praeter
christum habet. Aut si quid praeter christum habet, perfectus non est. Et si
perfectus non est, cum se perfectum fore deo pollicitus sit, ante mentitus est.
Os autem, quod me^titur, occidit animam, Igitur ut concludam, Sapien^. ^.
si perfectus es, cur bona paterna desideras? Dominum ^efel listi, si perfectus
non es. Alia est monachorum causa, al^a clericor^. Clerici pascunt oue^, ego
pascor. Again he says unto a monk. To^. ad rusticum.
Tuver^, si monachus esse vis, non uideri, habeto curam, non rei familiaris,
cui renunciando, hoc esse caepisti, sed animaetuae. But if thou will be a monk
in deed, and not to appear only, care not for the goods belonginge to thy
family, or household, which thou haste forsaken, to be a Monk, but take care
of thye soul. He says also. Vidi ego quosdam, qui postquam renunciauere
Read ye monks and ^hano^s.
saeculo, uestimentis dumta ^a^ et uocis professione, non rebus, nihil de
pristina conuersatione mutarunt. Res familiaris magis aucta, qua^m imminuta.
Eade^ ministeria seruulorum, idem apparatus con(...). I de ^^^d pa^linum de
institutione monach said, Siofficium uis exercere presbyteri, si episcopatus ^e
ve^ opus, vel honor for^e delectat, vi^e v^bibus, vel ^^stellis, (...) salutem,
^ac lu^rum ani^^^ ^uae. Sim aute^ c^p^s esse, quod diceris, monachu^, id est,
solus, quid facis in vrbibus, quae ^^que non ^u^t solorum habit ^cula^sed
multorum? ^am non sunt tua, quae possides, sed dispensatio tibi eredita est.
Memento Act. v.
Ananiae at Sapphyrae. Illi sua timide serua^^er^^^, ^u considera, ne christi
substantiam imprudenter effundas, id est, ne immoderato i^dicio rem p^uperum
trib^as, no^ pauperibus, Is not this manifest lie said against religious men,
that have benefices, prebendes, and other promotions, where they have vowed
poverty, and made a promise in the time of their profession, to have nothing
as their own, and propre to themselfes, but to live in commone God give to
the^ grace, and to all others, to serve him devoutly, that therbye they may
pourchasse unto themselfs the glory of heaven, through Gods mercy, and the
deserts of our Lord Jesus Christ Amen.

Imprinted at London by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an hospital, called Christ's
hospital. M. D. LV.


