ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX HIS GHOST.

Sent from ELIZIAN: TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, AND COMMVNALTIE OF ENGLAND.

Virtutum Comes Jnvidia. Printed in PARADISE. 1624.

TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, AND Communalty of England.
Nobles, Gentlemen, Commons:
ALthough in this most holy and glorious Assembly of Angels and Saints, in the
most High Star Chamber Court of Heaven, where Almighty God, and his Son
Christ Jesus, are King and Prince, we the Saints do neither participate nor
sympathize of the good or evil condition of ye Mortals on earth: Yet, seeing
it is a part of that glory, that God affoordeth us in Heaven, to have a measure
of knowledge of your condition on earth; and I, particularly taking knowledge
of the miserable and distracted present estate, of the whilome flourishing
Realm of England, in the days of my then dread Sovereign, (now fellow Saint)
Queen Elizabeth, (of blessed and immortal memory on Earth, and in Heaven,)
could do no less then give you this my Sacred Declaration, and Admonishment,
which I send you, by this my Blessed Genius, written with a pen made of an
Angels Pinion; and agreeing with my Apology which I left behind me on Earth, in
mine own defense, and for the good of my Country, after my discease.

The lawful succession of your now King, when I was amongst you on earth, I
never questioned, but maintained, and was ever ready to maintain (with dint of
my Sword, if need had bin.) his Title, against whomsoever offered to question
the same, as was, and is well known to his Majesty. That he was a prudent,
learned, and religious (educated) Prince, I also never doubted, But that such a
prudent, learned, and religious Prince, should be so far misled, by (some)
false hearted Counselors at home, and fawning Foreign Ambassadors from the
enemies of God and his Gospel prosessed in England, to the detriment of the
Kingdom, That, I say makes me not a little to marvel, and mourn I should
for my Native Country, but that here in Heaven, we are not subject to passion.

Upon my certain knowledge, notwithstanding all the fair show of league and
amity, betwixt James King of Scots, and Philip King of Spain, the Crown of
Scotland was no longer safe on King James his head, then whiles my Sovereign
Lady, and Mistress Queen Elizabeth, by her valiant men of Action, curbed King
Phillip, and kept him in awe: For, had his ambitious, wicked, and deuilish
design of Englands invasion in 88. taken effect, Is there any so childish to
think that his invasion would have had any Period at Barwick? Sure I am, King
James had wisdom enough, to know that his Crown and Kingdom lay then at the
Stake, in the second place, next unto England. For K. James then of Scotland
made a sweet Sonet, as a Monument and Commemoration of his and our
deliverance, from that Foreign and godless Fleet, as he then termed It:
Which Sonet as I then received it, I here present unto your view and
consideration.

The Nations banded against the Lord of might
Prepared a Force, and set them to the way:
Mars dressed himself in sick and awful plight,
The like whereof was never seen, they say:
They forward came in monstrous array,
Both Sea and Land be set us every where,
Brags threatened us a ruinous decay,
What came of that? the ishue did declare:
The Winds began to toss them here and there,
The Seas began in foaming waves to swell:
The number that escaped it fell them fair,
The rest were swallowed up in gulfes of Hell.
But how were all these things miraculous done?
God looks at them, out of his Heavenly Throne.
(The same Sonet is extant in Latin by Metellanus L. Chancellor of Scotland.)

Matters so standing, the marvel is, That upon the mature shutting in of the
evening of your long Summers day of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, King James
lawfully and peaceably succeeding to the Crowns of England, and Ireland, he so
suddenly concludes (as it were) an inviolable league, with that ambitious King
Philip of Spain, that never made league with any King, Prince, or State, but
for his own end and advantage.

If I were on earth, I know some of you would answer me, King James was a
peaceable Prince, and so loved to be at peace, and in amity with other
Christian Princes: Yea, and it seems your King himself, is much affected with
the very name of PEACE, alleging, that he has been a peaceable King from
his Cradle; That BEATI PACIFICI is his happy destined Motto; and with such like
selfe-pleasing songs, has a long time sung a Requiem to himself, etc. I must
confess, it is a happy thing for Christian, and Religious Kings, Princes, and
States to be at peace, in unity, and amity one with an other. But on the other
side, it is as unhappy and dangerous a thing to have league or amity with
Romane-Catholique Kings, and Princes, who are, I say, sworn and professed
enemies to God, and his Gospel, as was, and is this great Catholic King
Philip, and his Austrian-Castillian family.

When I was a servant to my Prince and Country on earth, my affection in
nature, was indifferent, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio, and I was more enflamed with
the love of knowledge, then the love of Fame: which some of your Henry Earl of
Southamton, etc.
Men of State, and great place, yet living, that knew my heart can bear me
witness.

But my Noble, and Religious He died Earl Marshall of Ireland. An. 1576.
Father, Walter Earl of Essex, upon his Deathbed, he gave me in precept three
maine and weighty matters, viz. First, To serve God according to his Ordinances
in his Word. Secondly, To obey my Prince. Thirdly, To love and serve my
Country, unto which he added, To beware of and to hate all Popish superstition
and Idolatry. All which he religiously enlarged, and pressed unto me, the more,
in regard of my tender, youthful, and unripe years. Which Swan-like Song of
my dear Parent, took so deep an impression in me, that I being called by my
Sovereign the Queen, (and being but a youth, she was pleased to call me her
Boy) to serve her Majesty and my Country, did the willinger yield and obey my
Prince her Command, and entered into Action.

First, in the year of our Lord 1585, and xix. of my Pupill-age, I went with
the Earl of Leicester my Father in law into the Netherlands, where I had the
Honorable charge of General of the Horse, in a fair Army: Where, I adventured
my life, and subjected my self to many kinds of wants (disagreeing with my
education and years, etc.) Which I did for the Honor of my Prince and Country.

Secondly, in the year 1589. I enterprized my voyage into Portugal, with a
poor distrested and exiled King, Don Antonio, whom I many times (with pity)
heard repeat (with tears) the story of his oppressions by Phillip King of
Spain; who by force and tyranny had usurped his Crown of Portugal: Also,
considering the enemy against whom I went, an insolent, cruel, and usurping
Prince, that disturbed the Common peace, was a general enemy to the liberty of
all Christendom; and in particular aspired the Conquest of my Country; and the
cause I went, was to the deliver the oppressed out of the hands of the
Oppressor; and (by giving the Castillian his handful at home) to free both
mine own Country and our Confederates from the fear and danger of his
attempts: And lastly, a time in which I went, when as mine eyes, full of
disdain, had so lately seen his (falsely called) Invincible Armado sail by
our shore: when all the brave hearts in England boiled till they saw that
insolent enemy taught, both to know himself, and value Us. And had the
Portugals risen and assisted me, I should have gone nigh to have plucked
Portugals Crown off the Usurpers head, and placed it on the lawful Kings
head: but they for fear of Philip were faithless to Antonio. Yet in that my
Voyage, what I attempted to aid the wronged and banished King, and for Honor
of my Prince and Country, if you know it not, let your Chronicles resolve you.

Thirdly, in the year 1591. I conducted and was General of her Majesty, my
Sovereigns succors to Henry the French King, a Prince, who for his admirable
valor, and often fighting with his own hands, against his enemies, was not
only the most famous, but the most renowned and redoubted Captain of
Christendom: And the end of that my service, was, to free the maritine parts
of Normandy from the hands of the league and power of the Spaniard, that
thereby he our enemy should find less succor or favor in those Seas, etc.
This also was done, for Honor of my Prince and Country.

Fourthly, in the year 1596. I undertook my Spanish Voyage to Cadiz, where,
not only I soon seized on, sacked, and burnnt the Town, and enriched my
Followers, and Soldiers, but we burnt his best Shipping, and brought away his
Ordinance, and some Ships, destroying his Sea Provisions: Yea, put him to such
charge and loss, as he shortly after played Bankerupt, with all his Creditors,
etc. And this likewise I did, for Honor of my Prince and Country.

Fifthly, in the year 1597. my Spanish Voyage toward the Tercera's, was
intended with her Majesty's leave, and by her command for Fayall, to assail
the Adelantado there, and thither I shaped my course; and had it been
prosperous, and fortunate, I had made my Sovereign such an absolute Queen of
the Ocean, and disarmed, and disabled the enemy at Sea, as that she might
either have enforced him to any conditions of Peace, or made War on him, to her
infinite Advantage, and his utter Ruin.

But that my design was fatally frustrated by violent and long Tempests, which
took us in the height of 46. Which scattered our Fleet, disabled and almost
drowned most of our principal Ships, and (when we could no longer bear it up
against the Wind) drove us back upon our own Coast; and to what a desperate
case my own Ship was brought? there witnesses were enough: My attempts and
endeauours were nevertheless, my dangers, and endurance of hardness the more,
etc, And all for honor of my Prince and Country.

(When Philip King of Spain, that mortal enemy of my Prince and Country, had
made many attempts, and assaults upon Us; failed and was frustrated in all,
then he begged of the Pope, my Sovereigns Kingdom of Ireland, and sent his
Bastard brother, Don John D'Aquila, to take possession of it.

But this Messinger (a Viceroy in his conceit) was soon sent back with an
English-Flea in his Spanish ear, that made such a buzzing in his head, that
either with that, or else by a Spanish-figge, the good Don discontentedly
departed this life, in short time after his return into Spain.)

At length, (and it was my last Voyage) by command of my Sovereign I was made,
and sent Lord General into Ireland of all her Majesty's Forces. And there,
when I had begun to subjugate those headstrong Rebels, and brought their
Ringleader (that notable Rebel Tyr-oen) upon his knees: I was forced abruptly
to return back into England: and my Commission was conferred upon an other
Noble Charles L. Mountjoy.
, my inferior: who was sent over to wade against those Rebels, after I had
broken the Ice aforehand; and he had the Honor, happily to perform what I had
carefully and painefully, projected and intended. In the interim, the fatal
thread of my mortal life, was almost spun, and my glass nigh through run. My
enemies laying many heinous crimes unto my charge, and therewith abusing my
Sovereigns ears, and incensing her sacred Majesty against me.

But, beloved Mortals, it is not my meaning (neither would I have you expect
it) to touch the injury of the times in that my latter Time, nor the
State-faction of men in place, my then enemies: I forbear to touch, also how
by the machinations of men, my gracious Sovereign was forced to sign the
hastening of my Death: For before my head was severed from my Shoulders, (with
which stroke my immortal soul was separated from my mortal body) I forgave
them all, and left my cause to God, to whom vengeance is due: And certes, my
God has been thoroughly avenged of them all, (my enemies,) to their dishonor
and disgrace on earth; yea, before Men and Angels. And all was but like an
impetuous storm to hasten my arriving in the Harbor of Heaven: Here, where
there is no room for revenge, nor ought else but holy love: which has moved
me to send you of my quondam Country this my declaration or discourse (call it
what you will:) Wherein, I list not neither to meddle with the Arcana imperij,
of your King and State, further then shall beseem a zealous Patriot, that
tendreth still, and wishes the welfare and flourishing State of his once
dear and native Country.

And now, well beloved Englishmen, in the premises I have given you a brief
account of my life, and as it were an Epitome of my time-spending on earth. In
which employments, I empayred my hereditary estate; lost my dear and only Mr
Walter Devreux, slain at the siege of Rouen. 1591.
brother, the half Arch of my House, and buried also many of my nearest and
dearest friends; subjected my self to the rage of the Seas violence, general
plagues, famine, and all kind of wants; discontentments of undisciplined and
unruly multitudes, and receptation of all events: and all, for the Honor and
renown of my gracious Prince, and dear Country, keeping in mind my fathes
Charge: Sit tota Britannia Testis.

Now beloved Mortals, let me come more nearly to Counsel and advise with
yon. First, that the Spanish Kings reuengefull humor was insatiable appeared,
when, in my time Anno 1597. when he came newly out of a Trance, which was
thought would have been his last swoune, he asked (the first word that he
spoke) whether the Adelantado were gone for England; and if remorse of
conscience would have quenched his thirst of revenge, he would not, a little
before his death, in his devotions, being all Mass, have vowed to be revenged
on England, though he sold all those Candlestickes upon the Altar, before him.

Secondly, that all Treaties with Spain (an idolatrous and irreligious Nation)
were both unsafe and dangerous, I proved by vn-answerable arguments in my
Apology, page 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. And how injurious
the zealous peacemakers of those times, were to the State, I proved page 35,
36. How necessary gainful, and honorable it was, for the State of England, to
have Wars with Spain. I proved page 36, 37. and so to the end of my Apology.
But some of you happily will how say, That now, The Times are changed, and with
the time the Spaniards mind is altered. Indeed, I remember the old Poet said,
Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis.

But that is quite contrary in the Spaniard: For, although old King Phillip be
dead, yet there is a young (Iesuited) Phillip sprung from his loins. It is an
old and homely Proverb, That which is bred in the bone, will never out of the
flesh: But it is a true and obseruable saying, Apol. page 19.
and in that House above all others. For, as I told you in my Apology: wheneuer
old King Phillip should die, his sons blood would be as hot, and hotter than
his Fathers, and his humor of ambition like to be greater, as having been
bred in Domo regnatrice, and his mind swollen, vetere and insita Austriacae
familiae suberbia. So as, in the Spaniards seeming peaceable proffers there is
no hope, etc.

Nay, if it chance there be Infancy, or Idiotisme found in any Heir or
Offspring of that Race, the state of Spain are politic enough, as being
sworn thereunto, (though by never so dishonorable and degenerous means and
machinations) to promote the enlargement of his Western Monarchy. And certes,
he having of late years, since the death of my Sovereign Lady Elizabeth,
gotten such footing in Christendom, by dispossessing off and encroaching upon
some Princes and States their ancient and lawful Inheritance, Princedomes, and
Territories, by which means he has as it were beguirt France with his
Garrisons: Is, I say, his ambition thereby lessened? Surely no, but as his
Conquests are enlarged; so his Ambition and Malice are abundantly increased
toward other Christian Princes and States: Witness, his late cruel and
bloody attempts, and perpetual designs to his Universal Monarchy; and the
progress of his Conquests, with the help of his Confederates of the
(terrestrial) omnipotent Austrian House, in Italy, the Grizons Country,
Suitzerland, Bohemia, Germany, and I say, the Frontiers of flourishing France,
since the Death of Henry the Fourth the French King, of famous memory. And in
all these places, he and the Emperor his Confederate and Cousin, do labor to
extirpate the Gospel, and persecute the professors thereof, even unto the
Death.

It would be known, what King James says to all this: who is Defender of the
Faith, and Head of all the United Kings and Princes of the Religion in
Christendom.

There is here in Heaven secret intelligence, that He, not contenting himself
with making that League with Spain, has also entertained a Treaty of Marriage
for the Prince his only Son, with the Daughter of Spain: And certes, the
very Angels have blushed at this news, that your King, who is of so profound
judgment, learning, and knowledge in Divine matters, should ever assent to
Treat of Matching his only Son, with a wife of a contrary Religion:
Especially with an Impe sprung from such an incestuous Generation, as is that
of Austria and Spain, or Spain and Austria, choose you whither, which is
unanswerably proved by one of your most accute and ingenious Sandy's Relation
of the West parts, page 26, 27
Writers. Without doubt, King James cannot but know in his conscience, that it
is directly against the revealed Will of God in Holy Writ, for Christian
Princes and people that profess the Gospel, to match with Romane-Catholickes;
which made himself match with Denmarkes Daughter, a Protestant Princess, and
afterward he matched his only Daughter with the Count Palatine, a Protestant
Prince; witness also his Majesty's own Pen, in his Basilicon Doron.

How comes it then to pass? that he is so misled, as not only to entertain
of this Treaty with Spain, but suffer himself to be so baffled and abused, as
that about the said Treaty he has wasted the Treasure of the Kingdom, in a
far greater measure then his Royal Predecessor Queen Elizabeth, my
gracious Sovereign, did to maintain Wars against Spain and all his his
Adherents? I fear, I fear, you of his Nobility, and Council (unto whom it
belongs) are not so faithful, true hearted, and stout, as religiously to
advise, and Counsel your King, as you ought, not to suffer himself to be so
abused, his Kingdom to be wel-nigh ruined, and his subjects impouerished.

Oh the flourishing State of your Faery-Land, in the days of yore, whiles I
lived on earth, under the Government of that glorious Queen, of etermemory:
The Christian World did admire her Government, and your flourishing State; Nay,
the very Mahumetane Speed, in Hist. page 852, 853.
Monarchs did admire and acknowledge the same.

But now, the case is altered, (and) I can hardly forbear to weep, to see
what a piteous Petition that glorious Queen, my now fellow Saint Elizabeth,
lately received from you the Commons of England: But thereof I say no more,
considering she according to her Commission from the highest Power answered
that your Petition.

Let me now admonish you all, of the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty: First,
seriously and yet submissiuely, to dehort and dissuade your King, to leave off
and absolutely dissolve all Treaties of Matches, or whatsoever else with that
perfidious and dangerous Spanish Nation; and in lieu of the Spanish Match to
promote the English March. What though his Majesty's Treasure be drawn deep
into, the poor Countryman by these late hard years be impouerished, the
Merchandise and trading of your Kingdom much decayed, etc. Yet, if your
sumptuous Buildings, your surfeiting Diets, your Prodigality in Garments, your
infinite Plate, and costly furniture in your Houses, and the pride of your
Wives (especially) be considered, England cannot be though so poor. Can you
exceed all Nations in Christendom in wastfull vanities? And can you not arm
your selves against one Nation, (which you have ever beaten) for your necessary
defense? Was Rome so brave a State, as that the very Ladies, to supply the
Common Treasure, and to maintain the Wars, despoyled themselves of their
costly Jewels and rich Ornaments? And is England become so base a State, as
that the people therein will not bestow some part of their superfluous expenses
to keep themselves from Conquest and Slavery? (The only end of all Spaines
Treaties: Witness their Treaty of peace in 88. when as, even at the instant
their mighty Navy came to invade Us) Did the godly Kings, and Religious people,
which you may read of in the old Testament, to maintain the Wars against the
enemies of God, sell the Ornaments of the Temple, and things consecrated to
holy Uses? And will ye that have as Holy and as warrantable a Cause of War,
spare those things that you have Dedicated to your idle and sensual pleasures?
Could your Nation in those former Ages, when the Country was far poorer then
now it is, leauy Armies, maintain Wars, atchieue great Conquests in France,
and make their powerful Arms known as far as the Holy Land? And is this so
degenerate an Age, as you will not be able to defend your own Land? No, no, I
hope there is yet left some seed of that ancient virtue: Remember with what
spirit and alacrity the Gentlemen of England did contribute and put themselves
voluntarily into Action, in my time on earth. And doubtless, there will ever
be found some VALERII, who (so the State may stand and flourish) will not care
though they leave not where with to bury themselves, though other some bury
their money, not caring in what estate they leave the State.

You had a Queen, in my time on earth, who was ever open handed to men of
desert, yet never wastfull in her private expenses; but maintained Armies and
Garrisons, not a few; a well-rigged Navy, assisted and lent money to her
Neighboring States. And why will ye doubt but with your seasonable Counsel,
in a Parliamentary-course (the ancient and laudable Course of England) your
King will rather sell his Plate, and Jewels in the Tower, which in my time were
of inestimable value, (if yet they be not sold, nor given away,) rather then
his people shall be undefended. And ye his people, I hope will turn your
golden and silver Coats, into Coats of Male, or iron Iacks, and your silver
Plate, into Iron Corslets of Plate, rather then your Sovereign and Country
shall be unserved. But what need all this? A free and cheerful contribution
to the Wars according to your abilities will serve the turn. And so, oh
Noble Prince, and Valiant People, agree to go on, the one to send forth, the
other to lead on Gods Armies, to fight his Battles, against his and your
enemies; lest they suddenly surprise you unawares by some new Invasion; and
remember that the Almighty, as he is a God of Peace in the consciences of his
Elect, so is he a man of War to his enemies; even so his Majesty, has
expressed himself in holy Writ.

Again, in any wise beware of disuniting your selves from the united States of
the Netherlands: for it will be to your infinite disadvantage so to do: But
rather, assist, cherish, and hearten them: They are the best Confederates you
have. Remember in what steed they stood you in that memorable year 88. And
they, being firmly knit unto you, are of more use unto you then all the
Friends you have, or can have in Christendom. In my time on earth, they were
able (upon my certain knowledge) to find 60. or 80. Thousand fighting
Soldiers, 300 Ships of War, besides an infinite number of transporting
Vessels and commodious Ports, that are but a days sailing from the very heart
of England: Since my time on earth, they are increased in men, in munition, in
Shipping and in wealth; and which should make the knot of unity more strong and
fast with you, they were and are of the same true Religion, which you profess:
And moreover, now, which should not be of least consideration, with your King
and you: They are of late years Harbourers of of the exiled Princes his
Majesty's Children, who are beaten out of their lawful inheritance by Spain
and Austria.

And verily, were it not that my condition here, I say, were free from all
passions, my very heart would bleed to think on the deplorable State of
Christendom, how drunk those two Houses of Spain and Austria have made
themselves in the blood of Christians, professors of Christ's Gospel; and the
very Angels do wonder to see how they are suffered to go on in their inveterate
malice and furious rage against Gods Church, and that other Christian Princes
do not stop the current of their fury: Especially, that your King, who is a
Professor of the Gospel, and Faiths great Defender on earth, is so backward in
the business.

Which considered, it is your parts, especially that are of his Majesty's
Council and Nobility, with faithful hearts to persuade and stir him up, not
to let the Lion in his Princely Breast, any longer to sleep and slumber, but
to awake and rouse up himself, and to go forth against the Romish wolves, and
Spanish Foxes, who have devoured so many of Christ's Sheep, and laid his
Vineyard so wast: Yea, the blood of the Saints does continually cry at Heaven
gates for Vengeance.

To draw to an end, I will not cease to intercede to the Almighty my ever
glorious God, that he never denounce the curse against your King, or ye his
Nobles, which he once in his word denounced against Meros, etc.

My Conclusion still is, and shall be: Iustissimum ijs Bellum quibus
necessarium, et pia Arma quibus nullum nisi in armis spes est. And for an
vltimum Vale, as in my Apology I advised to Remember how Bernardine Mendoza
(the then Ambassador of Spain) spent his time here in England: So, I now
advise you, Remember how your late Spanish Ambassadors have spent their times,
and behaved themselves here in England, etc.

The Peace of God, which passes all (earthly) understanding be with you, and
dwell in your hearts.

My Declaration's ended, I must no longer stay,
Because Heavens Cornets summon me away:
The Blessed Quire of Heaven I do hear,
Tuning their Voices to the Almighties ear.
HAL -- LE -- LV -- jAH HAL -- LE -- LV -- jAH. Ha -- le -- lu -- jah.
A POSTSCRIPT, OR, A SECOND PART OF ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX HIS GHOST.

To the Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty of ENGLAND.

printer's illustration

Printed in PARADISE. 1624.

TO THE NOBILITY, Gentry, and Communalty, of ENGLAND.
THrice Beloved Mortals:
I being still Studious of your welfares, and having obtained leave of the
Almighty, I am now to give unto you and commend unto your consideration a
Catalogue and Commemoration of such cruel Plots, as were practiced in my time
on Earth, by the King and State of Spain, against the Queen and State of
England: Wherein, I will not meddle with Practices and Cruelties to other
Nations; and therefore I omit to tell you how far their Cruelties extended to
the poor naked Indians in America, though I remember, whiles I was on Earth, I
have seen a Book, as well in English, as in Spanish and Latin, entitled,
The Cruelties and Tyrannies of the Spanish Coloni, perpetrated in the
West Indies, commonly called the Newfound World, written in the Castilian
Tongue by the Reverend Bartholomew De las Casas, a Friar of the Order of St.
Dominick, and Bishop of the Royal Town called Chiapa; serving as a warning to
the twelve United Provinces of the Low Countries: Translated into English, and
Printed, (as I take it,) in the 25 year of the happy Reign of that Virgin
Empress, Queen Elizabeth, my gracious Sovereign: The lamentable Relation
whereof, if you would particularly know, I wish you have recourse unto the said
Book. And of their cruelties and Tyrannies exercised by their Arch-Tyrannous
General Duke D' Alva toward the Netherlanders, if you know them not, look
but into their Chronicles. And for their plots and practices toward England,
before my time, look but into your own Chronicles.

But, before I come to my Catalogue, I must commend unto your consideration,
When I was but an Infant, there came a certain Bull from Pius Quintus, that
impious Pope of Rome, against Queen Elizabeth: The Copy of which Bull is also
to be seen in your Chronicles: But the Copy of her Sacred Majesty's Answer
unto the said Bull, because you have not elsewhere seen it, (as most Worthy
your reading and observation,) I here insert it: The Lord that Reigns on high
in Heavens Throne
Does Kingdoms rule below, it is He alone
That Earth does govern with high thundering might,
And moderates the staff of Kingdoms right:
It Is H^ that guides with his Almighty Name,
The wheel of all this Universal frame:
It Is He that Kings anointed and Elect,
And sacred Captains strongly will protect.
Why should this Bull-head Bishop therefore, full
Of rage, against me roar with Basan Bull,
To pluck me from my Sacred Seat and Throne,
T'out root the Plant which Christ himself has sown?
Why does this Pius seek with impious guilt,
To pull down that which God himself has built?
Christ me anointed, and anoint I hope,
Will keep me from the jaws of this proud Pope:
His powerful Hand has kept me yet from harm,
Nor will the Lord make short his out-stretcht Arm.
If God be on my side, why does this Popish wonder
Seek to affright me with his beastly Thunder?
Why does this newborn Giant seek to ride
Above the Clouds with his prodigious pride?
Against Heaven why does this Nimrod make new wars,
And with Jehovah breed these impious jarrs?
Pius this Anchor of thy Peter's bote
Is broake, thy hope and faith does floate.
Ye, An Exhortation to other Princes.
in whose hands the Almighty God ordaines
To put the peoples and the Kingdoms reins,
Do not your selves, and people bring,
Under the yoke of this vile borbarous King.
Away with him that does for Scepter fight
And royal Crown, that is not Bishops right:
What, must the Pope so many States devour?
Its not Priests part to use the Carnal power:
To make these madding Bulls fits not their names,
And set on fire these hot rebellious flames.
Their Sword, the Word should be, the words interpretation,
Their Key should be, this is the foundation,
Whereon Christ's Saints do fight, such men Christ's sword do wear,
Such do his holy keys and Standard bear.
Oh Kings; the fathers blessed son then kiss;
Psalm 2.
The King of Kings, the Head of Heads he is,
Who serves not him, not reigns, a shadow vain
And Cyphar is, learn this all by my Reign:
He Will never fail you whom a woman bore,
Psalm 24.
Away with Popes, to them set open the door:
Set wide the Gate, shut forth these new made Kings,
Let in the Lord, which with him Justice brings.
Dear England, mine own Bowels, Daughter, Mother,
Fear not this bulling Pious, or such other.
What have I done that Thou should angry be?
Oh England, cause thou art happy hate thou me?
Cause God by me so many gifts has given,
And I these gifts, on earth, God loathed, in Heaven?
Why do my English love the Egyptian Pot?
Why looks on Sodom back the wife of Lot?
Whiles that my Sister was at Romish call,
There was a Stage and Scoene most Tragical:
Religion was corrupted, all your Rite
Divine was stained, Faith wrapped in errors night,
Home jarrs and strange, my Muse now shall not show,
Even I my self drank cupps of Gall with you.
Now Manna raines from Heaven, Heavenly food,
Now flows Peace and Joy and every Good:
He that feeds Ravens makes my Lillyes flourish,
Hairs of my Head and Diadem does nourish:
Iuda's strong Lion keeps our Lions nest,
The Romish Leo's but a fearful Breast;
Fear ye the Ensigns of a Mitred Priest?
Can we with Sword, Keys, Club be ere oppressed?
Rather thank Christ, pray him that he all evil
He would resist, all Ambushes of th'Deuill,
Double your prayers to Christ that he would deigne
T'assure your good and let no Rhombus reign:
Double your prayers for Church and purest Faith,
Power forth your prayers for Queen Elizabeth.


I have inserted this answer of Queen Elizabeth not only for the worth of
it, (though I hold it worthy to be written in Letters of Gold:) nor will I say
that Philip King of Spain was an instigastour of Pius Pope of Rome, to send
that cursed Bull: But it was plain and more then probable, that that Bull was
the ground which set on fire the hearts of her Popish Romish-Subjects to rise
in Rebellion against her; and sure I am that Spain soon backed them, and
subborned them in their Rebellion and cruel practices against her Sacred
Person, and flourishing State: Witness the Bead-roll of their cruel Practices
here following.

In the year of our Blessed Savior 1583. and 25. of Queen Elizabeth her
Reign, Francis Throkmorton, being solicited by Bernardine Mendoza (the then
Spanish Ambassador Lieger, lying in London) undertook a most dangerous design
against his Dread Sovereign and Native Country, which was to bring in a
Foreign (Spanish) Army, and to alter Religion, with alienation of the Crown
and State: And for the charges of which attempt, the said Mendoza promised that
the King his Master would bear half the charge of the Enterprise.

In the next year, viz. 1584. William Parry, (as he named himself) being
instigated by Benedicto Palmio, and Christofero de Salazar, (Secretary to the
Catholic King Philip) undertook to murder her Sacred Majesty, and one
Haniball Codreto a Spanish Priest, approved the same Diabolical Design.

In the year 1586. Babington and Ballard, and their fellows, complotted with
the aforesaid Mendoza, to betray the Land to a Spanish Invasion: Which being
discovered, they enter into a new resolution to kill the Queen: Whereof they
were prevented.

But Phillip of Spain, seeing that all former attempts failed. In the year
1588. he set forwards his long premeditated Invasion of England, sending a
mighty Armado, which he termed the Invinsible Navy, meaning then, as it were,
to devour England at a Bit: But he found so many bones in the Bit, that in
attempting to swallow it, they stuck so fast in his throat, that he was the
worse for it every day of his life after.

This great, noble and invincible Army, (as Pope Sixtus termed it,) and Terror
of Europe, (as the Papals both term it and took it to be) consisting of 134.
Sail of lofty Towering Ships, besides Galleys, Galliasses, and Gallions,
threatening, as it were the Heavens; and spreading in the Wind their Flaggs,
Streamers, and Ensigns, seemed to darken even the Sun; and were furnished with
this provision following; Bullets for great shot 22000. Powder 40200. Kintalls,
(every kintall an hundred weight;) Lead for Bullets 1000. kintals; Match 10200.
kintalls; Muskets and Calieuers 7000. Partisans and Halbert 1000. besides
murdering pieces, double Cannons, and Field-peeces for Camp, and store of
Mules, Horses, and Asses: so as they were sufficiently provided by Sea and for
Land: Bread and Biscuit was baked, and Wine laid aboard for six Months
provision; Bacon 60500. kintalls; Cheese 3000. besides other flesh, Rice,
Beans, Peace, Oil, and Vinegre, with 12000. Pipes of fresh water; store they
had of Torches, Lanthornes and Lamps, Canuas, Hides, and Lead to stop leakes;
butcherly knives, iron ghiues, shackles, wirewhipps, whips with spurre-rowels,
and other torturing instruments, intended to torment us, old and young, (all
such I mean as would not suddenly submit to the Spanish yoke.)

This mighty Navy thus prepared as you have heard, loosed Anchor from Lisbone
19. Maij 88. and made to the Groine in Galizia, it being the nearest Haven to
England: whence, I say, hoysing sails, with great hope and no less pride,
bent their course hitherward: But suddenly the Heavens, hating such hostile
actions, powered down revenge, by a sore and unexpected Tempest, which drove
the Duke of Medina (the chief General) back again into the Groine; and
diverse others were dispersed and driven upon the Coast of Bayon in France, and
there perished. Not long after, their Navy nevertheless appeared in the
Narrow-Seas, twixt England and France, in manner of an half moon (the
Arch-enemy of Christ his Ensign:) where, our English Fleet gave them such an
encounter, (the God of the maine Ocean fighting for us in the Narrow-Seas) that
we soon defeated and dispersed that Invincible Navy, and made it Vincible.

Now, because the Subject I am upon is a Catalogue of Spanish cruelties, I
would feign know whether there was ever invented a greater Cruelty toward, and
against a famous and flourishing State and Kingdom: Surely, in my judgment
(which did concur with the judgment of the Christian World) there was never
such, and so great a cruelty hatched under Heaven as that Spanish Invasion 88.
our Deliverance from the which, has made the year ever since famous and
memorable; upon my knowledge, when I was on earth, there was a Day set a part,
and commanded by my Sovereign, to be kept Holy, for that our great and
miraculous Deliverance from the Jaws of the Spaniard; and I wish that your
unthankfulness in the neglect of Celebrating that Day, holy, be not required
at some of your hands: And certes, those reverend Divines that do never cease
in their public Prayers to give God thanks for that your great Deliverance
do show their zeal not a little, and deserve double Commendation: Yea, and let
my Posterity no longer live and prosper, than so long as they have thankful
hearts to God for that general Deliverance; and let the posterity of all
Religious People say, Amen.

For, all men and women, that would not have bowed the knee to (Spanish) Ball,
had then doubtless been put to the sword, their children (now happily living,
men and women) had been tossed at the Pikes ends, or else their brains dashed
out by some ill-fac'd Donns or other: Strangers have not been wanting to
commemorate that Time of Englands Deliverance, and amongst others, I remember
Reverend and Religious Theodore Beza (of pious memory) wrote a sweet and
patheticall poem, gratulatory, of the aforesaid Tragy-Comedy in Latin,
inscribed to the Queen my Sovereign, and sent unto me to deliver unto her
Royal hands: the which is thus excellently rendered in English: Spaines King
with Nauies huge the sea's bestrewd,
T augment with English Crown his Spanish sway;
Ask ye what caused this proud attempt? 'tas lewd,
Ambition drove, and Avarice led the way.
It Is well; Ambitions windy puff lies drowned
By Winds, and swelling hearts, by swelling waves:
It Is well; the Spaniards who the worlds vast round
Devoured, devouring Sea most justly craves.
But Thou, o Queen, for whom Winds seas do war,
Oh Thou sole glory of the Worlds wide Mass,
So reign to God still, from Ambition far,
So still with bounteous Aids the Good embrace.
That Thou, England, long, long may England Thee enjoy,
Thou Terror of all Bad, Thou Good men's Joy.


Oh let the Remembrance of that Time have an eternal being in the Minds and
Mouths of Men.

I have been somewhat long in the commemoration of this part of my Catalogue
of Cruelties, I now proceed to the Residue as follows.

In the year 1594. Rodericke Lopez Doctor of Physic, a Portugal by birth,
(and entertained Physician in Ordinary to Queen Elizabeth) being instigated by
Christofero de Moro (a special Counselor of King Philips) couenanted to take
away the life of her Sacred Majesty, by a poisoned Potion, for performance of
which deed of darkness, the said de Moro promised him 50000. Crowns, and he
had earnest given him, a Jewel of Gold with a Dimond and Ruby of rich value:
but that plot was detected by Gods providence, and Lopez received condign
punishment.

In the year 1595. Edmund York and Richard Williams, being set on work by
one Stefano Ibarra, King Phillips Secretary at Bruxelles, who promised them
the reward of 4000. Crowns undertook to kill the Queen by some means or
other: but that also was detected by the vigilant eye of the English State, and
they received the reward of their deserts.

When King Phillip saw all his practices still frustrated, he, as audacious as
ambitious, began to tamper with my Self, and by his Instruments sought out me
as a fit man to betray both my sacred Sovereign and dear Country: I forb^ to
trouble your ears with the latitude of his large bumbasted Promises of reward
unto me to effect the same: but in lieu of accepting his cursed Proposition and
offer, I vowed a further revenge of him: and with my Sovereigns leave and Gods
assistance, I had performed what I vowed and intended, etc.

The last public Attempter in my time, which in no wise I must forget, was
one Edward Squire, who, being taken Prisoner in Spain, was set on work by
Walpoole the Jesuit, and other officers of King Phillip to murder her sacred
Majesty, and my Self, which he undertook, and brought over a new invented
Castillian Confection: first, to poison the Pommels of her Majesty's saddle,
and then the Pommels of a chair wherein I usually sat at sea, both which he
failed not to attempt: But by Gods goodness his cruel and treasonable
attempts proved also successelesse, and this proper Squire had the reward of
his Devilish practices.

Of all these cruel Spanish practices, I was more than an ordinary witness:
And these premises considered, what Treason was ever attempted against her
Majesty's sacred Person or flourishing State, but the Spaniard was at one end
or other of it? Nay, since my time on Earth, and the death of her Majesty,
That horrid Gun Powder Plot, hatched in Hell, was it not consulted on and
approved of in the Spanish Kings Court? Look well to the confessions of the
Traitors: Speed, in Hist. page 1246.
And did not King Phillip promise 100. thousand Crowns toward the expedition
of that damnable deed of darkness? Look into your own Chronicles.

Now, all the Premises well weighed and considered; Certes, the Turk ought not
to be more hated and abhorred by Christendom than the Spaniard deserves to be
detested by England, etc. Discite o Mortales.

Iterum in Christo Valete.

