THE DIGNITY of Gods children. OR AN EXPOSITION OF 1. JOHN 3. 1. 2. 3.

Plentifully showing the comfortable, happy, and most blessed state of all
Gods children, and also on the contrary, the base, fearful, and most woeful
condition of all other that are not the children of GOD.

PROVE. 12. 26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: but the way
of the wicked will deceive them. JOHN 1. 12. 13. As many as received him, to
them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God: even to them that believe in
his name, Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the
will of man; but of God. LONDON Printed by Thomas Haueland, for Thomas Man, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1610.

TO THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY OF GREAT BRITAIN, Grace and Peace.
RIGHT Honorable, and right Worshipful, to you all, and to every one of you,
am I bold to present and dedicate this my treatise of the dignity of Gods
children, not so much searing the same to be offensive to any of you, either by
the meannesse and obscurity of my person, or by the plain and homely manner of
writing thereof, as hoping it will be acceptable to you all, for the argument
and subject matter therein handled. For to whom more fitly appertains the
dedication of a treatise of the dignity of the sons of the Psalm. 29. 1.
Almighty in heaven, then to those who are called the sons of the mighty in
earth?

Although also it behooves all, well to consider and to make good use of the
whole treatise, yet the same especially belongs to all that are of highest
honor and dignity in the world. For to whomsoever much is given, of Luke 12. 48.
him shall be much required. And the more eminent that any are in place, the
more excellent ought the same to show themselves in grace.

Our dread Sovereign writing to his most princely Son, by many golden
sentences teaches, that as any 1. (...) page 4.
in dignity be erected above other, so they ought in thankfulness toward God
(that has advanced them) go as far beyond all other: and that the highness
of any dignity does not dimin^sh, but rather much increase the faults of such
as are in such dignity. The same also is grounded upon the commandment of the
Soueraign of all sovereigns, even of the mighty God and Lord of heaven and
earth touching a greater sacrifice for the ruler of the people offending of
ignorance, then for a private person in like manner transgressing. (...) 4. 22.
^. ^7.
Is not the same much more to be said of the ruler of the people that offends
of knowledge?

As in these respects I was the bolder to dedicate these my labors to your
Honors and Worships, so not fearing any imputation of presumption, I thought it
more fit to dedicat the same to you all generally, then to any one, or to some
few particularly, that so none might think himself excluded, and that every
one might accept them as dedicated to himself, and so vouchsafe to read them
the more diligently, and to make the better use of them, according to his place.

The rather also did I take encouragement so to do, that ye especially might
by these my labors the more clearly see, that without this dignity in this
treatise set sorth, and the right use of the same, all nobility, honor, and
dignity in this world is of no value, of no price, of no account.

As age is a crown of glory, being found in the way of righteousness, Prove.
16. 31.
and no otherwise; so may it be said of nobility, and of all other dignities of
the world. The description of the sons of Nobles by eating in time for
strength, and not for drunkenness: (this sobriety in eating and drinking for
Eccles. 10. 17.
the rareness of it in great persons of the world, being synecdochically put
for all virtues) This description (I say) of the sons of nobles, does plainly
teach them only to be truly worthy of the said honorable title, which by the
foresaid virtue and all other accompanying the same, do show themselves to be
the children of God.

Does not the same Solomon also say without exception of any degree in the
world, that the righteous is more Prove. 12. 26.
excellent then his neighbor? Elsewhere also he prefers (not a great name,
but) a good name above great riches, and Prove. 22. 1. Ecces. 7. 3.
before precious ointment: both which commonly are apurtenances and ornaments
of nobility, and other worldly dignity. What is a good name, but such a name as
is gotten by doing of those things, which belong to the children of God?

The former point is further evident by diverse reasons. For all honor and
dignity according to this world, is only in this world. But the dignity of
being the sennes of the most High, is also in heaven. For ye shall afterward see
in the treatise, that the children of God do sit with Christ Jesus in the
heavenly places, even while they are here in the earth. All worldly honors and
dignities do end with this life. For as in the resurrection, men shall neither
marry wives, nor women shall be given in marriage; so then Mat. 22. 30.
there shall be neither Gentlemen, nor Esquires, nor Knights, nor Barons, nor
any such degree of men, but all shall be as one in Christ Jesus. But the
dignity of the children of God after this life is enlarged, and in the
resurrection shall be made greater then it was. Even then (I say) shall the
dignity of adoption be increased, when all worldly dignity shall be utterly
ceased.

As men are noble, honorable, or worshipful in this world, they are but in
favor with men; but as they be the children of God, they are in grace with God
himself.

Worldly dignity does but give access to worldly Princes: but the dignity of
adoption, has access (with assurance of prevailing) to the throne of him that
is Lord of heaven, and earth.

As here men are Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, etc. they have
but men to attend upon them: but the treatise following will show, that as any
be the children of God, the glorious Angels of heaven do wait upon them, and
continually guard them for their safety, and further good.

As here men be in great place, they have but earthly inheritances, whereof
they or theirs may be dispossessed and clean disinherited: But as they be the
children of God, they have an inheritance in heaven, far passing all the
kingdoms of the world, and the which all the power of hell shall never take
away.

Many other the like prerogatives shall ye find in this treatise, of the
children of the Almighty in heaven, far excelling the honors of the sons of the
mighty in earth: Of the which prerogatives I do here give you but this taste,
thereby the more to quicken your appetite, and the better to encourage you to
vouchsafe the reading of those more largely handled, and of many other
contained in the treatise it self.

Pleases it your Honors and worships further to see the former point in the
glass of a few examples? Behold then (I beseech you) Moses, Joshua, Othniel,
Ehud, Deborah, Gideon, I phtah, Sampson, and all the other good Judges of
Israel, before the kingdom of Israel established. For were they so honorable
by being kings fellows, and having kingly authority, as they were by doing
those things which testified their adoption? Behold David and Solomon, (two
mighty kings of al Israel) with Asa, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, all
good Kings of Judah. For were these so honorable by being great and mighty
princes, as they were by being the children of God? Behold Ester, Mordecai,
Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, and Daniel. For were they so honorable, the one by
being a Queen, and the wife of a most mighty monarch, that had 127. provinces
under him, the other by being in great grace and favor with the like mighty
monarchs; as they were by showing themselves the children of God? Yea, behold
Cyrus, Artashasht, Darius and Ahasbuerosh, all heathen Emperors. For were they
so honorable by being such Emperors (though some of them had 127. pro. uinces
under their government) as they were by doing some things for the Church and
people of God, whereby they did only resemble Gods children, and were not so
indeed? May not the like be said of Iehu King of Israel? For was he so
honorable by being King of Israel, extraordinarily anointed so to be by the
appointment of God; as he was by his zeal (though only temporary) against
Baal, and his Priests and servants? Behold further Joseph of Arimathea, and
Nicodemus. For were they so honorable, in that the one was a rich man, and an
honerable Mat. 27. 17. Mark. 15. 45. Ioh. 3. 1. and 10.
counselor; and the other a great Pharisee, a ruler of the Jews, and a
teacher in Israel; as they were, in that the one went to Pilat, and begged the
body of Jesus, and the other joined with him in the honorable burial thereof?

Behold the Eunuch of Ethtopia. For was he so honorable, Act^ 8. 27.
by being the Queen of the Ethiopians chief governor and her Lord treasurer,
as he was by coming out of his own country (a long, a chargeable, and a
dangerous iourny) to worship the Lord at Jerusalem: by reading the scriptures
as he rode in his chariot; (whereas such great men for the most part spend
such times in vain sports, or in some idle discourses) and by his meek
acknowlegement of his ignorance of the Scripture which he did read: by his
courteous speech to Philip (a poor traveling footman, never before nor after
seen of him) and by his like kind taking him up into his chariot to himself to
be further instructed by him, and by his humble submitting himself to be
examined of his faith, and to be baptized of him?

The like may be said of many Christian Emperors, Constantine and other: of
our late most noble King Edward the sixth; and of our more late Queen
(Elizabeth) of most happy and blessed memory.

To produce the examples of any Princes or nobles living, would not (perhaps)
be so well approved, as suspected of flattery, or some other sinister meaning.

What now (right Honorable and right Worshipful) shall I say more? As Noah
said, God persuade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of Shem; so say I: If
any of G^^es. 9. 27.
you, to whom I do in all humility present and dedicate these my labors,
have not yet received the spirit of adoption, God persuade such to dwell in the
tents of his such children, as whose dignity I do in this treatise lay
forth: as likewise, to think it a woe unto them to vemaine in Meshech, and to
dwell in the tents of Kedar. Psalm. 120 5.


The same God also of power, majesty, and glory, who has the hearts of all
Kings, and Nobles, and of all other great persons in his hand as the rivers of
waters, to turn the same whither it pleases him; even this God, that Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, so incline all your hearts, Prove. ^1. 1.
both to consider of the reasons whereby the dignity of his children is here
declared, and also to apply the uses of the doctrine thereof to your selves,
according to your several states and places in this world, that as some of you
do sometimes here in earth sit in Parliament with our most gracious Sovereign
King JAMES: so ye may all at the last sit with Christ Jesus in heaven, even in
his throne, as himself sits Rev. 3. 21.
in the throne of his Father: and that for ever and ever. Much Totham in Essex:
April 16. 16 10.

Your Honors, and Worships, Most humble in the Lord to be commanded, THOMAS
STOVGHTON.

To the inhabitants of those places, where at any time, especially last of all,
I have had a settled MINISTRY.
AS in this treatise I speak generally to every Christian reader, so now my
dear brethren in the Lord, that have sometimes heard me preach these things
which now I have printed, let me more particularly entreat you to vouchsafe
the buying and reading of them, because in the printing of them I have had a
special respect unto your good.

I am not able to beslow upon every one of you one of these books, of as small
price as they be. The most of you do know, how truly I amy say with Naomi, I
was full, but the Lord has made me empty: and the Almighty has brought me
unto adversity. Ruth. 1. 21. even in my latter age requiring most comfort.

I suppose also, that my willing mind for a greater kindness is not doubted
of by you, if my ability were according. If I were as I have been, yet were it
easier for the least of many of you to buy one, then for me to give many.

I shall not need to tell you for further persuasion in this behalf, that the
fruit of well and advised reading this Treatise will abundantly recompense your
cost. Ye have not so learned Christ, (in whom all of us have our adoption) as
so lightly to esteem a treatise setting forth the excellency of the said
adoption: neither (I am sure) have ye forgotten that Esau is pronounced a
profane person, for making more account of one portion of meat (even in his
extremity of hunger) then of his birthright, (Heb. 12. 17.) a pledge and a
kind of Sacrament of this adoption.

For me also, first to gather all these things together, then to write,
afterward to correct them, and last of all to write them again for the
press, is much more then for to lay out a little money, and to spend a few
hours in reading of them. In your love therefore toward me, accept them as a
testimony of my vnseined love toward you, and of my like desire of your
welfare in the Lord. Such of you as are best able I desire to buy and to read
them, and having read them themselves, then also to lend them to other that
cannot buy them. Let all that read them, make use also of them, as their
several occasions shall require.

What more my beloved brethren shall I say unto you? Even this, that because ye
have been long hearers of the word, the preaching whereof is the means both
to begin your regeneration, and also to increase your sanctification,
therefore remember how ye have received and heard, and that also ye do hold
fast Revel. 3. 3. Yea, that with all your might ye keep that which ye have,
that no man take away your crown, verse 11.

Are not these the latter times wherein the spirit long since did speak
evidently that some should depart from the faith, and give heed to the spirits
of errors, and to doctrines of devils? 1. Tim. 4. 1. Are they not the last
days, and perilous times, wherein men should be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, etc. fierce also, no lovers at all
of them which are good, traitors (or treacherous) heady, high minded lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God: having a show of godliness, but (in truth)
denying the power thereof? 2. Tim. 3. 1. etc.

Have ye not therefore the more need, diligently to take heed to the things
which ye have heard, lest at any time ye run out (Heb. 2. 1.) and leake as
riuen vessels use to do? and lest (also) at any time there be in any of you an
evil, and an unbelieving heart, to depart away from the living God; and further
to exhort one another daily, whiles it is called to day, and whiles ye enjoy
the light of the gospel, that none of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin? Heb. 3. 12. etc. Yea, that also ye watch one over
another (even as every Pastor ought to do over his flock) that no man fall
away from the grace of God? etc. Heb. 12. 15. Verily beloved ye ought thus to
do, and the times do require it at your hands.

Take heed therefore that in these days wherein the love of many waxes cold,
and all iniquity is increased, no man deceive you: Mat. 24. 4. 12. Look to
your selves, that we lose not the things which we have done, but that we may
all receive a full reward: 2. John. 8. Be steadfast and unremovable (not
decaying, but) abounding always in the work of the Lord: knowing that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: 1. Cor. 15. 58.

And because ye have not only been hearers of the word, neither such only
as have learned somewhat out of the same, but have also made profession of the
hope belonging to adoption, therefore against all forces and persuasions to the
contrary, keep the said profession of your hope, without wavering, considering
one another (and whetting one another as iron whetteth iron: Pro. 27. 17.) to
love and to good works (Heb. 10. 23. 24.) both toward God, and also toward
men, that so ye may flourish as palm trees; and grow like Cedars in Lebanon;
and being planted in the house of the Lord, ye may flourish in the Courts of
our God: and still bring forth fruit in your age, and be fat, and
flourishing. Psalm. 92. 12. Yea, that your love, and services, and faith, and
patience, and works may be more at the last, then at the first. Revel. 2. 19.

Shall I here conclude my speech unto you? Not so my good brethren, but suffer
a little further the words of exhortation. Heb. 13. 22. Because therefore all
the children of God are as it were bound up in the bundle of life (as Abigail
speaks to David, 1. Sam. 25. 29.) and sticks that are bound, continuing so
bound cannot be easily broken, but the bond whereby they are bound being cut in
sunder, a child may break them one by one: Because also they be as it were
burning coals; (even coals of the Lords altar) and coals lying together do
keep their heat, but being raked out, and scattered upon the hearth, they are
soon quenched and do dye: therefore the more excellent by this Treatise ye
shall see, the state and condition of the children of God to be, the more
siriue (I beseech you) to keep communion with them, and forsake not the
fellowship that ye have with them, as the manner of some was, even in the golden
age, and flourishing time of the Apostles. Heb. 10. 25.

Let no man dare to account that ministry Antichristian, which God the father
has used, and Jesus Christ has graced with the holy Ghost, to the begetting
of such Children as cannot be begotten but by the word of truth. I ames 1. 18.
As therefore ye cannot deny God, to have begotten again your selves and other,
and daily so to do; by the ministry of the Church of England, so ye must
acknowledge the means to have been and daily to bec no other, then the word
of truth. It is no more possible for any to be begotten again by any word of
error, then it is to have any father of regeneration but God. Was it the word
of truth, and is it not still? Or is it to some, and ought not all so to
account of it? Or is it the word of truth to make men newborn babes in Christ
(1. Pet. 1. 23.) and is it not also that sincere and pure milk, which such as
are so made newborn babes, ought still to desire, that they may grow thereby?
1. Pet. 2. 2. Or can this sincere milk of that word of truth be sucked out of
the breasts and pappes of an harlot? Or can the same word of truth be publicly
preached and maintained, with as public a disclaiming and renouncing of all
things contrary thereunto, in a false and an adulterous Church? As the Church
of God is the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. so whatsoever company is the
pillar of truth, and does publicly preach and maintain, and uphold the truth,
that also is to be acknowledged the Church of God. If some one man, or diverse
particular persons do preach some errors in such a Church: yea and be suffered
so to do, either by the negligence, or by want of knowledge of them, yet this
does no more nullify such a Church, and make it to be no Church, then the
suffering of the woman Iezebel (which called her self a Prophetess) to
deceive Christ's servants, to make them commit fornication, and to eat meat
sacrificed to Idols, Revel. 2. 20. did null^fie the Church of Thyatira, and
make it to be no Church.

But to return to that from which I have a little digressed: as it cannot be
denied to be the word of truth, whereby men have been and daily are begotten
again amongst us: neither that can be denied to be the Church of God, where
the said word is preached, and publicly, even by public authority
maintained, with as public a renou^cing of all errors, and foreign Canons
contrary to the said word of truth: as these things cannot be denied; so also
must such ministers as do so preach that word of truth, that thereby men are
begotten again unto God, be acknowledged to be the ministers of God, and sent
by God. For does not the Apostle join all these together, calling upon God,
believing, hearing, preaching, and sending them that did preach? Romans 10. 14.
15. And does he not thereby plainly teach, that they do go all together, and
that none can truly call upon God which does not believe: none can believe
which does not hear: none can hear which have no preachers: none can preach
except they be sent? and that consequently whosoever do so preach, that men
thereby are brought truly to call upon God, and truly to believe in God, they
are sent of God so to preach?

Is not the same point further manifest by that argument whereby the same
Apostle instifieth his Apostleship, and ministry to the Corinthians: even by
the success and efficacy of his preaching amongst them, against such as
denied his Apostleship, as many in these days do altogether deny all the
ministry of the Church of England? Am I not (says he) an Apostle? etc. Are
not ye my work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto other, doubtless I am
unto you: for ye are the seal of my Apostleship in the Lord. 1. Cor. 9. 1. 2.
And again: Need we, as some other, epistles of recommendations unto you: or
of recommendation from you? ye are our epistle written in our hearts: which is
understood and read of all men, in that ye are manifest to be the epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, and written, not with ink, but with the spirit of the
living God: not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart. 2. Cor.
3. 1. 2. 3. What mean all these words? Even this, that such had been the
success of the ministry of the Apostle amongst the Corinthians, that both
himself had good assurance in his own heart of his calling unto them, and
that other also might thereby evidently perceive and understand as much.

Does not our Savior prove his sending as a Messiah, and to be a Messiah, by
the works which he did? The works that I do bear witness of me, that the
father has sent me? John. 5. 39. As his works beseeming a Messiah, and in the
power of none, but of the Messiah, proved him to be the Messiah, so do not
also the works of ministers of the gospel, and proper only to such as are
sent from God, prove men to be such ministers? Doubtless (says he, that
being borne blind had his sight given him by Christ) this is a marvelous
thing, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes: John.
9. 30. And again, If this man were not of God, he could have done nothing:
verse 33. May it not in like manner, (and much more) be said of the ministers of
the Church of England, to all them that make question of their calling,
Doubtless this is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence they be, (or deny
them from whence they are) and yet they open the eyes of the minds of many:
Yea, even of them that do make such question of their calling, and do
peremptorily deny them to be of God, as those wicked Jews, to whom that poor
man so spoke, denied Christ to be of God. If such ministers were not of God,
they could have done nothing in the lightning men's eyes of their understanding,
to know what the hope is of his calling, and what be the riches of his
glorious inheritance in the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 1. 18.

No man can make opposition to these things, but he must also oppose himself
to the former scriptures. And if the former scriptures be for the justifying of
the ministry of the Church of England, as thereby the word of truth is
preached to the effectual begetting again of men unto God; no other
Scriptures can be against it for the nullifying thereof: because the scriptures
do all most sweetly agree together, without any contradiction of any one to
any other. As therefore, when our Savior seeing many of his disciples to go
back, and to walk no more with him (that is, utterly to leave him) said unto
the twelve, will ye also go away? Peter answered him, Master, to whom shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal life: John. 6. 66. 67. 68. so (my good
brethren) though ye do see many to withdraw themselves from them that have
preached the words of eternal life, and still do preach the same; and though
ye also be earnestly solicited to do the like; yet determine in your hearts,
and answer accordingly, To whom shall we go? these have the words of eternal
life?

The comparison objected by some, of children begotten to men as well by
adultery and fornication, as by lawful marriage, thereby to insinuate, that
as such children do not justify either adultery or fornication; so in like
manner such Children, as before we have said to be begotten again unto God by
the ministry of the Church of England, do not justify the said ministry; this
comparison (I say) is so odious, so beastly, so detestable, and abominable,
that a man would wonder it should come from such men, as they would seem to be
that object the same. For in an adulterous generation, as there is a common
work of God, so who sees not also a plain work of nature? Yea, such a work
of nature, as is in the very beasts themselves, in the procreation of other of
their own kind? But the regeneration of Children unto God, is a work above
all nature, only and wholly of God, yea of the free grace and abundant mercy
of God, as afterward shall further appear. Furthermore, touching this
comparison, it might as well have been objected against the former argument of
the Apostle from the success of his preaching amongst the Corinthians, as it
is now objected against us, reasoning in like manner from the efficacy and
fruit of our ministry.

Again, all children, either in adultery or infornication begotten and borne,
in time of the Law, were forbidden to enter into the congregation of the Lord
(that is, to be admitted to any public office) to the tenth generation: Deuteronomy.
2 3. 2. Dare any man say the like of such, as are begotten again unto God by
the present ministry of the Church of England? Yea, dare any man deny any so
begotten to have right and interest into all the promises and blessings of God,
for this life and for the life to come, as well as any other begotten unto God,
by the ministry of any other?

Herein (beloved) deceive not your selves: Halt not with God, neither show your
selves unthankful unto him, by denying his rich mercy toward you in your
regeneration. If ye have good testimony thereof to your own souls: If by the
ministry of the Church of England ye have ever felt any true virtue of
Christ's death to the mortifying of sin in you; and of his resurrection to the
life of righteousness: If thereby ye have attained to that true and unfeigned
love of the brethren, whereby ye know your selves to be translated from death
to life: and that already ye are of the truth, and hereafter shall before him
assure your hearts: 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and 18. and 19. by which things also ye have
felt unspeakable and incomprehensible joy and comfort; then minse not the
matter, neither clippe ye the Lords goodness toward you, by saying, that
indeed ye have by our ministry atteined unto some knowledge, even to a
verbal knowledge (so to my grief, I hear some to have scoffingly said;) but
whether ye have received also the spirit of adoption, that ye cannot tell:
yea, some of you do utterly deny. But alas, if ye have ever felt the things
before spoken of, how ungrateful impiety, and how impious ingratitude is this
against God? For what is this, but for the excuse of your wavering mind to lie
of the holy ghost? And how much less sin is this lying of the holy Ghost,
then that of Ananias and Sapphira of lying to the holy ghost. Acts. 5. 3. I
may amplify this point, by that which is written in the law, against him that
sinned against the Lord, in denying unto his neighbor that which was taken him
to keep, or that which was put to him of trust: Leuit. 6. 2. For if it be so
great a sin against the Lord for a man to deny unto his neighbor that which
was taken him to keep, or that which was put to him of trust, to be restored
again to the owner, without any benefit to the keeper; oh then, how heinous a
sin is it against the Lord, to deny the free gift of God himself, bestowed
upon wretched man, never to be restored, but to continue to everlasting life?

Concerning such as are already separated from amongst you, and do so continue,
if they have made separation only in zeal which is not according to
knowledge, without pride, disdain, and contempt against all other, such I
wish, well and seriously to consider the words and counsel of the angel which
found out Hagar being fled from her mistress Sara, for her hard dealing with
her. For as the Angel first asked her whence she came, and whither she would
go: and secondly upon her answer, that she fled from her dame Sara, commanded
her to return to her dame, and to humble her self under her hands: Genes. 16.
7. so, and much more, let the separatists among you consider the more whence
they came, and whither they are going: as also to make the more have of
returning and humbling themselves to them whom without sufficient cause they
have for saken, because their regeneration (if they be regenerated) received
amongst them, and wrought by some of them whom they have for saken, is a far
greater benefit, then all that ever Hagar had had at the hands of her mistress
Sara. Touching both the that are separated, and also that are not, I do jointly
entreat them with judgment to consider, first the speedy growth of them that
decline that way like to the gourd of Iona: Iona. 4. 6. not like to the grain
of mustard seed, whereunto the kingdom of heaven is compared: Mat. 13. 31.
which at the first being the least of all seeds, afterward grows (not of the
sudden, but) by degrees to be a great tree. For may not this make them to
suspect their course to be rather according to nature, then according to grace?
Is it not more easy to go down the hill, then up the hill?

The rather may this sudden growth be suspected, because it is more without
means in one day, or at least by small and simple means, only by private
talking, etc. then before they did grow in grace and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in many months. Great indeed was the sudden success of
the sermon of Peter: Acts. 2. 41. and of the preaching of Paul to the keeper of
the prison. Acts. 16. 33.

But, alas, the extraordinary and strange means before mentioned in either
place, do show not only the said sudden and great success to have been
extraordinary, but also that the like extraordinary success requires more
extra ordinary means, then in these dais we have warrant to expect.

Secondly, let both sorts before mentioned further consider, the scoffing,
gibing, and contemptuous spirit (I speak this with grief) of most of them
that are separated, against all other, especially not inclining toward them:
most of all against them that have done them most good, if ever they have at
all tasted (in truth) how good the Lord is, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Is the spirit of God
the spirit of scoffing, gibing, and contempt? No: but of sobriety, of
gravity, of meekness, and of reverence, teaching them in whom it is, not to
be high minded, but to make themselves (though of high place) equal to them of
the lower sort: Romans 12. 16. and in meekenes of mind, to esteem other better
then themselves. Philip. 2. 3.

Lastly, let both sorts before spoken unto, further yet observe, the ignorance
of many that are most prone to separation, in the things of greatest moment,
and of most necessity; and also what little conscience they make of sactifying
the Lords day, not only not spending the time of their absence from our
asseblies in private exercises of religion at home, but also in walking up and
down idly in the fields and woods, etc: and finally, how they neglect their
callings, and misspend their time in running up and down to talk one with
another of separation, and so wast that little stock which before through the
good blessing of God they had gotten, whiles they did diligently follow their
calling. In the largenes of my love toward you I could write much more largely
of these points: But being loath to trouble other readers, and too long to
de^cine them from the treatise following, I do forbear.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom is named the whole family in
heaven and in earth, grant to all you to whom now I do write, that ye may be
strength ned by his spirit, in the inner man: Ephesians. 3. 14. etc. and that none
of you may ever fall away utterly from the grace of God.

The same God also so print all good things in all your hearts, both which are
in this whole book printed in paper, and also which ye do daily read in other
good books, and which ye hear (or may hear) in the public preaching of the
word, that neither the love of the world, nor any other power of hell may ever
be able to race them out: that so God may have the glory of them, and your
selves may enjoy the fruit; even righteousness, peace, joy and comfort in this
life: and everlasting glory in the life to come.

From Much Totham, April 20. 1610. Your most unfeigned, and faithful in the
Lord, Thomas Stoughton.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS OF THIS TREAtise of the Dignity of Gods
children: with a note of the Pages where they begin.
CHAPTER. I. OF the special reason of writing this treatise: of the text of
Scripture generally, whereupon the same is grounded: of the coherence of the
said Scripture with the words going before: as also of the reason of them in
respect of the words following. Of the logical analysis, or resolution of the
said Scripture: and of the first particular word therein, in page 1. etc.

CHAPTER. II. Containing observations of the sour next particular words in
this text the ground of the whole treatise, viz. of the word, what, of the
word, love: of the word, Father: and of the word has given. page 13. etc.

CHAPTER. III. Of the four next particular words in this text: viz. of the
word, to VE: of the word, that we should be called: of the word, the children,
and lastly of the word, of God. p. 23.

CHAPTER IIII. Of the Dignity of Gods children, from the excellency of God
himself: who is their father: the rather because it is further proved by the
difficulty and greatness of the work of regeneration, that the said work is
altogether and only the work of God. page 31.

CHAPTER V. Of the first moving cause of our regeneration: viz. which first
moved God to regenerate v^^ ^ag. 42.

CHAPTER VI. Of Christ Jesus being one of t^^ principal causes of, and agent
in our adoption: of the great price he has given for it: of the work also of
the holy Ghost therein: and of the true nobility of all Gods children, by the
joint working of all the three persons in the^r adoption. page 50.

CHAPTER VII. Of the excellent instrum^nts that God uses in the work of our
regeneration, viz. the ministers of the word, and the word it self. page 59.

CHAPTER VIII. Of faith a chief internal cause of regeneration, or the first
degree and step thereunto: and of Christ again as he is the chief matter of
regeneration, as before we heard him to be one of the principal efficient
causes likewise thereof. page 66.

CHAPTER IX. More largely showing other things concerning the matter of
regeneration, especially the renewing of this life of God in us all that are
newborn, which before were utterly void of the said list page 72.

CHAPTER X. Of some other things further concerning the matter of the
regeneration of the children of God: and of their very being the children of
God: viz. of their knowledge of God, and of their true wisdom, declared by
the opposition thereunto, of the ignorance, foolishness, and madness of all
mere natural, wicked and unregenerate men. page 84.

CHAPTER XI. Of some other branches of the former life of God in all newborn:
viz. of holiness, and righteousness, both generally and also in some
particulars. page 101.

CHAPTER XII. Of the true love of God and of men, only found in the children of
God: and so of the further dignity of the children of God in respect thereof.
page 114.

CHAPTER XIII. Of a further degree of the freedom of Gods children. page 125.

CHAPTER XIIII. Of true hope, proper only to the children of God, and therefore
much making for their further dignity: and of some other special points
belonging to all before said of their life, wisdom, etc. page 130.

CHAPTER XV. Of the final cause of the regeneration and new birth of the
children of God. page 139.

CHAPTER XVI. More largely laying forth the communion of the children of God
with Christ Jesus, and of some special benefits they have thereby. page 145.

CHAPTER XVII. Of other benefits of the children of God, by their foresaid
communion with Christ, and with the whole Deity, and first of the forgiveness
of sins. page 159.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the dying more and more of the children of God unto sin,
and of their preservation from many great sins, which the wicked do daily
commit; and of their living more and more unto righteousness. page 171.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the dignity of Gods children by the word, as it is a rule of
says and life, and a special part of our Christian armor. page 192.

CHAPTER XX. Of the word, as it is given for consolation and comfort of the
children of God in their afflictions: and also of the sacraments. page 214.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the prerogative of Gods children by their liberty and free
access to the throne of Gods grace, to ask any thing, every one for himself,
and also for other: with much assurance of obtaining that which they ask. page
227.

CHAPTER XXII. Of the communicating of many titles of Christ to the children of
God. page 237.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of the benefits of the children of God for this life: viz. of
their immunity from evil: and of good things of this life belonging unto them.
page 254.

CHAPTER XXIIII. Showing why the children of God do sometime meet with the
afflictions of this life, threatened against and most properly belonging to the
wicked; and how beneficial such afflictions are unto them: and that all things
work to their good. page 270.

CHAPTER XXV. Of the benefits of the children of God in the life to come: and
first of their freedom from condemnation. page 284.

CHAPTER XXVI. Of the inheritance of the children of God in the life to come.
page 297.

CHAPTER XXVII. Of the peace of conscience in the children of God. page 317.

CHAPTER XXVIII. Of the benefits that other do enjoy by the children of God:
not only which other men, both the living and dead do enjoy, but also which
other creatures, yea also the Angels in heaven do enjoy by them. page 336.

CHAPTER XXIX. Of diverse similitudes and other comparisons, setting soorth the
dignity of Gods children: wherein also is handled whether they have
pre-eminence above the blessed Angels. page 355.

CHAPTER XXX. Of the promises of God to them that shall show kindness to any
of the children of God: and of the threatenings to the contrary. page 372.

CHAPTER XXXI. Of the uses of the former doctrine concerning Gods children.
page 383.

CHAPTER XXXII. Of the objection that might be made against all generally
before written of the dignity of Gods children, and of the first part of the
Apostles answer thereunto. page 405.

CHAPTER XXXIII. Of the second answer to the former objection: or of the second
reason why the world knows not the children of God. In this Chapter are
showed many good reasons why it appears not what the children of God
hereafter shall be. page 417.

CHAPTER XXXIIII. Of that which the children of God shall be: viz. of their
future similitude and likeness unto Christ, and of the certainty thereof. page
434.

CHAPTER XXXV. Of the time when the children of God shall be so like unto
Christ, as before we heard: and of the reason of the said likeness by an
effect thereof. In this Chapter this question is largely handled, whether the
bodies of Enoch and Elias be already in heaven and made like unto Christ. page
452.

CHAPTER XXXVI. Of every man's purging himself in whom there is the former hope
of being like unto Christ. page 467.

THE DIGNITY of Gods children: AND THE BASENESS of all other.
CHAPTER 1.
Of the special reason of writing this Treatise. Of the Text of Scripture
generally whereupon the same is grounded. Of the coherence of the said
Scripture with the words going before. As also of the reason of them in respect
of the words following. Of the Logical analysis, or resolution of the said
Scripture. And of the first particular word therein.

AMongst many other sins of these last days, in respect whereof the Apostle
has foretold by the spirit, that the times would be the more perilous, this
is one, and not the least, that as men should be lovers of themselves, so they
should not be lovers of them that are good. 2. Tim. 3. 3.

Now as by woeful experience we see other sins mentioned by the Apostle in
the former place (according to his said Prophecy) to abound, so all men whose
eyes are not smitten with too great blindness may behold the extreme hatred of
the sons of men against ^he children of God, and the manifold indignities that
these do daily bear at their hands that know not how worthy their state and
condition is. For this cause I have taken in land this present treatise of the
dignity of God, children; both for their better comfort against all such
indignities as daily the wicked do offer unto them: as likewise for their
better instruction how to carry themselves toward such their adversaries: and
also that these their adversaries may the better consider what they do mo^^^^
(...) such indignities to them whom they ought to honor: that so seeing their
fault in that behalf, they may (if they belong to God) repent thereof.

I am not ignorant that some things by diverse learned, godly, and reverend men,
have been written pertaining to this theme. Peter de La Place, a noble man
(as it seems) of France, at least a worthy Christian, and described by the
name of one of the Kings Counsel, and chief President of his Court of Aids in
Paris, has written a godly Treatise in French, Of the excellency of a
Christian: which is also translated into English, and printed 1576.

In that worthy work also of M. Rogers, published about some five years
sithence, there is one treatise (viz. the sixth) wholly of the privileges of a
Christian: which argument differs not much from this present theme, Of the
dignity of Gods children.

Otho Casmannus likewise a very learned and godly man, has written more
lately two books in Latin, one entitled, Hominis spiritualis anatomia and
meditatio, etc. The anatomy and meditation of a spiritual man, printed Anno
1605. the other entitled, Christianus nomine and re, etc. A Christian in name
and in deed, etc. published Anno 160^. In both which are many sweet points, not
impertinent to my present argument.

Notwithstanding, because the first of these (Peter de La Place) has written
very briefly, and so long sithence, that his book is worn (almost) out of
date, (so easily does this age neglect and forget things how good soever, of
never so little antiquity) and because also that book is hardly now to be
had. Again, because M. Rogers his treatise of the privileges of a Christian,
being a part of his great book, never separated from his other six treatises
therein contained, is not therefore every man's money: besides, because it goes
under another title, and does handle but some part of the matter of this
treatise: and lastly, because the two works of Casmannus are only in Latin,
and therefore not fit for common Englishmen, ignorant of the Latin tongue: and
because they are written in such a method, as every one understanding the
Latin tongue, cannot well conceive the same; therefore, notwithstanding all
those said works, I have thought it worthy the labor to write more largely of
the dignity of Gods children, then either Peter de La Place, or M. Rogers (and
that in our mother tongue) or then Otho Casmannus has written; and in such a
volume, as that although it be of greater quantity and price then the first
other treatise before mentioned, yet it is less then either the book of M.
Rogers, or the two last books of C^smannus, and therefore the more easily to
be purchased by any of very mean ability. Such also as have read the other
books before named, shall not only find the chief points in this that are
handled in all those, but also many other, not touched in any of them: in
respect whereof, they shall not think their labor lost in reading of this.

Now forasmuch as the Scripture ought to be the only ground of all Theological
Theames: therefore for the foundation whereupon to build all my work
following, I have the rather chosen 1 John 3. 1. 2. 3. because sometimes I have
preached of this Text, though nothing so largely as here I do write thereof.
The words of the Apostle are these:

The text of all the treatise.
1. JOHN 3. 1. 2. 3. Behold what love the Father has given unto us, that we
should be called the Sons of God: for this cause the world knows you not,
because it knows not him.

Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God: but it is not manifest what we
shall be: and we know that when he shall be made manifest, we shall be like to
him; for we shall see him as he is.

And every one that has this hope in him purges himself, as he is pure.


IN these three verses, two things are contained. The first is the dignity of
Gods children. The second is the duty of them. Touching the former, let us
observe: first, the coherence of the Apostles words, concerning the dignity of
Gods children, with that which before he had said in the end of the former
Chapter: as also the reason of the said words in respect of the matter
following in the rest of this Epistle: Secondly, let us consider the present
words of the Apostle, touching the foresaid dignity, etc.

Touching the coherence of these words with the former, it is this:

In the 28. verse of the former Chapter, the Apostle had exhorted these
Christians to whom he writes, unto constancy, saying, And now little children
abide in him, meaning Christ. This exhortation he had confirmed by an argument
taken from the end in the very same verse, viz. That when he shall appear
they might be bold. This end he illustrateth by the contrary in the next words,
adding, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. In the 29. verse he had
also confirmed the same end, by an argument taken from an adiunct or attribute
of them that abide in Christ. Which also he lays forth not barely or
nakedly, but (as it were) clothed with an argument from their own knowledge,
or testimony, in these words: If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that
he that does righteously is borne of him. In which argument let us observe,
that he does not say (as Note.
before) he that abides in him, but that changing the words he says, he that
does righteously, is borne of him. Wherefore is this change of words? To teach,
that when he had before exhorted them to abide in him, his meaning was not,
that they should be constant only touching their sound judgment, not embracing
any errors contrary to the wholesome doctrine of Christ before heard and
learned by them; but also that they should be constant in all holy and
righteous living, agreeable to such constancy in sound judgment.

So Paul ioineth constancy in judgment, and in godliness of life, together,
1. Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be steadfast and vnremooueable,
(see here the constancy of judgment or mind) abounding always in the
works of the Lord. See here also, constancy in practice and true godliness.

Secondly, let us observe, in the former argument and in that 29. ver. that the
Apostle does not say every one that does righteous things is borne of God; but
unto every one that does righteously. For the wicked and reprobate (as Saul,
Judas, and Horod, etc.) do many righteous things, but the children of God and
the elect do only righteously.

Thridly, let us observe in the said verse, that the Apostle says not, every
one that does righteously is the child of God; but every one that does
righteously is borne of God. Hereby he teaches that he speaks not of them
that are the children of God by creation of their substances, but of them that
are the children of God by regeneration, and by that new birth, where of our
Savior speaks to Nicodemus, John 3. 3. Except a man be borne again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God: and again, Except a man be borne of water and
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: verse. 5. By creation
of substance the wicked and reprobate, yea* the devils themselves are the
children of God, but the ^lect only are the children of God by regeneration.

Fourthly, in that he simply says not, Every one that does righteously is
borne of God, but fortifieth the same by their (...) testimony and knowledge:
he thereby teaches, that the work of regeneration is not a matter of
doubtful conjecture, but of certain knowledge.

^ea, fifthly, in that he strengthens all this by an argument called by the
Logicians, a coniugatis, or from the like attribute in God, to that whereof he
speaks touching them that are borne of God, saying, If ye know that he is
righteous know ye that he that does righteously, is borne of God. Thereby he
further teaches the foresaid certainty of their regeneration, viz. that as
certainly as they know God himself to be righteous, so certainly they might
assure themselves that Every one (without exception of any) that does
righteously is borne of God.

He teaches moreover, that there is no other way, whereby to declare our selves
the children of God, then by doing righteously as he himself is righteous. No
natural child of man does more declare himself to be the child of him whose
child indeed he is, by any similitude of person or of behavior, then they that
do righteously, do show themselves to be children of God. One man may be like
another in person, and in behavior, that is of no kindred to him to whom he is
like. But it is impossible that any should do righteously, but he that is the
child of the righteous God: or that any should be the child of the righteous
God, but he that does righteously. If God were your Father says our Savior
to the Jews) then would ye love me, John 8. 48. And If ye love me, then
(says he again) keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. What is the keeping of
his Commandments but to do righteously?

From these things hitherto noted of the certain knowledge Note.
of regeneration, and of being borne of God, follows also another point, viz.
of the certainty of the appearing of such as are so borne of God, with
boldness without all fear of any shame before him at his appearing: Do not
all these things make much for that dignity of the children of God, for the
writing whereof, we have intended this present treatise? But of these things
more afterward.

In the mean time by all hitherto said, we see how the Apostle in the former
Chapter has come to the mention of our being the children of God, and that
this is the very last point handled in the former chapter. Now because it is a
point of great moment, and yet for the most part too lightly regarded, yea
searcely so much as once looked upon, therefore in the beginning of this
chapter he insisteth upon it, and commends it to their further
consideration, as a matter very excellent and admirable, and in no case to be
too slenderly passed over, but worthy all diligent observation and making.
Therefore the Apostle says, Behold what love the Father has given unto us,
that we should be called his children. This is the plain coherence of these
words with the end of the former Chapter.

Touching the reason of them in respect of the chief matter following in the
rest of this Epistle, especially in this Chapter and in the next, that is
likewise plain and evident. For the Apostle being afterward to exhort these
Christians to mutual brotherly love, that is, to the love of the children of
God, what better foundation could he lay for the said exhortation, then a
grave admonition, seriously to consider the dignity of Gods children, and the
unspeakable, yea the admirable love of God toward them in advancing them to
the said dignity? For so the Apostle in this preface, and grave exhortation to
the consideration of Gods love, in making men his children, lays two maine
arguments for the better provoking of men to the love of Gods children: one
from the example of Gods love toward them in making them his children: this
being far more then all other can do for them: the other from the
excellency of them that are so made his children. For ought not all to love
them whom God loves? especially whom he so loves, as to make them his
children? The more excellent also that any be, are they not the more worthy of
the love of all other?

Thus much for the coherence of these words with the former; as also for the
reason of them in respect of the matter following.

Now to come to the present words of the Apostle: they are (as partly we have
seen) a grave exhortation to the serious consideration of the love of God in
making men his children by the work of regeneration, touched in the last verse
of the former chapter. For how excellent soever this love of God be, yet the
Apostle seeing the same to be made a matter of nothing in the world, neither
the children of God to be esteemed according to their excellency, but rather to
be despised and contemned, does therefore commend that which before he had
touched, to their further consideration, preventing also an objection touching
their contempt in the world, and showing the reason thereof to be, partly
because the world knows not God himself, and partly because the future state
and condition of Gods children is not so apparent to the world as it is to
themselves. From hence he takes occasion to set forth their future
excellency and happiness, (whatsoever their present baseness and misery
seem to be) and last of all shows what use they are to make in the mean
time of their hope of the said future excellency and happiness.

This briefly is the sum of all these three first verses of this Chapter:
viz. that in them is contained (as first I said) both the excellency of the
children of God, and also their duty according to their said excellency.

To speak more particularly of these words, concerning the former of these two
points, let us observe these two things: viz.

1. The exhortation it self to the serious consideration of the excellency of
Gods children.

2. The preventing of an objection that might have been made against the same.

The exhortation is in these words: Behold what love the Father has given unto
us, that we should be called the sons of God.

The preventing of the objection is in the words following, both in that verse,
and also in the second. Then in the third verse follows the duty of the
children of God, by occasion of the second part of his answer to the former
objection.

To return to the exhortation, let us first of all note, and Note.
but note this one thing: namely, that as in other places of Scripture the holy
Ghost commends the love of God toward us, in making his own Son to be the
son of man for us; so here he commends his love toward us, in making us,
that are but men, to be the sons of God. As in other places we are taught,
that the son of God was made also the son of man; so here we are taught,
that the sons of men are also made the sons of God: and this he does, the
better (as was before noted) to provoke them afterward to the love of them,
whom God so loves, as to make them his children: for it cannot be, but that
the more men do consider of the love of God toward themselves and other in
making them his children, the more they should be provoked to love them whom
God has loved, and made his children as well as themselves.

To return again to the present exhortation, let us first briefly consider
the words thereof particularly, and then more largely lay forth the thing it
self (that is, the dignity of Gods children) here specially commended to our
beholding. The words used by the Apostle are every one very emphaticall and
significant, and such as do import the dignity of Gods children to be very
great.

Behold] The first word, Behold, is a note of attention, or of exhortation to
the most diligent marking and observing of that which follows. It is often
used in the Scripture, and prefixed before matters of great moment and
importance, that by the hearers or readers they may the better be noted and
observed. Psalm. 77. 5. Come and behold the works of God, etc. Psalm. 133. 1.
Behold how good and how comely a thing it is, brethren, to dwell even together.
Psalm. 134. 1. Behold, praise ye the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, etc. Ioh.
1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, etc. Luc. 19. 8. And Zacheus stood forth, and
said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor,
etc. Romans 11. 22. Behold therefore the bountifulness and severity of God, etc.

In all these, and diverse other the like places, the word Behold is used to
provoke men diligently to note and mark, and not to look as it were asquint,
or glauncingly to cast one eye aside at a thing, but with both eyes to take a
view of that which is commended unto us: yea, not only to mark with the eyes
of our body, but also to note with the eyes of our mind. For it is all one
with the word Consider: 1. Sam. 12. 24. Consider how great things the Lord has
done for you, etc. Oh consider this ye that forget God, etc. Psalm. 50. 22.

Therefore in some places the holy Ghost is not content with the word Behold
alone, but he ioineth another therewith of like signification, even the word
see, to excite and awaken men to the more serious consideration of the matter
spoken of: as Lament. 1. 12. to move all men the more diligently to mark the
woeful state of Jerusalem, the Prophet speaking in the person of Jerusalem,
says, Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow.

It is also a usual thing with us, when we think men do not well consider any
ware, or other benefit offered unto them, to say thus, I pray see it, I pray you
behold it, etc. This then is it that the Apostle signifies and requires by
this word, in the first place, that men should diligently note, mark, observe,
and consider, the love of God toward other men, and toward themselves, in
making them his children; and that, as a matter of great worth and excellency.

Yea, the Apostle insinuates by this word, that although the dignity and
honorable state of Gods children be very great, yet men are too secure and
negligent in beholding the same, except they be roused up and awakened, and
(in a manner) cried unto (as men in a dead sleep, yea, as Christ cried with a
loud voice to Lazarus in the grave) to behold it.

If it were not so, the Apostle would have rested and contented himself in
that mention which he had made of our being the children of God, in the end of
the former chapter. But because he saw that men for the most part were herein
asleep, therefore concerning this matter, he speaks unto them as another
Apostle speaks in another matter, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from
the dead, Ephesians 5. 14. and says here, Behold what love the Father has given
unto us, that we should be called his children.

Touching earthly dignities and prerogatives, we are wakefull enough. Our eyes
are always both broad open, and ever poring into them, so that we need not be
bidden to behold: for we see and behold too much. Or if at any time we fall
asleep touching this matter, yet we are half awake, and the least whispering
that is of any worldly preferment, will make us start up, and stand upon both
our legs, and look round about us, and over every man's head, (though taller
then our selves by the head) not only to look upon it, but also to look after
it, and (if possibly we can by hook or crook) to get it, even from them that
are ten times more worthy of it then our selves.

Yea, so much do we look upon and after such matters, that either we have
never an eye to behold this dignity of Gods children, or any such spiritual
matter; or else we see but weaklie and dimly, as men half asleep and half
awake: yea, as men half blind and half seeing: and as the blind man, whose
eyes our Savior had begun to open, and who said, I see men walking like
trees, Marc. 8. 24. In this respect therefore the Apostle does the rather here
say, Behold what love, etc. And because this here spoken of, is of another
nature then the things of this world, and of this life, and because of our
selves naturally, we are all blind, sitting in darkness and in the shadow of
death, Luc. 1. 79. Act. 26. 18. and because such of us as have the eyes of our
understanding lightened, have them not so lightened, but that we see only in
part, and as it were with spectacles through a glass, 1. Cor. 13. 12. so that
still we had need to pray our selves, and to be prayed for by other, that the
eyes of our understanding may be further lightened, Ephesians. 1. 18. and this
weakness of sight in our inward man, is partly by the relics of sin in us,
and partly by the objects of this world here spoken of; therefore we have the
more need to be called upon by other, and also to provoke our selves, to behold
what love the Father has given unto us, to be called his children.

We have hawks eyes, and eagles eyes to behold the glory of the world, and the
worldly dignities of the sons of men, and that even in the twilight, yea in
the dark night: we need not be carried up to the top of an high mountain, as
our Savior was by the devil, Matthew. 4. 8. Where note, that if the Devil Note.
had power over the outward man of Christ himself, so without sin to carry
him from place to place, we may not think much if he have power to vex our
bodies. Such things (I say) we can see easily enough in the lowest valley: we
need not be called upon by other to behold them: we do too much behold them
of our selves.

But as touching this object of sight here spoken of, as Hagar saw not the
Well of water that was hard by her, till God opened her eyes, Genes 21. 19. and
as the two Disciples that were going from Jerusalem to Emmaus, walked and
talked with our Savior, Luc. 24. 16. and Mary did the like, John 20. 24. and
yet discerned him not, because their eyes were holden: so truly is it, not
only with natural and unregenerated men, but even sometimes with them that are
the children of God. Though they be so, yet for many causes (hereafter to be
spoken of) they do not always discern themselves to be so: and therefore
they have need to be spoken unto, as here the Apostle speaks, Behold what
great love, etc. Yea the more necessary is it, that all men generally, and
even the children of God, be so spoken unto in this behalf, because the word
is the means whereby our eyes should be opened at the first to behold this,
and more and more afterward to behold it more clearly. For the Commandment of
the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes, Psalm. 19. 8. as in other
things, so also in this. Therefore our Savior, in opening the eyes of the
bodily blinded men, did Note.
not only touch them and handle them, but also spoke unto them, thereby
teaching, that as himself is the Son of righteousness, and the light of the
world, so his word is the means whereby the eyes of our mind are to be
opened. Otherwise he could have opened the bodily eyes of men, without any
speech at all unto them. Therefore also the Apostle testifies this to have
been the end of his ministry with the Gentiles, even to open their eyes,
that they might turn from darkness to light, Act. 26. 18.

But this being a part of regeneration it self, it shall be further manifest
afterward by proof of the whole work of our regeneration, to be by the word.

As it is necessary, that at all times we should be thus called upon to
consider of Gods love in making us his children, so especially the same is most
necessary in the time of trouble and adversity. For when have we more need
of the comfort thereof, then at such times? For what greater comfort can there
be, then in considering the love of God in this behalf? But because this is
one special drift of this whole Treatise, therefore I shall not need in this
place particularly to enlarge it. Thus much for observation of the first
particular word in this Scripture.

CHAP. II.
Containing observations of the four next particular words in this Text, the
ground of the whole treatise: viz. Of the word What. Of the word Love. Of the
word Father. And of the word has given.

THe second word to be considered, is, What, or what manner. He does not say,
Behold the love, but, Behold what love, or, what manner of love, or, how great
love. This is a word commonly used in matters of admiration. When our Savior
by his word had pacified the winds and the seas, it is said that the men that
saw the said miracle, marvelled, saying, What man is this, or what manner of
man is this, that both the winds and the sea obey him? Mat. 8. 27. In which
place is the same word that is here used by the Apostle.

So when the Angel was sent to the Virgin Mary, to tell her that she should
conceive the Son of God in her womb, and when he had saluted her in this
sort, Hail Mary, or, Rejoice Mary freely beloved, etc. it is said, that she
was troubled (or marvelled) at this speech, and thought what manner of
salutation that should be, Luc. 1. 29. where also is the same word that is in
this place.

This word therefore is an amplification of the love of God in making us his
children, here spoken of, by an adiunct or attribute that signifies the same
to be very great; yea, exceeding great; yea, so great, that it is rather to be
admired and wondered at, then any ways fully to be expressed.

It signifies as much as the word how in other places, as O Lord of Hosts, how
amiable are thy Tabernacles! Psalm. 84. 1. that is, so amiable, that they are
also admirable. O how love I thy Law! Psalm. 119. 97. that is, I love thy Law
with a love that cannot be expressed. I am even sick of love toward thy Law,
as the Church speaks of her love toward Christ, Cant. 2. 5. How beautiful
are the feet of them that bring gladtidings of peace! Romans 10. 15. As if he
should have said, so beautiful, that no tongue of man can express the beauty
of them, no heart can well comprehend it. And indeed we shall see by the
handling of this dignity of the children of God, that it is such, that as it
is said of making Christ the stone which was rejected of the builders, to be
the head stone of the corner, This was the Lords work, and it is marvelous in
our eyes, Psalm. 118. 23. so it may be likewise said of the work of our
adoption, and of the love of God in making us his children, This is the Lords
work, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

This circumstance noted by this word, is to be joined with the former word,
Behold, the more to provoke us to long after the knowledge of the excellency
of the children of God: especially after that knowledge that is by experience,
sense, taste, and feeling (as it were) of the excellency thereof. For no man
so well knows this excellency, or can so well speak or write thereof, as he
that is partaker of it, and finds the sweetness of it in himself. For this
is that white stone promised to them that overcome, wherein is a new name
written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it, Reu. 2. 17.

The rather is this to be joined with the former word, to make us more
desirous of getting this title, and the more careful to keep it being gotten,
yea to carry our selves according unto it. All men do gaze upon the honorable
titles of the world, and are in great admiration of them: but no man almost
does once look after this: yea every man (almost) in respect of the contempt
wherein this name is with the world, (afterward to be spoken of in handling
this objection) is afraid to be called or known by this name. As many of the
chief Rulers that believed in Christ, for fear notwithstanding of the
Pharisees, durst not profess him, Ioh. 12. 42. so many hearing so much as often
times they do, of the dignity of Gods children, have some desire, and could be
content to be the children of God: but fearing the world, and the great men in
the world, (especially such as to whom they do specially belong) are loath to
be seen to have any mind or affection that way. But of these more afterward.
Thus much of the second word in this text, preparing us to think the more
highly of the dignity of the children of God here spoken of.

The third word is Love. Behold what love: This word sets forth the
fountain or principal cause of making us the children of God, to be the love
of God. So it is said to be the cause why God sent or gave his only son for
us, Ioh. 3. 16. and. 1. Ioh. 4. 9. whereof we shall hear more afterward. If the
love of God be the fountain of sending his son, then also it is of our
making or adopting to be the children of God. For whence is it that we are
made the children of God? Is it not by Jesus Christ? It cannot be denied: and
it shall afterward be more plentifully proved. Herein the Lord differs
from men: for men cannot properly be said to beget children of Note.
love. There may be, and is in men, a desire of children: but there cannot
properly be a love of children, till children be begotten and borne. For how
can men love them that have no being at all in nature? But God is said to love
us, and in love of us, to make us his children, or to beget us again to
himself, and so his love toward us is before we are borne again, or begotten
again unto him. As this love of God was before the action of our regeneration,
so it continues ever after. Gods love is unchangeable. As Christ is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. so is God in his love toward them
whom he loves: yea, there is not only no change in him, but also with him
there is no variableness nor shadow of turning: James 1. 17. But being to
speak of this love again afterward, this in this place shall be sufficient
thereof.

The fourth word here to be observed, is, the Father. As the former word
sets forth the original cause of our being the children of God, so this
sets forth the author thereof, and the subject of that love before spoken
of: and that to be, not only God, barely considered in his divine essence, but
as he is invested with the title of a Father.

To speak more plainly: The love before spoken of, whereby we are made the
children of God, does not come from God as he is God only, but as he is a
Father: and that first of all, as he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And therefore when the Apostle Peter speaks of this matter, even of our
regeneration, he says not only, Blessed be God, but he says further, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which of his abundant (or rich) mercy has
begotten us again, 1. Pet. 1. 3. God was always the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the distinction of persons in the divine essence: and so Jesus
Christ, as the second person in the Deity, was always the son of the
Father, even before all times: so that there never was any time when the one of
these two persons was not the Father, and the other the Son.

Secondly, this love here spoken of, comes from God, not only as he is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also as by Jesus Christ he is our Father.
To speak this also a little more plainly, the Apostle here speaking of
himself and of them to whom he did write, not only as the people of God, nor
as the works of God, but as the children of God, it was therefore the more sit
that he should describe God by such a title as was most answerable to that
respect, wherein he speaks of himself the writer, and of them to whom he did
write. These being, as they were, the children of God, it was more answerable
to the word children, that he should say, Behold what love the Father has
given unto us, then, Behold what love God has given unto us. For the word God
does more fitly answer to the word creatures, or people, and the word Father is
a plain correlatiue to the word children. Now although ever sithence the
creation, and sithence the first time that there were any elect and believing
men, God was alwares their Father, yet as God was not so known to be the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the old Testament, and before the
mearnation and manifestation of Christ in the fleth, as ^^thence: so God also
Note.
did not so plainly open and manifest himself to be the father of the elect,
as he has done sithence the time of the Gospel. And therefore we find this
title, Father, ostener attributed unto God in respect of Christ, and of the
elect, in the new Testament, then in the old. In the old Testament he is most
called and made known by the name of The God of Abraham, the God of Izaak, and
the God of Iaacob: but in the new Testament he makes himself known by the
name of The Father of our Lord Ie^us Christ, and of them that by faith are made
members of Christ, and flesh of his flesh, even one body with him. As the
grace of God, which brings salvation unto all men, is said especially to have
(as it were) broken forth through all the clouds of ceremonies and other
things, whereby before it was obscured, and so to have shined more clecrelie
and brightly now then ever before it did, Tit. 2. 11. so God does make himself
known by this blessed, sweet, and gracious name of Father, more now in the
time of the Gospel then ever he did before.

This is the reason why the Apostle here rather says, Behold what love the
Father has given unto us, etc. then, Behold what Jove God has given unto us,
And although the name God be in the very next words used, (that we should be
called the children of God) yet this is only to teach us, that we are to
consider and apprehend God not only in his divine Ma^estie, (which
consideration is enough to swallow us up, and to make us fear and tremble) but
also in the person of a Father, and as he is our Father.

Notwithstanding, this that I have hitherto said of this word the Father, is
not so to be restrained to the first person in the Godhead, but that therein
also is included the Son. As in the former Chapter, verse. 22. 23. and 24. the
Apostle had joined them together, making the denial of the Son to be the
denial of the Father, and the continu ince in the Son and in the Father, to
be all one. And as our Savior himself does the like, saying, that He that
honors not the Son, the same honors not the Father that has sent him,
Ich. 5. 23. so in this place, the word Father is not personally to be
understood, but rather essentially, as comprehending the Son as well as the
Father. Therefore, as there it is said, Behold what love the Father has given
unto us, that we should be called the Children of God: so it is also said by
the same spirit, that directed the pen of this Apostle, even of the Son, that
he came to his own, and his own received him not: but as many as received
him, to them he gane power to be made the children of God, John 1. 12.
Therefore the spirit of God, which is the immortal seed whereby we are
begotten again unto God, and made the children of God, (as afterward we shall
hear) Romans 8. 9. etc. and 1. Pet. 1. 11. and often elsewhere, is called the
spirit of Christ, as well as the spirit of the Father, and therefore also
Christ in that respect may be as well said to beget us again unto God, to make
us the children of God, and to give us this love, that we should be called the
children of God, as the Father and the first person in the Deity. To conclude
this point, as when we pray and say, Our Father which art in heaven, we direct
our prayers immediately to the person of the Father by a kind of excellency,
because he is Principium Deitatis, (not in time, but in order) the beginning of
the Deity: and yet in the Father we pray also to the Son and to the holy
Ghost: so in this place this word the Father is to be understood as well of the
Son as of the Father. Theresore in the very next verse, without any further
express mention of the Son, using only a relative, and thereby making a
relation to that before spoken in this verse, the Apostle says, that we know,
that when he shall appear (or be made manifest) we shall be made like unto
him. These words must needs be understood esp^c^ally of the Son, because the
Father shall not appear or be made manifest, but in the Son. But so near is
the coni^^ction, or rather union betwixt the Father and the Son that here
and elsewhere the holy Ghost means both, by using a continued speech of one
for both.

Furthermore, the addition of this word serves to teach, that we are not made
the children of God by the gifts, labor, and industry of any man or Angel,
but only by God himself. Therefore our Savior forbids this name Father to
be attributed to any other then to God alone. Call no man (says he) your
Father upon the earth: for there is but one your Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 23. 9. The Apostle Paul, according with our Savior, says, there is one
God and Father of us all, Ephesians. 46. and so by ioining these two words God and
Father together, and uniting them in one, he teaches, that it is as absurd in
religion, to say, there are diverse fathers, as to say there are diverse Gods,
and that we may as well say there are diverse Gods, as diverse fathers. Whereas
the Apostle calls himself the father of the Corinthians, saying, Though ye
have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4. 15. he
speaks of himself only as the instrument of God in their regeneration. He
derogateth nothing from God, neither arrogateth that to himself that was
proper to God, but shows only that God had used him as his instrument of
their first conversion to him. Therefore before he had sharphe rebuked them for
saving, I am Paul's, I am Apollos his, I am Cephas his, and I am Christ's, Chap.
1. 12. And again, Who is Paul? who is Apollos (...) but the Ministers by whom
ye believed? and as the Lord gave to every man: I have planted, Apollos
watered, but God gave the increase, 1. Cor. 3. 5. 6. Do we not here plainly
see, that he makes God all in all in our regeneration? So does the Apostle
Peter in the place before alleged, 1. Pet. 1. 3. So does the Apostle James, not
only generally saying of all good and perfect gifts, that they come from the
Father of lights, but also adding immediately touching the work of our
regeneration, Of his own will begat he us, etc. James 1. 17. 18.

I might confirm this against Papists, and also other Patrons of man's free
will, by many other testimonies, and prove our regeneration to be wholly the
work of God, by showing every part thereof in our soul and in our body, to be
attributed unto God; and by diverse other arguments: but because I shall (I
trust) do this in another place, and deal with this point again in this
Treatise afterward, therefore this shall suffice thereof in this place. And
thus much also for the fourth particular word in this text.

The fifth follows, has given. This word is added for two Has given.
con^iderations. The first is, to prevent an objection, and to take away all
conceit of our worthiness of this honor of being Gods children, and that no
man might think God so to h^^^ loved him for any goodness that was in him.
This (I say) he preuenteth, by showing the manner of Gods love in making us
his children. It is indeed an improper phase, to say that God or any other does
give love. It is more apt to say, that he shows love: and therefore some
Translators have so turned this wo^d in this place. But though this phrase of
showing love be more apt, yet the other phrase of giving love is more natural
and agreeable to the proper signification of the wo^d here used. And it is not
to be doubted, but that the (...) it of purpose, first to exclude all merits
and worthiness of our selves, for d^seruing this love of God toward (...)
making us his children, and to show that this love of God (...) and without any
respect of any good in us. So (...) words, love and giving l^ue, are as much as
the word (...) other places, which is all opposed to merits in us in (...) of
God. (...) is called election of grace: and it is (...) that (...) be of grace,
it is no more of work: or else were g^^^e no m^^^ (...): but if it be of
works it is no more grace: or (...) were work, no more works, Rom 11. 5. 6.
So in the same (...) it i^ ^a^d in these me epistle before, that are the
children were borne (viz. Ia^cob and Esau) and when they had done neither good
nor ^ui^l (that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by
^^^kes, but by him that calls) it was said unto her, The elder shall s^^ue
the younger, Rom 9. 11. 12. And (...) afterward he concludes, So then it is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy, verse. 16 Can there be a more plain and manifest opposition and
contrariety then this is? Verily it is so plain and manifest, that all the
cauilling and quarrelling wit in the world cannot wash the same away. Touching
^ustification, it is said, that God has saved us, not by the works of
righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy, Tit. 3. 5. And
again: By the works of the Law no flesh shall be justified, Romans 3. 20. and
that we be justified freely by his grace, verse 24.

Touching both our justification and calling (whereby we are made the children
of God) the same Apostle also says, that God has saved us, and called us with
an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace: 2. Tim. 1. 9.

In all these places, and touching these points, who sees not a most evident
opposition of Gods grace to our worthlnesse, and that Gods grace does exclude
our worthinesle? I grant sometime grace mentioned, and sometime mercy, and
that there is some distinction betwixt grace and mercy (as afterward shall be
showed) yet there is also such affinity betwixt them, that as two brethren
being very like one another, are sometimes taken one for another; so also these
two words (in this argument especially) are confounded, and the one used for
another.

Now let it be noted that I said grace was opposed to our Note.
worthlnesse, ^ot to all worthiness. When we hear that God has freely of his
own love made us his children, this indeed excludes al worthiness of us and
in us, from being any cause of making us the children of God. Notwithstanding
if we look to Christ Jesus and to that that he has done, it is certain that
God has not, either saved us freely, or freely ma^e us his children: save in
the sending or giving his son freely and of his own only love, grace, and
mercy, for the saving us, and for the making us his children, that so by
adoption we might be capable of salvation. Otherwise if we look to that which
Christ did for us, being so freely given or sent in the world, in our behalf,
it is certain that Christ Jesus by his passive and active righteousness, that
is, by those things which he suffered, and by that obedience which otherwise he
performed unto God his Father for us, has both justified us, and also
purchased this honor for us, of being the children of God. Though therefore
we have this honor freely and only of Gods free grace in respect of our
selves; yet it is not so free in respect of Christ (his sending only of Gods
free grace excepted) because (as we shall afterward hear more largely) Christ
has most dearly bought all that we have, and most sweetly paid for it, in
the satisfying the justice of God in our behalf. Thus much for the first
consideration, why the Apostle uses this phrase, that God has given us this
lone of calling us his children.

The second consideration is for the distinguishing of us from Christ Jesus,
and to teach, that though we be the children or sons of God, yet there is
great difference betwixt Christ and us in this behalf. Christ, as he is the
second person in the Deity, is the Son of God immediately by nature, by
communication of the whole essence of the Father unto him, and from all
eternity before all times: so that there never was any time when God was not
his Father, etc. as has been before said.

As Christ also was man, he was the Son of God, by miraculous conception of
the holy Ghost, and by a most wonderful conjunction of the godhead and manhood
together hypostatically in one person. But we are the sons, or children of
God immediately, and only by grace, by gift, by ad^ption, in, by, and through
Christ Jesus, being incorporated and ingrafted into him, that is in himself
the natural, the eternal, and the only son of God; having no fellows,
either amongst men, or amongst Angels. Therefore he is called Gods own Son,
Romans 8. 32. his first be gotten Son, Heb. 1. 6. and his only be gotten Son,
John 1. 14. and 3. 16. and 1. John 4. 9.

Now, as here it is said, that God has given us this love, to be called his
children; so it is also said, that to as many as received him (that is, Christ)
he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his
name. Ioh. 1. 12. In which place the holy Ghost shows the means more
plainly, whereby we are the sons or children of God: namely, by receiving
Christ by faith, and by being through faith ingrafted into Christ.

Howsoever therefore we be called the sons of God as well as Christ, yet
there is great difference betwixt Christ and us in this behalf: and Christ is
in a far more excellent manner the Son of God, then either we or the Angels
can claim the same title and prerogative.

Let us here note one thing more: viz. that the Apostle Note.
speaks not in the present time, saying, does give; but in the time past,
saying, has given. This observation is not to be understood only of the
first actual beginning of our adoption and regeneration, but also of Gods
eternal election of us thereunto before the making of the world. For so the
same phrase in the same tense imports elsewhere. The Father that has given
them unto me, etc. John 10. 29. As thou have given him power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to all them that thou bast given him, John
17. 2. And again: I have declared thy name to the men which thou gave me out
of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me. verse 6. In this one
verse is the same word and tense twice. The same phrase and tense is often used
afterward in the same chapter, to the same purpose, viz. verse 7. verse 9. and
verse 12. So before he had said, This is the Fathers will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, etc. John 6. 39. But
this shall be sufficient for this observation, touching the tense here used
by the Apostle. And thus much also for the fifth particular word in this text.

CHAP III.
Of the four next particular words in this text: viz. of the word to us, of
the word, that we should be called, of the word, the children, and lastly of
the word, of God.

THE sixth particular word to be considered, is, to us. This sets forth, the
persons of whom the Apostle speaks; and to whom God has given this love to
be called the children of God. Whom therefore has God thus advanced? and to
whom has he given this great and admirable love, to be called his children?
Even to elect men, to miserable, and wretched men: before blind, lame deaf,
dumme, leprous, dead in sins and trespasses, sitting in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, servants of sin, and bondmen of the Devil: yea, bound with
such chains of Satan, as were ten thousand times worse, then all iron chains
in the world.

Even as men (I say) that were before in this woeful, lamentable, and most
fearful plight and condition, has he thus advanced to the honor of his
children. Is not this love of God admirable? Is it not incomprehensible? Who is
able to comprehend the breadth and length and depth, and height thereof? Ephesians.
3. 18. Truly this love is such, that as the Apostle cries out touching the
reiection of the Jews for a time, and touching the calling of the Gentiles, O
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.
So we likewise touching this love of God may, with admiration cry out, O the
depth of the riches thereof! Yea, if we should measure Gods doing herein by
carnal reason, we should condemn Gods wisdom for foolishnes; for loving us,
being every way so vile, so base, and so unworthy of any love of any other of
his creatures: much more of his.

Yea, so much the more may we cry out with such admiration (as before) of this
love of God, because herein God has passed over the Angels that fell as we had
fallen, and has not vouchsafed them the like love, for restoring them, and
making them his children, that he has vouchsafed unto us. But of this more
afterward. In the mean time this briefly shall suffice for this sixth word.

The seventh is, that we should be called. What means the Apostle by this
phrase? That we should only have the name That we should be called.
and title of Gods children, and not be indeed the children of God? Not so,
for our Savior reproves the Angel of the Church of Sardi For having a name
to be alive, who yet was dead, Revel. 3. 1. In the world indeed so it is
oftentimes, that men have bare names and titles, and not the thing or benefit
signified by such names, or belonging to such names and titles. Absolon was
saluted by this name of King, God save the King, God save the King. 2 Samuel 16.
16. And that not only by Hushai the Archit in policy, but also by many other;
yet he was not the King. The like title was for a time given also to Adonija
1. King. 1. 18. Yet he was not the King. So we have known the name of the king
of Portugal, given to one, that had no privileges or royalties belonging to
that name. So some noble men being condemned for high treason, and thereby
tainted in their blood, and having lost all then honors, are notwithstanding
by many whiles they live, in courtesy called by such honorable names as before
they had: though they have no other privileges belonging to such honorable
names: the cutting off only of their heads excepted, whereas meaner persons for
the like trespasses are hanged, drawn, and quartered. Thus (I say) it is in
the world, and with men of the world. But this is not the meaning of the
Apostle in this place, but that indeed we be, as well as called, the children
of God. For he speaks not of our being so called by men only, ^ut also by God
himself, who knows how to call every thing by the right name: and calls
nothing amiss. This is manifest by the very next verse, where the Apostle
says not Dearly beloved, now are we called the sons of God, but now we be
the sons of God. So also the word called is taken in some other places.

The Angel says of Christ to the virgin Mary Thou shall call his name Jesus
Luc. 1. 31. And again: he shall be called the Son of the most high, verse 32.
Does the Angel mean Christ should be called Jesus, or Savior, and not be a
Jesus or Savior indeed? or that he should only be called the son of the most
high, and not be so indeed? verily he had no such meaning.

When Christ says of the temple, Mine house shall be called the house of
prayer etc. Mark 11. 17. his meaning is that it should be so indeed. So
therefore is the meaning of the same phrase in this place.

But why does the Apostle rather use this phrase, then plainly Note.
say, that we should be his children? It may be he would heerby insinuate,
the means whereby we come to this honor, to be the outward calling by the
ministry of the word. As when our Savior says, I came not to call the
rig^teous; but sinners to repentance: Mat. 9. 13. he insinuates his calling
by the word to be the means of repentance; so the Apostle by this phrase,
that we should be called the children of God, may insinuate the outward calling
by the preaching of the word, to be the means whereby God brings us to this
honor of his children.

Secondly, (not to stand upon this reason) by this phrase that we should be
called, he means, not only that we should be indeed his children: but also
that we should be so known and declared, yea, publicly proclaimed to all the
world to be the children of God. As an other Apostile says, that God was not
ashamed to be called the God of his ancient people Hebr. 11. 16. (Where also
note the phrase, to be called, to signify so to be indeed) so here this
Apostle tells us, that God is not ashamed, that we should profess our
selves to be, and that we should be called by other, his children. Herein
therefore God differs from many men, especially from some princes, who though
they purpose secretly with themselves, whom by adoption to make their children
(having none by nature) and to whom to leave their inheritances or their
Crowns, yet for some considerations they will not have this to be known. But
it is otherwise with God. He has so loved us, that he does not only make us
his children, but that also he does declare and publish and proclaim us so to
be.

3 From the former reason arises another, viz. that the Apostle uses this
phrase to teach us, that if he be not ashamed, that such as we are, should be
called his children, then much less should we our selves be ashamed of this
honorable title. If a great king be not ashamed that the son of a poor
beggar, should be called his son, is there any cause, why the said son of
such a poor beggar, should be ashamed to be called the son of such a great
King. In like manner, if God the king of kings, be nor ashamed that we poor
beggars brats should be called his children, is there any reason, why we
should be ashamed of so honorable a title? I could much amplify this point.
But for further amplification thereof, I do only wish, that if any for fear of
the disgrace of the world (to be spoken of in the objection following) be
ashamed to call himself the child of God, and to carry himself accordingly:
such an one do well remember, what our Savior says of them that are ashamed of
him. and of his words, before such an adulterous and sinful generation (viz.
as this last age of the world is where in we now live) to wit that he also will
be ashamed of him, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels Mark. 8. 38. For certainly in like manner will God the Father be
ashamed of all such, and will utterly deny them to be his children in the world
to come, that were ashamed to be called his children, and to live as his
children in this life. Yea this is the more certain, because there is
infinitely more cause why God should be ashamed of us, then why we should be
ashamed of him. Thus much of the seventh particular word in this text.

The eighth word is, the children of God. Some read, the sons of God: but the
original is, the children of God: comprehending sons and daughters, men and
women: and so the same word is used, John 1. 12. and 11. 52. and Romans 8. 16.
17. and in many other places.

This is to be observed, for the comfort as well of women, as of men; and for
the instruction (as afterward we shall hear) of one sex as well as of the
other. And therefore the Apostle allegeth the words of the Prophet in the name
of God himself, speaking in this manner: I will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. 2. Cor. 6. 18.
Here we see express mention as well of daughters as of sons. This is to be
the rather noted, because some in the bravery of their wit (or rather in the
rage of their madness) do not stick to deny women to have any part in the
matters of salvation: although the Scripture do both expreslie say, that there
is no exception of male or female with God, but that all are one in Christ
Jesus, Galat. 3. 28. and although it do also record unto us example as well of
believing women as of believing men.

But what does the Apostle here mean by children? For the understanding of
this, besides diverse other ways how men may be, and are called the children of
God, let us know that in a more strict sense, this title, the children of God,
is taken two ways: First, for all the members of the visible Church, so long
as they continue such members, and that because of the outward covenant of God
made with the whole body of the visible Church. In this sense it is said, The
sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, etc. Genes. 6. 2.
Here the sons of God do signify such as professed themselves the sons of
God, and so were of the visible Church. In the same sense also our Savior
himself calls the Jews (even in his time) generally by the name of
children, saying, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to
^helpes: Matt. 15. 26. Secondly, this title, the children of God, is taken for
them that have received the spirit of adoption, and that are regenerated by the
immortal seed of the spirit, and by the word of God. So it is taken in the
place before alleged, Romans 8. 16. 17. and often elsewhere: and so only (not in
the former sense) is it taken in this place. For the Apostle speaks of them
that work righteously, and are borne of God, as we have heard in the end of
the former chapter: and of them that know that when Christ shall appear they
shall be like him, as appears in the next verse. But none work righteously,
etc. neither do any know they shall be like unto Christ at his appearing, but
only they that are by the spirit of God regenerated: and therefore the Apostle
speaks only of such in this place.

To speak a little more of adoption and regeneration; for Note.
the making thereof the plainer and more perspicuous, we must understand that
the adoption of God differs much from the adoption of men. For the civil
Lawyers that write of (...) say that adoption must be of the yoonger by the
(...) that he that adopteth a child, must be elder then the person adopted,
neither do they only distingui^h thus betwixt adoption and arrogation; that
arrogation is the taking of one to be a child, which is already of age, and
at liberty, and (as we say) at his own hand, and his own man: but adoption
is of one under age, and of one that is in tuition, government, and gardianship
of another: the civil Lawyers (I say) do not only write thus of adoption,
but they also say, that adoption properly is when one that has no children of
his own, does adopt the child of some other to be called by his name, or at
least to be brought up by him, and to be his heir. God does not so adopt us:
for he has a Son of his own: yea more properly his own, then any man can
say of any child in the world, because Christ is the proper Son of God from
everlasting, by communication (as we have heard) of the whole essence of his
Father unto him.

But the children of men are their children long after them, and therefore they
are yoonger then their fathers. They are also children by taking some part of
their parents nature, and that of their bodily substance only: for their souls
are immediately from God: who therefore by opposition to the fathers of our
bodies, is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12. 9. and is said to form the
spirit of man, Zechar. 12. 1.

As for the great objection that does most trouble men, viz. if Note.
God immediately make our souls, how then come we stained with original
sin? it may receive a double answer: First, that they come by sin at their
entrance into the body: as in old time men might get the leprosy by entering
into an house only infected with the leprosy: and as men may now get the
plague by going to the house lately visited therewith, though no man dwell in
the said house: as also by putting on a garment coming from one that had the
plague. For the body is an house, or garment of the soul, coming from our
polluted and defiled parents. Secondly, touching the said great objection, it
is altogether curious to inquire of the manner, when the thing is manifest. For
a man may as well inquire of Note.
them that were raised from death to life by the Prophets, and by our Savior,
and his Apostles, especially of the faithful so raised (Lazarus, Dorcas, etc.)
how after their said restoring to life again, they became sinners again, and
so subject to death again. For being dead, and their souls and bodies in
death separated, it cannot be denied, but that during that time, they were free
from sin, both in body and in soul. If therefore this be a curious
question, how they became again def^led with sin, and to need to pray for
forgiveness of their trespasses then also is the former. For there is the like
reason of the one and of the other. To return to our former speech of
adoption, although God have such a Son of his own, in whom he is well
pleased, yea many other sons likewise by creation, keeping still that
glorious image wherein they were created; (viz. all the blessed Angels) yet
because Adam had transgressed, and that through his fall he had no children
amongst the sons of men, therefore it pleased him also to adopt us unto
himself. This then is one difference betwixt the adoption of God and the
adoption of men: that men only adopt children when they have none of their
own: but God adopteth us though he have one of his own by nature, and many by
creation like unto himself.

Another difference is, that when men do adopt, there is Note.
not, neither can be any second generation of him that is adopted, whereby to
make him like to him that does adopt him, being before unlike unto him. For to
make one like to another, passes the work of any man. But in our adoption to
God there is not only an acceptance of us for his children, but there is also
an actual regeneration and second birth wrought in us by Gods spirit
(therefore called the spirit of adoption) whereby we are made like to our
Father that does adopt us.

Secondly, men having no children of their own, cannot adopt other in any or
by any: but God having a Son of his own (as we said) does in him, and by
him, and through him, (as it were by marying of us unto him, and incorporating
us into him) adopt us for his children.

Moreover, touching adoption, the whole number of children adopted to God,
considered jointly together, are accounted as one, viz. as a daughter, so made
by marriage to the only Son of God, Psalm. 45. 10. Hos. 2. 9. in which respect
the whole Catholic Church, comprehending all the elect and children of God
(and no other) is often called by the name of a Spouse, and of one spouse unto
Christ, Cantic 4. 8. 9. 10. and 5. 1. John 3. 29. Reu 21. 2. and 9. and as of
one wife, Ierem. 3. 1. etc. and the Church is said to be but one, even one
alone, and the only daughter of her mother, Cantic. 6. 8. and one body in
Christ, Romans 12. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 4. But the children of God being
severally considered, according to the several sex of every one, they are
called the sons and daughters of God, as before we heard. Thus much of the
eighth particular word in this text.

In the last place the Apostle does rather repeat the name of (...) God.
God, then use the relative his, saying, that we should be called the children
of God, rather then his children, the more to keep them to whom he wrote in a
serious consideration of this their dignity whereof he speaks, and to make
them the more to lift up their eyes and their minds and whole hearts to him,
whose children they are. Thus much (as breefly as I well could) for the
consideration of the particular words of this exhortation, to the beholding of
the great love of God in making us his children.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the dignity of Gods children from the excellency of God himself who is
their Father: the rather because it is further proved by the difficulty and
greatness of the work of regeneration, that the said work, is altogether and
only the work of God.

NOW according to my method and order first propounded to my self, I will more
amply lay forth the main point of the dignity of Gods children, viz. How
great, how admirable, and how incomprehensible this love of God is in making
and declaring us to be the children of God, in such fort as has been before
touched. For it cannot be but of very great excellency, since the Apostle has
made such a grave exhortation to the beholding thereof: cuery word whereof is so
emphatical and significant as we have heard. And indeed so excellent is it,
that as M. Rogers says (Chap. 3. of his sixth treatise) so I may also say, that
when I have said what I can of their state, I must confess that I have said
but a little. NOtwithstanding I hope that this little shall be somewhat for the
helping of them that considered not so much before: and for the provoking like
wise of other to enter into further meditation of this argument, and perhaps to
write more largely there of then I have done or could do. For it is well worthy
of the best meditation, and largest writing that may be, for the better comfort
of such weak ones as whose hearts are almost broken with the manifold
indiguities that daily they meet with in the world; and for the provoking of
all advanced thereunto, to more thankful ^es to him that has so advanced them:
and to make such other uses, as after the point it self more largely handled,
shall be breefely noted.

To come therefore to the matter: touching this dignity of the children of God,
let us first of all consider the same by the excellency of him whose children
they are h^^e said to be. For he is described to be high and excellent to
inhabit the eternity, to be called by the name of The holy one, and to dwelin
the high and holy place. Isai. 57. 15.

He is called, The God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, A great God, mighty and
terrible, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Hens^d to have (...) his hands, the deep places of the
earth, the height of the mountains the sea etc. Psalm. 95. 5. and to have
greatness and power, and gl^ry, and victory, and praise, with all that is
inheauen and earth: that his is the kingdom, and that he excels as head
over alth^^ both riches and honor come from him, and that he reigns over
all, and has power and strength in his hand, and is able to make great, and to
give strength unto all etc. 1. Chron. 29. 11. 12.

Again, who is the King of glory? The Lord, strong and mighty: even the Lord
mighty in battle: Psalm. 24. 8.

And again, The Lord reigns etc. Clouds and darkness are rounnd about his
Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne etc. Psalm. 97. 1.
etc.

But why do I thus discourse of his excellency whom the heaven and the heaven
of heavens are not able to contain? 1 King 8. 27. It is hard to set forth the
excellency of the children of God now in hand, as it is worthy; how impossible
then is it to set forth the excellency of God himself? For is he not so
excellent, that those creatures which next to himself are by creation most
excellent (I mean the Angels, for their excellency called princip l^^es,
powers, and mights etc) cannot behold his excellency, without hiding their
faces with their wings from the sight thereof? Isa. 6. 2.

Is he not so excellent, that Moses (one of the most excellent servants of God,
that ever were amongst men) hearing his title of mercy, The God of Abraham,
Isaak, and Iaakob, hid his face, being afraid to look upon him? Exodus 3. 6.

Is he not so excellent, that when he gave his Law, there were thunders, and
lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the sound of a trumpet
exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp, was afraid? and
that all mount Sinai was on a smoke because the Lord came down upon it in
fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and all the
mount (it self) trembled exceedingly? Exodus 19. 16. 18. Is he not so
excellent, that when he had so given the law, and when the people saw the
thunders and the lightning, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain
smoking, they fled and stood a far off: and said unto Moses, Talk thou with
God, and we will hear: but let not God talk with us, lest we die. Exodus 20.
18. 19.

Is he not so excellent, that when he passed by, before that great Prophet
Eliiah, a mighty strong wind rent the mountains; and that after the wind came
an earthquake and after the earthquake came fire: and after the fire, came a
still and soft voice: which notwithstanding when Eliia heard, he covered his
face with his mantell? 1 Kings 19. 11. 12. 13.

If any desire to behold more of the excellency of this God besides the book
of his excellent creatures, and besides those things before alleged out of
the book of his word; let him further look in the said book of his word upon
the places following. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. 10. and 32. 4. 2. Chron. 20. 6. etc. N^hem.
9. 17. and 32. Job 9. 3. etc. and verse. 14. and chap. 12. from 13. to the end
Psalm. 47. 3. etc. 84. 8. to 16. Isai. 40. 9. to 18. and verses 22. 23. 24.
Isai. 42. 5. and 48. 12. Ierem. 10. 10. etc. and 51. 15. etc. and 31. 35. etc.
and 32. 17. etc. Dan. 6. 27. Amos 4 13. and 5. 8. etc. Revel. 4. 3. etc. and
upon many other the like places.

Let him also consider his most wise, powerful, righteous, gracious, and every
way most admirable administration, and government of all things in heaven, in
earth, in the waters, and under earth and water. For as God made all things at
the first most excellently, so he still governs all things according to his
first creation of them.

If God himself be thus excellent, how can his children be but excellent? For
all the children of God are in some measure made like unto him, even in power,
wisdom, holiness, and righteousness, as afterward we shall hear. And they
are not his children (by adoption and regeneration) that do not in the former
things somewhat resemble him. Many men indeed have children nothing like them,
either in favor or in conditions. But certainly there are none of the children
of God, but are in part like unto himself, yea, this is a most certain note
of a child of God, to have the Character and similitude and image of God upon
him and in him.

As Adam who was the son of God by creation, Luke 2. 38. was at the first
(male and female) made and formed in the image and similitude of God, so
likewise are all these children of God by regeneration, of whom now I speak.
How great therefore is this their dignity? The dignity of the sons of men is
measured according to the dignity of their fathers: as also according to their
resemblance of them. Therefore the dignity of Kings being the greatest dignity
of the sons of men, their children are accounted most honorable and most
noble; yea to be but son in law to a king, by marriage only of a kings
daughter, is accounted, and is indeed a very great advancement: especially for
a poor and mean man. When Saul the first king of Israel, and a wicked King,
given in the Lords anger, offered his daughter Merab unto David, what answered
David? Who am I, or what is my life or the family of my father in Israel, that
I should be son in law to the King? When again Saul's servants (set a work
by Saul himself) spoke with David secretly, to persuade him to take Michael,
(an other of Saul's daughters, Merab being given to Adriel) and said, Behold the
King has a favor unto thee, and all his servants love thee: Be now therefore
the Kings son in law. He answered again to the same effect, that before he
had done, Seems it to you alight thing, to be a Kings son in law, seeing I
am a poor man and of small reputation? 1. Sam. 18 18. 22. 23. So David, that
could tell how to judge of things, (as being then a Prophet, and having before
that, written the 9. Psalm upon the overthrow of Goliath) accounted it a very
great dignity, (yea, too great for him being a mean person) to be but son in
law to a King, to the first king of Israel, (and therefore the least; for as
natural things are least at their first birth or springing up; so the
dignities of men, of Kings, and other, are least at the first, and in time do
increase and grow to a greater state, and stature) yea, also to a wicked King.
For Saul before that, had showed his wickedness, both in offering sacrifice
before Samuels coming and contrary to his direction. 1. Sam. 13. and also in
sparing of Agag, and the best of the Amalekites sheep and Oxen. 1. Sam. 15.
Who then can sufficiently express the dignity of them that are the children of
the most high God, King of kings, etc. by marriage unto Christ Jesus, by
adoption, and incorporation into him?

Furthermore, concerning these children of God, let us remember that before
said touching their regeneration by God himself. It is the work of God only
to make a child of God in this manner. In the time of the law (to speak
according to the phrase of those times) men might beget children to other, and
raise up seed unto other.

For we know that a man after marriage dying without issue, Note.
the next of that kindred (not married before) was bound to take the wife of him
deceased; and so to raise seed unto him: and this seed so raised, was accounted
the seed of the dead, not of the living. Deuteronomy. 25. 5. 6. By adultery also in
these days the children of some are accounted the children of other. But
certainly to raise up such children to God, as here I entreat of, is the work
only of God himself. Men and Angels cannot beget such a son or daughter unto
God. This has been proved by testimonies of Scripture before. Notwithstanding,
I will now further prove the same by the greatness of the said work of
regeneration. For indeed it is the greatest of all other: (the personal union
of the divine and humane nature in the person of Christ only excepted) because
it contains (almost) all miracles mentioned in the Gospel to have been
wrought upon men. What be those miracles? The giving sight to the blind:
hearing to the deaf: speech to the dumb: health to the sick: strength to the
lame: cleanness to the leapers: life to the dead: and release and liberty to
them that were possessed of devils. All these are wrought at once in the work
of our regeneration. Whereas we were by nature spiritually blind, the eyes of
our mind are lightened to see the great things of God, and the deep secrets of
his kingdom. Whereas by nature we are spiritually deaf, our hearts are
opened, that our ears do attend to the word of God. Whereas by nature we are
spiritually dumb, not able to speak a good word, our lips are so opened, that
our mouth does show forth the praise of God, and is able to speak of
righteousness. Whereas by nature we were spiritually sick, heart sick, sick
unto death: we are in regeneration restored to spiritual health in part, and
certainly Since the world began (says the blind man restored to bodily sight)
it was not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind.
Ioh. 9. 32. How great then and how wonderful is the work of all the former
miracles, at one instant wrought. Verily far greater, upon the inner man, and
being spiritually wrought then all the former outwardly wrought upon the
outward man: yea, all the former are the greater, because by working of them in
our regeneration, we are in a moment advanced from hell to heaven it self.

The disciples which John sent unto Christ to know whether he were the Messiah
or no, or whether they should look for another, were returned by Christ to
John with this message, Go and show John what things ye hear and see: The
blind receive sight, the halt do go: and the leapers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear; the dead are raised up: and lastly he adds as the greatest of
all, the poor receive the Gospel. Mat. 11. 4. 5.

How did the poor receive the Gospel? viz. to their regeneration of being the
children of God. And that the meaning of our Savior by setting this in the
last place, was to commend it as the greatest, it appears, because in the
place next before that, he had mentioned the greatest of all the former. For
who will deny the raising up of the dead to be greater then making the blind to
see, the halt to go, the leapers to be clean, or the deaf to hear? The
proof of all these particular miracles to be wrought in our regeneration, we
shall hear afterward.

In the mean time, hereby it is most evident, that the work of our
regeneration is the work only of God. For God only works all miracles.
Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things. Psalm. 72. 18. Thou artgreat, and do wondrous things; thou art God
alone. Psa. 86. 10. So the Prophet proves God to be God alone, by the effect
of doing wondrous things. Praise ye the Lord of Lords: for his mercy endures
for ever, which only does great wonders. Psalm. 136. 3. 4. Darius an Heathen
could acknowledge the working of signs and wonders in heaven and in earth as a
thing belonging to God only. Dan. 6. 27. And indeed, if the working of miracles
did not belong to God only, it had been no good argument of our Savior to
return the messengers of John with report of his miracles, for demonstration
of himself to be the Messiah which should come, and no other to be looked for.
If any that is learned desire further handling of this general point, I
refer him to Beza against Holderus, in pages 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. etc.

To return to the former matter, the work of our regeneration is not only a
miracle, and the greatest miracle of all other (except only before excepted)
but it is also as great as the creation of man at the first. For therefore it
is called by the very name of a creation. If any man be in Christ, let him be
a new creature. 2. Cor. 5. 17. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails
any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. Galat. 6. 15. We are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2. 10. Our new man also is said to
be created in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4. 24. Neither is our regeneration, as great
only as the first creation of man, but also greater; yea, then the first
creation of all things. This is manifest by these reasons.

1. Because the first creation, was (as it were) but one work:

2. In the first creation, there was no opposition, no enemies,

Yea, sometimes the children of God themselves (even being regenerated) do
interpose and oppose themselves to the regeneration of other. For did not John
say to our Savior: Master, we saw one casting out devils by thy name, which
follows not us: and we forbad him, because he followed us not? Mark. 9. 38.
Could John and the other disciples with him, forbid another casting out of
devils, in the name of Christ, and not hinder the work of regeneration?

Peter advised Christ not to go to Jerusalem there to suffer those things
which he was to suffer: Mark 8. 32. The like did all the Apostles: Ioh. 11. 8.
Peter also seeing Christ's glory in the mountain, where Christ transfigured
himself, being ravished therewith, would have had Christ to have continued
there still, and to have built three Tabernacles, one for him, another for
Moses, a third for Elias. Mark. 9. 5. Could Christ by the foresaid counsel
have avoided death, and not have hindered the whole work of man's redemption,
and therefore also of his adoption and regeneration? yea, had not the
hinderance of Christ's death, been the way to have fet all the saints from
heaven, that in their souls had been there before, by virtue of Christ's death,
after their translation into heaven, to be suffered for them in earth? The
taking away of the cause must needs be the nullifying of the effects, depending
upon that cause. If any in great place, do bestow an office upon an other as
pretending the bestowing thereof to belong unto his place; shall not the
receiver of that office (though having for sometime enioied the same) be
dispossessed thereof afterward by another, that shall find the right of
collating the same to be in him, and never to have been in the other that
before had bestowed it? The like might besayd even of the dispossessing of the
souls of the righteous of heaven it self, if they had been admitted thereunto
by virtue of his death, that had not died.

Thirdly, touching the difficulty of our second creation above the first: in
our said first creation God did no more for us

Fourthly, in the first creation, God wrought as God alone:

Fifthly, our first creation, and the first creation of all things, Note.
For Christ gave himself for us, and we are said, to be bought with a price:
as likewise shall be showed anon.

Sixthly, the first creation of all things was perfected, and do live many
years after his regeneration begun, yet it is never perfected in this life;
neither shall be, till our corruptible bodies have put on incorruption; and
till that that is mortal be made immortal.

Seventhly, to illustrate this by similitude, as it is more easy for the
potter, or glass man, to make an whole house full of

All this of the difficulty of our second creation, in comparison Note.
of the first creation, is to be understood, but only in respect of man's
judgment touching the difficulty of things: not simply in consideration of
Gods power. For to speak simply of Gods power, all things are alike thereunto.
There is nothing harder or easier then another with God. It is as easy for him
to make an whole world, yea, many worlds, as to make the least creature.

By this greatness of this work, the work it self is the more manifest, to
be the work only of God. For if to make a man, or to make an whole world, be
not the work of any but of God himself (as the whole Scripture teaches us)
how much less may we say, that any but God alone can regenerate a man and make
a man the child of God? this work being (as has been showed) greater then
the work of creation.

The more proper therefore that this work of regeneration is only to God, the
more excellent needs must be the condition of them, that by this work are made
the children of God. According to the rareness of the workman, so is the
work it self esteemed.

If but one man in a country, or in a kingdom, can do some special work, in
what estimation is the work it self? what then shall we say of this work of
regeneration, and of making the sons of men the sons of God, which none can
do in the world, but only one even God himself? How honorable therefore is
their state^

CHAP. V.
Of the first moving cause of our regeneration, viz. which first moved God to
regenerate us.

AS in the former Chapter the dignity of Gods children has been declared by
the excellency of God who is their Father, as also by this, that God only has
begotten them again unto himself, and that no other can work the work of
our regeneration: so now to set forth the same further by the first and
principal cause thereof, viz. by that which first moved God so to regenerate
and adopt us unto himself, let us a little more consider of the infinite love
of his toward us in this behalf, whereof before we have heard, even that that
love is the principal cause of our adoption and regeneration.

This love of God is here to be considered two ways. First, as the cause of
election before the foundations of the world were laid, both to adoption,
whereof now we speak: and also to the fruition of all other mercies in this
life and the life to come. Secondly, as it was afterward in the fullness of
time declared, by the sending specially of his son into the world, for the
effecting of that our adoption.

Touching the first, it has been before noted, that the Apostle in this very
place, speaking of the love of God as of the cause of making us his children,
does not speak in the time present, but in the time past, by that circumstance
of time signifying the said love of God, not to be a new love, or a present
love only, but an ancient love, even from the beginning. The same (besides the
Scriptures before alleged) is expressly testified by the Apostle Paul, who not
only says that God has elected us before the foundation of the world, but
also touching the cause and the end of our said election, he adds, that God
has then predestined us to be adopted, (or to be made children) through
Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians.
1. 5. that is, according to his mere and most free grace, without respect of
any worthiness of them, whom he has chosen: and the words following of the
principal end of our election, viz. the praise of the glory of his grace, do
further manifest his free grace to have been the principal cause of election
to adoption, and to the sonneship (if I may so speak) of God. For if there
were any other principal cause thereof then only Gods free grace, then also
the praise of the said cause should be the end of our election, as well as the
praise of the free grace of God.

As also it is said, that God chose the children of Israel to be his special
people, because only he loved their fathers, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and as Samuel says,
it had pleased the Lord to make them his people, 1. Sam. 12. 22. insinuating by
that phrase, the mere pleasure of God to have bin the cause of making them his
people: so and much more may be said touching our adoption to be the children
of God. Yea, so also it is said, that God of his own will has begotten us
again, etc. that is, of his mere love, Iam. 1. 18.

As this love of God (afterward declared by the act it self, of adopting us to
be his children) was thus eternal without beginning, so also it is eternal in
respect it shall be without end: Therefore it is called everlasting love, Ierem.
31. 3. and John says, that whom God loves once he loves to the end: John 13.
1. And indeed whatsoever is without beginning, is also without end. Many things
have beginning, which shall have no end, as all Angels good and bad, and the
spirits of all men: but nothing shall have end, that has no beginning.
Therefore as before we heard that all that are regenerated have been beloved
of God without beginning of his love, so Peter says that such also are kept by
the power of God unto salvation, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 5. But of this before, Chap.
2. Neither only is that love of God toward the regenerated everlasting and
without end, because it is without beginning: but for the same reason also it
is the more free and without all respect of any worthiness in them that are
without beginning beloved. For how can they pretend any worthiness in themselves
to have been the cause of that love, that was more ancient then themselves,
yea then the world? The cause must be before the effect, and not the effect
before the cause. In this respect therefore the dignity of Gods children is so
much the greater; first because they are beloved of God: secondly because they
have been so long beloved of God: thirdly, because they have been and are
freely beloved of God: fourthly because the love of God is everlasting.
Concerning the first; if the favor of a king be as the dew upon the grass,
Pro. 19. 12. and if in the light of a Kings countenance be life, and his favor
be like a cloud of the latter rain, Pro. 16. 15. what shall we say of the
favor of God, and of the light of his countenance that is king of kings?

The same is to be said of the antiquity of Gods love. For as it is the greater
grace and honor for a subject, the longer he has been in favor with his
Prince; so likewise that all the children of God have been so long in favor
with God, and that God has so long loved them, it cannot but be the greater
honor unto them.

Thirdly, the freeness of Gods love without respect of any desert in his
children, does as much dignifie his said children, as the free grace of a
Prince without any desert or gifts, whereby to procure the Princes favor, does
the more honor such a subject as is in such free favor with his Sovereign.

Fourthly, and principally the love of God is the more honorable in respect
that it is everlasting, because we see the grace and favor of all Princes to
be mutable. Though Haman were in such grace with Ahashuerosh that he procured
him to write his royal letters for the destruction of all the Jews: yet we
know what a change fell out afterward. Yea, how soon and upon how light an
occasion (even upon the false report only of flattering Ziba) was the great
love of David qua^led toward Mephibosheth the son of his ancient and most
faithful friend Jonathan? Since therefore the love of mortal Princes is so
uncertain, it cannot but be the greater honor to the children of God, that
they are so rooted and grounded in grace and favor with God, that nothing
whatsoever shall ever be able to disgrace them with him, so as that he shall
for ever cast them off. But this shall further appear by other things,
afterward handled concerning their further dignity. All this of the love of
God, of his ancient love, and of his free love, and of his unchangeable love
toward his children, is the more honor unto them, because as it is said, Jacob
have I loved and Esau have I hated: Romans 9. 17. so it is said that the Lord
hates all the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 5. 5. and that his face is against
them that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. Psalm. 34. 16.
And therefore the wicked have no part in the foresaid love of God, but it is
proper and peculiar only to the children of God. And thus we see, that the
foresaid love of God toward his children is not only to be considered as the
principal and first moving cause of their regeneration: but also as a
singular, and most honorable benefit and prerogative. Thus much for the first
consideration of the love of God in making us his children, viz. as it was the
cause of our election at the first, even before all times, unto our adoption
and regeneration to be made in time. Touching the second consideration of Gods
love in making us his children, namely as it has been declared particularly,
in giving his son for the effecting of our adoption whereunto we were
predestined and elected, it is said, So God loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, etc. Ioh. 3. 16. If God so loved the world that he sent his son, that
men might have everlasting life by believing in him, then also in his said love
he sent his son to adopt them unto God. For none can believe but such as are
adopted, and have the spirit of adoption, whereby to believe God to be their
father. And adoption is one necessary step to everlasting life: and without
adoption and regeneration, can no man enter into the kingdom of heaven, as our
Savior teaches Nicodemus in the same chapter.

Neither is it only manifest thus by consequence, that God so loved the world,
(that is, the elect men in the world) that he sent his son for their
adoption, but the Apostle does also teach the same expressly; When the fullness
of time (says he) was come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made under
the law, (that is, not only borne in the time of the law, but also made subject
both to the obedience and to the curse of the law) that he might redeem them
that were under the law, that they might receive the adoption of sons. Galat.
4. 4. 6.

By these testimonies it is manifest, not only that God declared his great love
toward us in sending his own and only son into the world, to make us his
children, but that also God the son was a principal agent in the work of our
adoption and regeneration, as well as God the father: and that we could no
more have been made the children of God without the work of God the son,
then without the work of God the father.

The same is yet further manifest, by the Evangelists interpretation of the
prophetical words of Caiph as spoken as he was high Priest, touching the
necessity of the death of one for the people, and that the whole nation should
not perish, For this (says the Evangelist) spoke he not of himself, but
being high Priest that same year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that
nation: and not for that nation only, but that he should gather together the
children of God that were scattered. Ioh. 11. 50. By gathering together he
means adopting: and by the children of God he means not them that were
already in act the children of God, but that were appointed and predestined
so to be, as before we heard. It is also in the said place to be observed Note.
that he speaks not passiuely, but actiuely. He says not, that the children
of God might be gathered together, but he says that he might gather together,
etc. So he notes that the gathering together and adopting of the children of
God, is a work of Jesus Christ as well as of God the father. The same our
Savior himself testifies, saying: Other sheep I have also which are not of
this fold, them also must I bring. Ioh. 10. 16. he says not they shall be
brought, but that he himself must bring them. Peter accords with both the
former testimonies, making this to be the end of Christ's suffering once for
sins, etc. not that we might be brought only to God, but also that he might
bring us unto God. 1. Pet. 3. 18. As therefore we could not have been saved
without Christ, so neither could we have been adopted without him.

Therefore also, as before we heard the dignity of Gods children, to be the
greater by the work of the father, so it is also the greater hereby, that the
father works herein by the son: and the son works with the father as
well in this our second creation as in the first: For Christ is the same in
glory and excellency with the Father. Whatsoever is spoken of the Father
(according to the Deity) the same may also be said of the son. For I (says
Christ himself) and my Father are one. Ioh. 10. 30. and the Apostle says,
that he being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God. Philip. 2. 6. And he is called the heir of all things, by whom God the
Father made the world: and the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form
of his fathers person. Heb. 1. 2. 3.

Neither was Christ only so excellent as he was God: but he was also very
excellent in his humanity: the same being conceived in the womb of a virgin by
the immediate operation of the holy ghost; and being personally united to the
Godhead, that both natures might make one person; and so united, being also
altogether without sin, unspotted, undefiled, most holy and righteous. In his
offices also he was most honorable: being the only King, Priest, and Prophet
of his Church: yea, such a King, Priest, and Prophet, as of whom David and
Solomon, and all their kingly posterity, with the Priests of the law, and the
Prophets extraordinarily raised up and sent to the ancient people of God, were
but types, figures and shadows.

The more excellent therefore that Christ is and was before his sending into
the world and afterward, the more has God dignified his children, in sending
him so into the world to make them his children. The more honorable persons
that any Prince does employ for the good of any other, the more is he dignified
and graced, for whose good such honorable persons are so employed.

Did not Balak King of Moab, much honor Balaam by sending unto him, first some
of the Elders and Princes of Moab and Midian: Number. 22. 5. 7. and 13. and
afterward more Princes and more honorable then the former? verse. 15.

Was it not a great honor to the Prophet Isaiah, that Hezekiah sent Eliakim the
steward of his house, and Shebna his Chauncellor and the elders of the Priests
to ask counsel of him touching Rabsheka? 2. King. 19. 2. May not the like be
said of Iosiahs sending Hi^kia the Priest, Ah^kan the son of Shaphat, Achbor
the son of Michaiah, Shaphan the Chancellor, and Asahia the Kings servant, to
Huldah the Prophe^esse for counsel from the Lord touching the finding of the
lawe^ 2. King. 22. 12.

That the Centurion sent not one of his own servants, but the elders of the
Jews unto our Savior in behalf of his sick servant, Luc. 7. 3. was it not
to do the more honor to our Savior?

If the sending of such honorable messengers were some honor to them to whom
they were sent, what shall we think of Gods sending his own son to us, and
for us, to make us his children? Does not God thereby greatly honor us? verily
it cannot be denied: since the sending of Christ was more, then if he had sent
all the Angels in heaven. For Christ is made so much more excellent then the
Angels, by how much more he has obtained a more excellent name then they. Heb.
1. 4.

This is so much the more, because God sent not his son in glory, and to live
here in glory, but in baseness and in form of a servant, clothed with our
base nature (yet purged from all corruption as soon as it was separated in the
womb of the Virgin to be that which afterward it was) and so to live a while
in poverty, in shame, and in all contempt, and at the last to be put to the
most shameful death of the cross, as though he had been a worm and no man;
or as though he had been the vilest man, that had before come into the world.

Were it not a very great honor to a poor, yea, to a traiterous subject, being
somewhere in captivity, bondage, and great misery, if his Prince should abase
his only son, and send him disguised in base apparel, and to undergo much
poverty and other hardness, with shame also and contempt for a time, for the
redeeming the said subject and to bring him home to the Court of the Prince,
there to eat meat with the Prince his son, and to be accounted as a companion
of his? How great then, is this honor that God has done unto us in sending
his own son, and in exposing him to many, (yea to all) indignities to redeem
us that we might receive the adoption of sons?

Before I proceed any further, let me here insert another principal cause of
our regeneration, viz. the mercy of God. This may seem to be all one with the
love of God, before handled. And indeed it is so like thereunto, that it is
often confounded therewith: so that the word love is often taken for mercy: and
mercy is often taken for love, when there is speech of the dealing of God with
men: especially in the matter of election, calling and salvation. This may be
observed in diverse places before alleged, and therefore I stand not upon it.
But although there be great similitude betwixt them, yet Note.
they are also to be distinguished. For first of all both are in God toward
man, but both cannot be in man toward God. Love may be and must be in man
toward God: but it is very absurd to say that a man may show mercy unto God.
Again the love of God has respect unto us as being only the creatures of God;
even base creatures, such as were altogether unworthy so great honor of being
made the children of God. But the mercy of God has respect and relation unto
us, not only as we are creatures, base, and unworthy of the foresaid love, but
also as we were miserable, especially polluted with infinite (...) yea, dead in
all sins and trespasses; more then unworthy of his favor, even such as had
deserved his everlasting displeasure and indignation: as having been traitors
and rebels against him in the highest degree. Furthermore, the love of God is
in order before the sending or giving of Christ, being the cause both of our
election, and also of sending or giving Christ Jesus as has been showed
touching election out of Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. and touching the sending of Christ out
of Ioh. 3. 16. But the mercy of God is only in Christ Jesus, and for Christ
Jesus his sake, as afterward shall appear.

Whereas it is said that we are elected in Christ, that is not to be understood
simply of election itself, but rather of the ends whereto we are elected, viz.
adoption and salvation. To speak simply of election itself, it was merely of
the free love of God, and the efficient cause thereof was only in God himself.
And so God having eternally decreed our salvation, did also at the same instant
decree the means of our salvation; namely the giving of his only son to be
made man for us. We were first in order elected to be saved, and then Christ
was appointed and at the same instant destinated, to be the person by whom we
should be saved. Therefore, as Peter says that the Jews had put Christ to
death by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, Acts 2. 23. so he
calls Christ alambe unspotted, etc. ordained before the foundations of the
world, 1. Pet. 1. 20.

Notwithstanding this priority of decreeing our salvation, before the sending
of Christ was decreed, must be understood of a priority in order in the nature
of things, not of a priority in time. For both being eternal and before all
times, (to wit the decree for saving us, and the decree for sending Christ to
work out that salvation for us) one could not be before an other in time. For
in things eternal, there can be neither priority, or posteriority in time.
Thus then we see a plain distinction betwixt the love of God, and the mercy of
God, either in our election, or in the work of regeneration, or in any other
thing.

That the mercy of God was one of the principal moving causes of our
regeneration, viz. which moved God to work this work in us, it is manifest
also by the testimony of Peter. For he in his first Epistle and Chapter, having
after his Apostolical manner saluted the Christians to whom he wrote, makes
this entrance into the rest of the Epistle, saying: Blessed be God the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant (or rich) mercy has
begotten us again, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 3. Is it not in these words plain, that
the Apostle does make the mercy of God a principal cause first moving God to
beget us again? So the Apostle Paul in the work of our salvation ioineth
together the mercy of God, and the washing of the new birth, Tit. 3. 5. So also
particularly speaking of his own conversion from blaspheming, and from
persecuting and oppressing of the Church, to the true fear of God, and love of
his Saints, he attributes the same to the mercy of God, saying: I was a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy, or
I found mercy. By the mercy of God here, I understand the pity and compassion
that God took upon us beholding us in our miserable state by nature, being
blind, deaf, dumb, lame, sick, dead, etc. (as has been said) and so his
bowels of compassion being moved toward us, and never ceasing to work (as it
were) in him till by the work of our regeneration he had released and
discharged us from our foresaid miserable state and condition. I might speak
in this place of the mercy of God in forgiving our sins: but because I shall
speak afterward of the forgiveness of sins amongst the benefits belonging
to the children of God by their communion with God: therefore I will spare all
speech thereof here. In the mean time that God has showed such mercy unto
men, as to make them his children, it cannot but add something to their
dignity. For as it is a great preferment to be beloved of God, he being the
King of kings: so it is no less matter for such miserable, yea, rebellious and
traitorous creatures, as we were, to find such mercy with God, as not only to
be pardoned of all our sins, but also to be made his children: yea, this is
the greater matter, because it is a special testimony of the love of God
before handled. For if he had not loved us full dearly, he would never have
showed such compassion upon us.

CHAP. VI.
Of Christ Jesus, being one of the principal causes of, and agent in our
adoption of the great price he has given for it: of the work also of the
holy ghost therein, and of the true nobility of all Gods children by the joint
working of all the three persons in their adoption.

TO return a little back, and to consider a little more of Christ Jesus as
one of the principallest agents in our regeneration; all before spoken of the
fathers sending of him is so much the more, because himself also came
voluntarily and of his own accord, even freely offering himself to be so
sent, because he saw that no burnt offerings or other sacrifices would be
sufficient for our salvation or adoption and regeneration. Psalm. 40. 5. 6. 7.

When Christ also was come in the flesh, and saw and felt what it was that the
Father had sent him for, and he was come for, did he any ways shrink, or show
that he repented of his former forwardnes? Nothing so: but he did most
willingly proceed and go through with that which the Father had decreed he
should perform, and which himself had taken upon him to do in our behalf:
viz. not only to accomplish and fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. which
actiuely was to be accomplished and fulfilled by him; but also to suffer both
poverty, reproach, contempt, and all other indignities, wrongs and injuries with
men: and even the wrath of God his father, the torments of hell, and the
sorrows of the life to come in his soul as well as in his body, and in his
body as well as in soul (we having deserved all these things) even such pains
and pangs as would have broken the back and very heart strings of all the
Angels in heaven.

Notwithstanding, all that he suffered, only whiles he lived in the earth long
before his last passion, Ioh. 12. ^7. and the very night before his said
passion, in the garden, when he prayed thrice, that if it were possible that
cup might pass from him, and when his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling
down to the ground, Luk 22. 41. etc. and in his last passion it self, crying
with a strong cry and bitter (as it is said of Mordecai, Ester 4. 1.) My God my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27. 46. Yea, so willing did Christ
suffer all before spoken, (and ten times more then can be spoken) that, albeit
till his time appointed was come, he did sometime avoid the rage and fury of
his enemies, yet for all that he did often sharply reprove his very friends
that either gave him any counsel to the contrary, Mar. 8. 33. Ioh. 11. 8. 9.
or that did any thing for to have rescued him against his enemies that put him
to death. Mat. 26. 53.

His threefold prayer (before mentioned in show to the contrary) was not so
indeed, because it was but conditional, and showed the greater extremity of
his passion. For after the said Note.
prayer he did not only rebuke Peter for going about to rescue him (as was
said) by smiting off the high Priests servants ear: neither did he only heal
him whom Peter had so maimed, the better to show that he neither had pleasure
in Peter's rashness, neither had any spleen against the said high Priests
servant that had come out with other to apprehend him: but he did further also
tell him, that if he would he could by his prayer to his father have obtained
more then twelve legions of Angels, to take him from them. Who then had laid
their hands upon him? Mat. 26. 53. Does not this most plainly testify that he
did all most willingly? Doubtless it does. For otherwise he could as easily
have avoided, yea and confounded all the company though coming forth with
swords and stanes to take him, as by telling them that he was the man they
sought for, he made them to go backward and to fall to the ground. Ioh. 18. 6.

By these things therefore, that God so loved us, that to make us his children,
he sent his own son, and that in form of a servant, yea, and worse then a
servant unto wretched men (not for doing any thing (as Paul for bids us to
be the servants of men. 1 Cor. 7. 23.) but for suffering any thing at their
hands: And that the son himself did also this most willingly and cheerfully
without any constraint, does it not manifestly appear, that the adoption of
the children is much graced and honored?

Yea certainly, the more is that their adoption to be the children of God
graced and honored by all things before spoken of, because as Christ was
therefore sent, and did therefore come, and being come did also willingly
undergo and suffer all, so also he did effect that, which was so the end of
his sending* coming, and suffering. For so it is said of him (not of the
father) that as many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the
sons of God; (or to be the children of God) even to them that believed in his
name: Ioh. 1. 12. And so although it be said in one respect that he is not
ashamed to call us brethren, Heb. 2. 11. yet both in the same place verse. 10.
in another respect he is insinuated also to be our father, in that it is said,
that he brought many children unto glory. and also he is expressly entitled by
the name of Everlasting father: Isa^. 9. 6. Moreover by these things thus
written, it is most apparent, that Christ has not only made us the children
of God, but also that he has paid full dearly for our said adoption.
Therefore it is said that we are bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23.
and this price was not any corruptible thing, as silver or go^d, but his own
most precious blood. 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. and by the blood of Christ are meant all
those his dreadful sufferings before mentioned. If God had sent all the Angels
of heaven and they had taken our nature upon them, and therein had shed their
blood for us, it had been nothing to the blood of Christ: because Christ was
the Lord of the Angels, and all the Angels were to worship him. Heb. 1. 6.

But to leave that which was not, and to return to that which was, it is much,
and exceeding much, that God has honored mankind, especially his children, by
giving unto them all living creatures, to be killed for preservation of their
present life. Much more then is this honor (and ten times greater then the
heart of man can conceive) that God has not spared his own son, but given
him to the death. Romans 8. 32. (yea, to such a death as he suffered, even the
cursed death of the Cross) that being dead in sins we might be made alive.
Ephesians. 2. 5. and so receive the promise of the spirit. Gal. 3. 14. where by to
call God our father, and to be called the children of God.

This were a worthy meditation, every time we see sheep or lamb, or pigeon, or
chicken, or any thing else, by butcher, or by any other body, to be killed for
us; it were (I say) a worthy meditation, if then we could think and say, This
is a great honor of God toward us, that this innocent and harmless creature
must die to preserve us alive. But (O Lord) how have thou honored us, by giving
thy son, thy only son, thy son whom thou louedst most dearly, even as
thy own soul, thy son Jesus, to be slain, and to suffer more then a
thousand bodily deaths, to make us thy children, that so we might live in thy
sight!

Did not Abraham greatly honor God, when he was so willing, to take now
(without delay or any stay for issue of him) his son, his only son, his
son Isaac (in whom the promise was made of blessing for all nations) his
son whom he loved most tenderly, (not only for natures sake, but also for the
promise sake) and to go to the land of Moriah (an unknown country) and to
offer him (that is, to kill him with his own hands, not to give him to another
to be offered and killed) for a burnt offering (an honorable but an hard and
woeful kind of death, for the natural father to put his own natural son
unto) upon one of the mountains which God should show him Genes. 22. 2. (he
could not tell where) did not Abraham (I say) greatly honor God, by being
willing and ready to do it; and by going so far in the doing of it, that the
knife was in his hand to have killed his own son upon Gods commandment in
that behalf; and that therefore he had done it indeed, if God himself had not
countermanded him, and forbidden it? Doubtless Abraham did so thereby honor
God, that Abraham's faith in that behalf has been the more renowned and
honorable ever sithence, and shall be renowned and honorable to the end of the
world.

How then has God honored us by giving his son for us? and how has Christ
Jesus honored us by giving and offering up himself a sweet smelling savor and
sacrifice to God for us, that did by our sins stink most noy somely in the
nostrills of God? Abraham had received his son from God: God had not received
his son from us. Abraham might have had an other son from God, as well as
he had Isaak: God could not have an other besides Christ. Abraham did owe his
son, and all that he had; yea, himself also to God: God owes nothing to us.

Abraham had a commandment to offer his son Isaak unto God. Had God any
commandment, or could any command God to give his son unto us and for us.
Abraham and his son both were to die at the last. The son of God was as
immortal and free from death as God himself, because he was God with his
father. Abraham had had his son but a while: but God had had his son from
all eternity. Abraham's son was like to himself but in part: Gods son was
perfectly and fully like unto him.

In all these respects and in diverse other, we plainly see how much more God
has honored us by giving his son, as also how much more Christ has honored
us by giving himself for us, then Abraham honored God, by giving his son
unto God, that had first given him to Abraham.

Again were it not a great honor to any poor and base subject etc. being in
miserable bondage and captivity (as before I said) for his Prince being wise
and knowing what he does, or for such a son of such a Prince to give a very
great price for his ransom? who then can express the honor that Christ Jesus
has done to us, in that being the son of his father, tender and dear unto
him (as Solomon speaks of himself in respect both of his father and mother.
Pro. 4. 3.) and being even the son of his fathers desires (as Bethsheba spoke
of Solomon and to Solomon. Pro. 31. 2.) and being full of wisdom and grace,
Luk 2. 40. and being the wisdom of his father Luke 11. 44. And having all
treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid in him, Coloss. 2. 3. who (I say) can
express the honor that Christ Jesus, being such as he is and always was, has
done unto us in giving a greater price for our ransom and adoption to his
father, then all the kingdoms of the world (ten thousand times told) are
worth? For do we not account of all things, according to the price that wise
men do give for them? Is then the adoption of Gods children lightly to be
accounted, for which Christ gave as great a price as for our salvation? This of
the price which Christ has given to make us the children of God, is the more,
because he gave not the same price or any other, for to redeem the Angels
(that kept not their standing) that they might with us receive the adoption of
sons.

Before their fall they were so much more glorious then man before his fall, by
how much more their habitation and employment in heaven, was more glorious then
Adams in earth: yet, has Christ Jesus, in making in us his children altogether
passed them over: and they are still reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Jude 6.

How greatly therefore has Christ honored us by giving such a price to make
us the children of God, who dwell in houses of clay, and who touching part of
us are but worms meat, whereas he has given none at all, for them that before
their fall, were most glorious spirits, dwelling with God himself in heaven?

Because also the holy ghost is of the same glory and excellency with God the
father, and God the son, therefore the work of the holy ghost in our
adoption is likewise to be considered with the work of the father and of the
son. For the father and the son work not without the holy ghost. As in the
first creation it is said that the spirit of God moved upon the waters, or sat
upon the waters, and upon the whole matter of all things before created (even
as a bird sits upon her eggs) to bring the said first matter into form and
fashion, and so did immediately execute that in the first creation which God the
father had decreed, and which God the son had spoken concerning the said
creation: so in our second creation and adoption God the father and God the
son work not immediately but by God the holy ghost.

The same holy ghost also is he, by whom the coming of Christ into the world,
his death, and other things he suffered, even the whole price which he gave of
his active and passive obedience for us, is applied unto us.

Our Savior likewise attributes our regeneration to the spirit, as well as it
is elsewhere ascribed to the father: Except a man be borne of water, and of the
spirit, etc. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that that is borne
of the spirit is spirit, etc. and again, The wind blows where it lists,
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor
whither it goes; so is every man that is borne of the spirit. Ioh. 3. 5. 6. 7.
8.

Yea the spirit of God seems to be that very immortal seed of our new birth
whereof Peter speaks, 1. Pet. 1. 23. I know that other do interpret the word
to be that immortal seed there spoken of, because it is said, not of mortal,
but of immortal seed, by the word. Notwithstanding to me it seems
otherwise, because the Apostle changes the first preposition (of) used in the
first place, into another, viz. into (by) used in the second place in speaking
of the word. And therefore I do rather think the word there to be noted, as
the instrument only, whereby that immortal seed of our new birth before
spoken of, is conveyed into us. This (I say) I do the rather think because of
the change of prepositions, the Apostle not saving, being borne anew, not of
mortal, but immortal seed of the word, but saying in this last clause, by the
word.

Yea, I am, and shall be the more fully persuaded of this interpretation to be
the right (till I shall hear, or see better reason then I have done for the
former) because of the places before alleged, to prove our regeneration to be
of the spirit of God, as well as of the father, and of the son, and because
the preposition of, first used in that place of Peter, is so constantly used in
all the former places concerning the spirit, viz. Ioh. 1. 13. and 3. verse. 5.
6. and 8.

I acknowledge the word to be called seed, in respect of the fruits of
righteousness, Luke 8. 11. but for the reasons before alleged, I cannot yet
think it to be there understood for the seed of our regeneration, any
otherwise then it is the instrument of conueying the spirit of God into us.

Moreover, the spirit is called the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba
father, that is, whereby we call God our father, and whereby we are called the
children of God. Yea, it is further said, that the same spirit bears witness
to our spirits that we are the children of God: Romans 8. 15. 16.

So then the holy ghost does both immediately beget us to God, and is also a
witness of that our begetting again to God, and of our being the children of
God. But I will stay no longer in this point. To conclude therefore all the
former arguments hitherto used for the dignity of Gods children; since they have
so honorable a father, and since their adoption is thus honored, with the work
of all the three persons in the Deity; and since the original cause of the said
adoption is both the free love of God the father in sending his own and only
son; and of the son in coming so willingly and submitting himself so
cheerfully to so base a condition for the effecting of the said adoption; and
since also he gave so great a price for it, it cannot be, but the work it self
is very honorable.

Thus we see, that they that be again so regenerated of him, and by him, by
whom they were at the first made, have obtained a new state and condition, and
are not as they were, of the world worldly, of the earth earthly, and of flesh
fleshly: but of heaven heavenly: of God the father (of whom the whole family in
heaven and in earth is named Ephesians. 3. 15.) called his children; of Christ
denominated Christians, Acts 19. 26. and of the spirit said to be spiritual,
1. Cor. 2. 15. So they are not only humane, by the humane nature, but also
divine by participation of the divine nature: 2. Pet. 1. 4. not touching their
substance, but touching divine qualities and operations.

Such therefore, and only such may truly speak of nobility. For only they may
most truly say, they are borne of God, as we have seen before, chap. 2. 29. and
as the Apostle speaks afterward chap. 4. 7. And they only may most truly
also say further, that they are the generation of God, Acts 17. 28. and that in
such manner, as that thereby they are citizens of heaven, and inhabitants
together with the glorious Angels: as afterward we shall hear more at large.

In respect of this nobility, and without this, all other nobility is nothing
in Gods sight. Yea, that which our Savior speaks of the Jews particularly,
may be said generally of all that are not the children of God, They do the works
of their father the devil and the lusts of their father they will do John 8.
41. 44. Not much unlike also is that description of the King that is the son
of nobles, that eat in time for strength, and not for drunkenness. Eccles. 10.
17. For what does Solomon by this description teach else, but that such kings
are most renowned and noble, which do adorn their kingly descent with true
piety and sobriety? And though Solomon speak but of eating in time for
strength and not for drunkenness; yet by this one virtue he means all
other. And of this virtue he makes choice above other, because it is in a
manner the rarest of all other, especially in kings. It is hard to find any man
that has abundance, to be sober and moderate in the use of meats and drink,
and to eat both only in time, and also for strength, not for excess, and
pleasure. I may also apply to this purpose, that which is said by the Prophet,
which confounds them that are excellent or noble in the earth with the
Saints, and the Saints with them, Psalm. 16. 3. thereby teaching, that the
Saints only have the best excellency and nobility, and that none may rightly
be called excellent or noble, but such as are Saints. And indeed seeing all
that are not sanctified, cannot but be of the devil as doing his works, what
greater baseness, vileness, and ignobility can there be then to be such?
Seeing therefore these things are so, who sees not but that the state of Gods
children is much dignified thereby? For who does not highly account of
nobility? what striving, what laboring, sometime also what offering and paying
is there for it? For it? For what? Even for names and titles of nobility, which
earthly Princes have in their power to bestow? what striving then, what
laboring, and what praying, (in stead of paying) ought there to be for that
nobility, which only comes from the God of heaven and earth? Nobles here of
the world sit with Princes of the world in their Parliaments, to make laws for
the government of other. But it is better to receive laws from God then to
make laws for men: and it is much better for a man to govern himself, then
without that to prescribe and give laws for the government of other. Last of
all we shall hear afterward, that the least of Gods children shall sit in
greater place with Christ Jesus, even to judge the world, in his heavenly
Parliament, then the greatest nobles that ever were in the earth did ever sit
with any earthly Prince, in their earthly parliaments. Thus much for this point.

CHAP. VII.
Of the excellent instruments that God uses in the work of our regeneration,
viz. the minister of the word, and the word it self.

Having hitherto spoken of the excellency of the authors of our regeneration,
and of the principal motives of them thereunto, etc. let us in the next place
consider what instruments the said authors have used to effect our
regeneration. This point I will dispatch very briefly that I may the more
hasten to other things. Touching this therefore, though God himself (I mean
Father, Son, and holy ghost) be the only authors of our regeneration, yet
we heard before, that men are the instruments of God, whereby the immortal
seed of our new birth is conveyed unto us, for the effecting of our said new
birth. These are chiefly the ministers of the word, touching whom, as we have
heard, the Apostle says that some plant, and other water, but that God gives
increase; so he also says of himself and all other that they are laborers
together with God.

Now touching the ministers of the word, especially of the gospel, it is said
for their commendation and honor; How beautiful are the feet of them that
bring glad tidings of peace etc. Romans 10. 15. out of Isa. 52. 7. Where the word
of admiration, (how) is to be noted, as teaching, (as before has been
insinuated chap. 2.) that indeed the calling of the ministers is more
honorable then well can be expressed. The synecdoche also of their feet, put
for their whole man, imports that if the feet of them that bring glad
tidings be so beautiful, how much more beautiful should their faces be?

For what does the glad tidings of peace there mean, but the preaching of the
Gospel, which is the doctrine of our reconciliation to God, and of our peace
made with God by Jesus Christ, by whom it pleased the Father to reconcile all
things unto himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross, both
the things in earth, and the things in heaven? Col. 1. 20. that is, both the
elect living still upon the earth, and also elect, whose souls before that time
had been translated into heaven. For as touching the Angels of heaven, what
need they any reconciliation, or how could they be reconciled, that never had
offended God, or were alienated from him? Therefore the gospel is called the
ministry of reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5. 18 and the word of reconciliation,
verse 19.

It is also called the Gospel of peace. Ephesians. 2. 15.

As the ministry of the Law may be called the ministry of wrath, because it
discovers our sins, whereby we deserve the wrath of God, and so it
testifies the wrath of God, (in which respect Josias at the finding of the
book of the Law, that had bin long hid, is said to have rent his clothes, 2.
Kings 22. 11. as perceiving thereby the transgressions of the people, and the
wrath of God hanging over their heads for the same) as (I say) the Law in that
respect may ie called the ministry of wrath because it testifies and shows
the wrath of God provoked by men's sins against the Law: so the gospel may be
and is called the gospel or the glad tidings of peace; not only because it
makes peace here below betwixt man and man, and betwixt man and other
creatures, Isa 11. 6. etc. and in man Note.
likewise toward God, making them as meek as lambs that were before as
fierce as Lions and Tigers: but also because it testifies God to be at peace
by Jesus Christ with me^. In this respect therefore, well might the Apostle, and
well might the Prophet say in commendation of the ministers of the gospel, How
beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of salvation! And if
their feet are to be thought so beautiful, much more their faces. The face of
Moses having received that law that is, as we heard, the ministry of wrath,
was so beautiful and did so shine, that the people could not endure the sight
thereof. Exodus 34. 30.

Wherefore did the Lord put such glory upon the very face of Moses? was it not
to make him in respect of his ministry, the more honorable with the people?
What then is to be said of the ministers of the Gospel in the former respect?

Before the coming of Christ, prophets that were sent to call men to
repentance, (the first step of the children of God and the beginning of their
regeneration) prophets (I say) so sent to call men to repentance by denouncing
the judgments of God against them, were so honorable that both God himself
joined the regard of them with the regard of kings, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm. Psalm. 105. 15. and also that kings were
glad of their company, for the honoring of them before their people: 1. Sam.
15. 3. And therefore they accounted them as their fathers: 2. Kings 6. 21. and
13. 14. yea, wicked kings did so account of them; as appears by the two
former places speaking of the kings of Israel, who after the falling away of
the ten tribes from the house of David were all evil.

In the time of our Savior such Prophets being in some sort ceased, John
Baptist raised up betwixt such prophets and Evangelical ministers, is
commended by our Savior in this manner; What went ye out (into the wilderness)
to see? A reed shaken with the wind? but what went ye out to see? a man clothed
in soft raiment? Behold, they that we are soft clothing (that is, such as flant
and ruffle it out in silks and veluets, and be georgeously aparrelled) are in
Kings houses. But what went ye out to see? A Prophet? yea, I say unto you, and
more then a Prophet etc. So our Savior magnifieth John Baptist, not only
above gallant and gorgeous courtiers, but also above the ancient Prophets: yet
for all that, he commends the least minister of the Gospel above him, saying,
Notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater then he,
Mat. 11. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

The excellency also of the ministers of the word (especially of the Gospel)
is manifest by the honorable names and titles given unto them by God himself.
For are they not called in a special manner, the men of God? 1. Kings 13. 1.
2. Tim. 3. 17. Be they not entitled the lights of the world? Mat. 5. 14: yea,
was not John Baptist called a burning and a shining candle, Ioh. 5. 35. Does
not the Apostle say of himself and of other: We are Ambassadors for Christ, 2.
Cor. 5. 20. Be they not called the salt of the earth? Mat. 5. 13. because by
their doctrine they should both suck out the corruption of men, and season them
(as it were) to be fit sacrifices for God.

Are not ministers of the word, as well as Kings, and Princes, often times in the
Prophets, as also in the writings of the Apostles, called by the names of
Pastors or shepherds? Are not the ministers of the seven Churches of Asia
called stars and Angels? Reu. 1. 20.

Has then the Lord always employed such honorable persons in the calling of
his children, that is, both in the first gathering and begetting of them again
unto himself: and also in the feeding, nursing, and strengthening of them being
so gathered and begotten? And shall we think that the state of the children of
God themselves is not likewise very honorable? Princes and other men of great
place and wisdom, use the more honorable persons in any business (as before
upon other occasion we have heard by the example of Balak King of Moab, of
Hezekiah, and Josiah, etc. chap. 5.) by how much the service it self is more
honorable. Shall we then think that the most high God of heaven, great in
wisdom and power, would employ so honorable persons upon a business not
suitable unto them? Doubtless as Princes sending forth such in Embassage, or
employing in some other great service such as before were not very honorable,
do therefore grace and dignifie them with some new honorable titles, as of
Knights, whereas before they were scarce esquires; or of Barons, whereas
before, they were but knights; or of Earls, whereas before they were but
Barons, and that to this end that their embassage or other works wherein they
are employed may be the more honorably accounted of, yea, and because their
emploiment being it self honorable, does therefore require like honorable
persons to be employed therein: so because the work of our regeneration is
very honorable, and to teach all men honorably to think of it, therefore has
the Lord with such Titiles dignified and graced his servants whom he does
employ to work and effect the same.

If any, notwithstanding that before said of the excellency and pre-eminence of
the ministers of the gospel (above the ministers of the Law, even above the
great prophets) shall for all that conceive more honorably of the prophets,
then of the ordinary ministers of the gospel (though there be no reason so to
do, because as the ministry it self of the gospel is more honorable then the
ministry of law and under the Law, so the ministers also of the gospel, are in
like manner to be esteemed) let such consider also, that all the doctrine of
the prophets is written for the begetting of the children of God in these
days, as well as it was preached in those days, for the begetting of the
elect then living. So it is expressly said, whatsoever things are written
aforetime are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the scriptures may have hope. Romans 15. 14. What hope can there be without
adoption and regeneration, as shall afterward appear? If then the former
writings of the prophets be as well for the regeneration of children to God
now, as the ministry of the present ministers; why may not those writers be as
well called ministers for us, as they were indeed for those ages wherein they
lived? yea, they are so called; yea, they are said to have ministered rather for
us then for themselves, and for other, that then lived with them.

So says the Apostle Peter most expressly, speaking of the prophets that had
enquired and searched of the salvation before spoken of by him, and saying,
that unto them it was revealed that not unto themselves, but unto us they
should minister the things which are now showed by them that have preached the
Gospel, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 12. These words are not to be taken for a simple
denial, as if the Prophets had not ministered at all unto themselves and to
other of those times, the things that were afterward preached, but rather they
are comparatively to be understood, viz. that they did not so much minister
those things to them of that age, as to succeeding generations. Therefore the
regeneration of the children of God of these times, is not wrought only by the
present ministry: but also by the ministry of the ancient Prophets.

How honorable therefore is that state and condition, for the better working
whereof the Lord has not only now given present ministers, and graced them
with honorable names, but has also so many years before raised up such worthy
persons as the ancient Prophets were?

With this argument from the excellency of the isntrumental fathers of our
regeneration, let us join an other the like, from the excellency of the
instrument it self, whereby the said isntrumental fathers do beget us again
unto God, that is, from the excellency of the word of God. For this is it
whereof the Apostle James says thus: Of his own will has he be gotten us
again with the word of truth, James 1. 18. and whereby our souls are renewed,
or restored, Psalm. 19. 7. The Apostle Paul also says: In Christ Jesus have I
begotten you through the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4. 15. It is that also, whereby we
being so regenerated and newborn, are fed, and nourished, and do grow to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus, 1. Pet. 2. 2.

This word of God is not only excellent in respect of the author thereof: 2.
Tim. 3. 16 and respect of the perfect matter therein contained, (as afterward
we shall hear) but also for these attributes thereof, sure, right, pure
clean, (or clean) true, etc. Psalm. 19. 7. 8. 9. and for that it is called and
is said to be the sword of the spirit: Ephesians. 6. 17. lively and mighty in
operation, sharperthen a two edged sword, entering through, even unto the
dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and of the
marrow, and d^scerning the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. So in
these and in other respects, it is said to be more to be desired then gold,
yea, then much fine gold: and to be sweeter then the honey and the honey comb,
Psalm. 19. 10. 11. and 119. 14. and 72. and 103.

And as the word of God generally is thus commended so specially the Gospel is
valued at the same rate, Mat. 13. 44. 45. where it is not only called by the
name of the kingdom of heaven, because it is the word of that kingdom, Mat.
13. 19. that is, the word whereby we attain both unto the kingdom of grace in
this world, and also the kingdom of glory in the world to come, but also by a
double parable, (for the more certainty thereof) it is commended to be better
then all treasures, and then all pearls.

Paul also comparing the Gospel with the law, says thus: If the ministration
of death written with letters, and engraven in stones was glorious, so that the
children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance, etc. how shall not the ministration of the spirit be more
glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation was glorious, much more does
the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory, 2. Cor. 3. 7. 8. 9. Yea, so
excellent also is the mystery of the Gospel, that one end thereof is said to
be that unto principalities and powers in heavenly places (that is, unto the
blessed Angels, waiting upon God in the heavens) might be made known by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. our Savior also threatens,
that such as should not receive his disciples sent forth by two and two, to
preach for a time for preparation of the way to the Gospel, should find it
harder at the day of judgment, then the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha, who
had been most fearfully destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven, Mat.
10. 15. The Apostle also speaking comparatively of the punishment of the
transgressors of the law, and of the Gospel says: If the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him? God bearing witness thereunto both
with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost? etc.
Heb. 2. 3. 4.

In these two places jointly considered, we have first an argument for the
excellency of the Gospel from the punishment of the contemners thereof. For
first if they should receive so great a judgment (not that resisted them, and
drove them out of their countries with fire and sword, but) that did not
receive them which were sent only by their preaching to prepare a way for the
Gospel; then (as follows comparatively in the second place before alleged)
how much greater shall the punishment of those be, that both neglect, and also
contemn, and persecute the Gospel? Does not this commination of so great
punishment to the neglecters and contemners of the Gospel, much magnify the
excellency of the Gospel?

Again, in the second place before alleged, we see other arguments for the
excellency thereof, viz. first it was first preached (touching the clear
manifestation of it) not by any servants, (as in former time the word had been
preached) but by the Lord himself, as before he had said, that in these last
days God has spoken unto us by his son, Heb. 1. 1. Secondly that God
himself had borne witness actually to the excellency thereof by signs and
wonders, etc. thirdly that he also graced it with many gifts of the holy ghost,
according to former prophecies in that behalf, especially that of Joel, 2. 28.
so applied by Peter, Act. 2. 17

To conclude therefore this argument, since this word of God is so excellent,
(whereby the regeneration of the children of God, of whom I do now speak, is
at first wrought, and afterward perfected,) shall we not think, that the state
of such children of God is also excellent?

Do not wise men according to the worthiness of any work apply and use the
more worthy instruments about the same? Much more therefore are we to think
the same, of the most wise God.

CHAP. VIII.
Of faith a chief internal cause of regeneration, or the first degree and
step thereunto; and of Christ again, as he is the chief matter of
regeneration, as before we heard him to be one of the principal efficient
causes likewise thereof.

HItherto we have heard of the dignity of Gods children, by the efficient
causes of their adoption, both principal and isntrumental. And all these
causes touching their own being have been external. For although the spirit
of God be within in us, when it does adopt and regenerat us, and so may be
called internal, in respect of the operation thereof in us, yet it may be
accounted external in in respect of the being that it has of it self, and by
it self, without us.

The next thing to be handled for the further amplification of the said dignity
is faith: because it may be considered in this argument, either as a mere
internal efficient cause of our said adoption and regeneration: or as the
first step and degree thereunto.

It may be considered first as a mere inward thing: because all the being of
it is altogether within us, not at all without us. It may be considered as an
efficient cause of our adoption, because it is that whereby we lay hold of
Christ, by whom and in whom alone, we do both at the first receive the spirit
of adoption, and be regenerated the children of God: and also afterward do
feed so upon him, that we grow up to a perfect stature of him. Therefore
these phrases, to come to him, to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood are
often used (especially Ioh. 6.) to express our communion with him by faith,
and to signify our believing in him. So also it is said that Christ dwells
in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17, and that we stand by faith, viz. in
Christ Romans 11. 20. So also faith is not only the inward instrument of our
communion with Christ, but also the next fountain of all other virtues
(afterward to be spoken of) wherein likewise consists our regeneration and
new birth. For by faith our hearts are purified, Act. 15. 9. and faith works
by love, Galat. 5. 6. and this love is the fulfilling of the Law. Romans 13. 10.
and the bond of perfection. Colos. 3. 14. and comes out of faith unfeigned. 1.
Timo. 1. 5. and therefore faith unfeigned may be said to be the next cause of
our communion with Christ, and consequently of all other things, wherein our
regeneration does consist.

As also, not believing God, and believing the devil, were the first degrees
of man's fall, Genes. 3. 3. and 6: so to cast away al giving credit to the
devil, and to believe in God, is the first degree of our regeneration and new
birth, whereby, we that were fallen are raised up again.

This faith is the believing of all things past, of all things present, of all
things to come, contained in holy Scripture for us to believe: neither only the
believing of them historically to be true, but also the particular application
of them to our selves.

The very wicked themselves, do believe the truth of the Scriptures
historically: yea, many of the reprobat, yea, the very Devils themselves do so
believe and tremble: James 2. 19. Mar. 1. 24. But the wicked (though elected)
before their calling, do not believe by particular application; because then
their hearts should be purified from their wickedness (as before we heard) they
having apprehended Christ that gave himself for us, not only to redeem us
from all iniquity, but also to purge us etc. Tit. 2. 14. and that he might
sanctify and cleanse us, etc. Ephesians. 5. 26. The wicked also (though elected)
are in the power of Satan (as afterward we shall hear) and to be accounted of
the world. But by faith we overcome the world: 1. Ioh. 5. 4. and the Devil
himself: Ephesians. 6. 16. 1. Pet. 5. 9.

The reprobat neither have faith, neither can have it: as for the reasons
before used touching the wicked generally; so also because the decree of God
touching their reprobation is as well vnreapealeable and unchangeable as the
decree of God touching election: and those reasons which make also for the
certainty and perpetuity of the elect, make also (for the most part) as
strongly for the immutability of Gods decree touching reprobation.

That which has been said of the wicked that are elected (viz. before their
calling) and of the reprobat to be without faith, may much more be said of the
devils.

But for as much, as neither reprobat men, nor the Devils can believe, because
Gods decree concerning their reprobation is unchangeable, therefore here may a
question be moved, whether infidelity and unbelief be a sin or no. For since
they cannot be saved, what sin is it in them not to believe in him, by whom
salvation is purchased? Nay rather, it may seem to be sin, to believe that
that is untrue.

I answer to the latter first, that concerning the devils, not to believe in
Christ, with application to themselves, is no sin in Note.
them: because, as Christ came not to save any of them, neither took their
nature upon him, so there is no commandment for them to believe in him as
their Savior. Notwithstanding, God having given his son for the redemption
of all elect men, therefore the devils not believing this or persuading any of
the elect not to it, do therein greatly sin, and so they shall certainly
aggrauat their condemnation. This then is breefely the solution of this
question touching the Devils, that they sin not in not believing in Christ
for themselves, but that they sin greatly in not believing that Christ came
to save elect men, and in persuading any of them not to believe it.

Touching reprobate men, though Christ came not to save them, neither did so
much as pray for them. Ioh. 17, 9. yet because Gods decree in this behalf is
not particularly known unto them, but God generally propounds his promises,
not particulary telling any by his external word, whose names are written in
the book of life, whose are not; but only reuealingthis by the work of his
spirit in calling them that are chosen, therefore the scripture pronounces
generally of all men that do not believe, that they are condemned already:
John 3. 18. Who then are they that do or shall believe? Only the elect. For
therefore it is not only said that All men have not faith. 2. These. 3. 2. but
also that faith is the faith of Gods elect. Tit. 1. 1. and, that as many as
were ordained to life believed. Acts 13, 48. And, that if the Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that are lost. 2. Cor. 4. 3. If al had faith all should be
saved, for by faith we are saved. Ephesians. 2. 8. and The just shall live by his
faith. Heb. 3. 4.

The faith of Gods elect is called most holy: Jude 20. and most precious: yea,
more precious then gold that is tried in the fire: because though gold be
tried, yet it perishes. 1. Pet. 1. 7. But they that trust in the Lord are like
to mount Zion that stands fast Note.
for ever. etc. Psalm. 125. 1.

All the elect that have faith, have not the like measure of faith, because God
that gives it, gives it as pleases him. Ephesians. 1. 9. and 4. 7. and because
all have not the like means neither the like time etc, but where it is left,
even as a grain of mustard seed (viz. not only for quantity but also for
quality, quickness, life and efficacy) there it is most holy and precious:
because to such as have such faith, nothing (making to Gods glory and their
salvation,) is impossible, yea, all such things are possible. Mat. 17. 20. and
21. 21. and Mark. 9. 23.

If any object the former places, to be understood of that kind of faith,
whereby men wrought miracles, and which was but for a time: I answer, that
although our Savior do indeed deliver those speeches by occasion of some
miracles, which he had then wrought: yet they are also more generally to be
understood even of a justifying and saving faith, as touching the object
thereof, I mean, as touching matters that appertain to salvation: Otherwise
that faith whereby a man is to save his own soul, should be inferior to that,
and of less force then that, whereby he is to save, (or in those days was to
save) other, by such working of miracles: were not this absurd in divinity?

Thus much shall suffice to have spoken of faith in this place: either as a
special and internal cause of our regeneration and new birth to be the
children of God, by incorporating us in to the only, natural, and first
begotten son of God: or at least as the first step and degree to our said
regeneration. More perhaps upon other occasion, shall be spoken of this faith
afterward. In the mean time, the more excellent that we have heard it to be,
and the more proper to the children of God, the more excellent also we must
needs acknowledge the state of the children of God to be in respect thereof.

The next point to be considered is the matter it self, wherein chiefly the
regeneration of the children of God does consist. This is first of all, their
communion with Christ. For Christ alone being the only, natural and proper
son of God (as has been said) no other can be the children of God (as now we
speak) but only by communion with him, and incorporation into him, whereby
they may be (spiritually) flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone, and members of
that body, whereof himself alone is the head. So many as have this communion
with Christ, so many may truly be called the beloved children of God.
Therefore they that are so regenerated are said to be begotten again in Christ
Jesus, 1. Cor. 4. 15. to be new creatures in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 17. Galat. 6.
5. and to be created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. and 4. 24. So farforth
therefore as we are in Christ, we are the children of God. And so many as are
not thus incorporated into Christ, are not in truth, neither ought to be called
the children of God. Such perhaps may be so accounted by other, yea,
peradventure, they may so account themselves. But as those that are begotten in
adultery by an adulterer, may be reputed the children of the lawful husband to
the adulteress, and yet are indeed bastards, and for the most part may be
discerned so to be by their bastardly conditions; so is it with them that
living in the Church of God do profess them selves to be the children of God,
and be so reputed by other, and yet have no communion with Christ. Though they
be reputed to be the children of God, yet they are no better then bastards, and
bastards they bewray themselves to be, by their bastardly minds and
conversation.

Although therefore in one respect we reckoned Christ before amongst the
efficient causes of our regeneration, and that therefore in respect of his
excellency our regeneration also is to be accounted the more excellent: yet in
another respect, he may also be accounted the material cause of our
regeneration, even as natural parents are both the efficient causes of our
natural birth, and do likewise communicate the matter of their bodies unto
ours. And so the more excellent that before we heard Christ to be, the more we
may again conclude the dignity of Gods children to be by his being the chief
material cause (as well as the efficient cause) of their regeneration. For as
that that is made of silver, or gold, or any other such like precious matter,
is it self more precious then other things made of brass, tin, lead, iron,
Copper, or any other such vile and base matter (the quantity of things being
alike: otherwise a great vessel of copper may be better then a very small cup
of silver) so the more excellent that Christ himself is, who is the chief
matter of Gods children, and of whom they be called Christians (as that that is
made of gold is called golden) and the children of God, the more excellent
needs must be their state and condition,

CHAP. IX.
More largely showing other things concerning the matter of regeneration,
especially the renewing of the life of God in us all that are newborn, which
before were utterly void of the said life.

BUT leaving that point, (till afterward) let us in the next place look into
the excellent gifts and graces, which by the former incorporation into Christ,
the children of God do receive, and in respect whereof we are said to be
partaker of the divine nature, and the which likewise may be esteemed as parts
(as it were) of that matter whereof they do consist.

These things let us consider by opposition of that unto them, that men are
since the fall of Adam, as naturally descending from Adam, and being (as it
were) boughs and branches of him.

In Adam and by Adam, since his fall all men (Christ himself only excepted)
have utterly lost that excellent and glorious image, wherein Adam and Eve at
the first were both created: Genes 1. 26. 27. This loss of that excellent and
glorious image is described by this phrase of dying the death: Genes. 2. 17.
This death was not a natural death, but it was a spiritual death: It was not
the separation of the soul and the body, but it was the separation of God and
man, as touching that gracious familiarity which before had been betwixt them.
As the soul is the life of the body, so is God the spiritual life of the
whole man. For man is not said to be alive unto God any longer, then he is in
grace and favor with God: so that to die the death in that place, was to be
utterly deprived of the inherent grace and favor of God which before they were
created in.

From that time therefore, that our first parents had eaten of the forbidden
fruit, and thereby had defaced the image of God in them, they were drowned over
head and ears in all sin; and so now also in the state of condemnation: and
were no more able (of themselves) to have gotten out of the same, then a man
drowned and dead in the bottom of a great river, or pond, is able of himself
to get out. And this is that dying the death before spoken of, even a
spiritual death, ten thousand times worse then any natural death: I mean,
then any separation of the soul and body, though the same be by never so
violent means. For it is the beginning and first step unto that everlasting
death of body and soul, whereof afterward we shall speak more at large: and
from the which, neither we could have freed our selves, neither could any
other creatures, or all creatures, if God himself had not sent his own son,
as before has been showed. And that spiritual life which is contrary to the
said death, and which is also the first effect of Christ in us after that once
we are ingrafted and incorporated into him, is the next point of the matter of
our regeneration, and being the children of God.

That we may the better see what this life of God is in us, let us first more
largely consider what the former death is, and how all men are by nature wholly
possessed thereof. That therefore which the Apostle says of the Ephesians, is
to be understood of all men by nature: viz. that they are dead in sins and
trespasses. Ephesians. 2. 1. without God and without Christ in the world (verse
12.) as not believing in God or Christ, and therefore being condemned already,
as before we heard our Savior to say: Ioh. 3. 18. and the rather were they so
indeed dead in their sins, because they were the children of him that had the
power of death, that is, of the devil. Heb. 2. 14. compared with Ioh. 8. 44.
For Satan having once put out the light and the life of God in Adam, whereby
he was the child of God, like unto God, did make him a son to himself; so
that as before he did bear the image of God, so for ever afterward he and
all his (Christ only excepted) did bear the image of the devil: in which
respect it is said generally, that he that commits sin is of the devil:
1. John 3. 8.

Thus we see, that our natural state is not as the Papists plead it to be, by
allegorizing upon him that our Savior says did fall into the hands of
thieves, and was by them wounded and left half dead. Luk 10. 30. but far
worse: not half miserable, but altogether miserable: not wounded, and yet
alive, though half dead, but so wounded, that we are altogether dead.

We have a vegetative and an animal life, as all living and brutish creatures
have: we have a reasonable life, to talk, and reason and discourse, and
determine and conclude of natural things, and of things pertaining to this
life, whereby we differ from beasts: but as touching the spiritual life
whereby to think of any thing, to affect any thing, to approve of any thing,
to speak of any thing, or to do any thing toward eternal salvation of body
and soul; and as touching that life of God, that is, that life that is
acceptable to God, (as the work of God: Ioh. 6. 29. and the works of the
Lord: 1. Cor, 15. 5. 8. are such as are acceptable to God) as touching this
life (I say) which is the first degree and the very beginning of eternal life,
to be afterward enjoyed with God and his holy Angels in heaven, all the whole
posterity of Adam (Christ only still excepted) is altogether void of. For as
the root and stock of a tree, being altogether dead without any spark of
natural life therein, it is not possible that any of the boughs or branches can
be alive; and as it is not possible for those men and women that are altogether
naturally dead (their souls and bodies being separated one from another) to
bring forth living children: so it is not possible, that our first parents
being altogether dead unto God, and without the life of God before spoken of,
we or any other of their posterity should be alive unto God.

They may seem to have this spiritual life, and this life of God, because
after a natural manner they can conceive, and do conceive some things
thereof; yea (sometimes) the greatest mysteries thereof, either after a mere
carnal sort; or by the special wisdom of God revealing the same unto them
for the furthering of the salvation of other, and for the making of themselves
the more inexcusable, and so for the increasing of their own condemnation: but
in truth and deed they are altogether destitute of it. In this case it is with
them, as it is with many a woman, that having a Tympany, and by the abundance
of water, or of some other matter of the said Tympany or other such like
disease, feeling some little stirring in her body, like the moving of a young
infant, does therefore think her self with child: and yet in the end she is
deceived, being not with child with any other thing then of a disease unto
death: so (I say) many natural and wicked men having some similitude, and like
actions of the life of God in them; and feeling as it were some little motions
of such life, (as it were little flashes, suddenly wrought, and suddenly
vanishing, like lightning) do therefore think themselves with child of Christ,
and to have conceived him in the womb of their hearts, but in the end they are
deceived, and find themselves only with child of a spiritual sickness unto
death; that is, of hypocrisy and of a bare resemblance of the life of God in
them, and not to have that life it self.

This is not only evident by the former testimony of the Apostle, but also by
another afterward in the same Epistle, where he describes our natural state
and condition to be, that we had our understanding darkened, and were strangers
from the life of God through the ignorance that was in us because of the
hardness of our hearts. Ephesians. 4. 18. Thus (I say) in that place the Apostle
describes the state of all men naturally.

The same namely that we are all void of that life of God, is manifest by other
reasons.

To omit that before insinuated, viz. that as the body is dead without the
communion of the soul, so man cannot be alive unto God that has lost his
communion with God: and that indeed naturally men are without God in the world,
and that because they are without Christ: Ephesians. 2. 12. by whom alone there is
communion betwixt God and man, and in whom alone is that life so that he that
has the son has life: and he that has not the son has not that life: 1.
Ioh. 5. 11. 12. although after a common manner effectiuely we all live, move,
and have our being in God: Acts 17. 18. To omit (I say) this reason, the same
is further manifest, because all mere natural men, are also without the
immortal seed of God in them, whereby they should be borne again the children
of God. This immortal seed is the spirit of God, as before we have heard. Mere
natural men therefore being without this seed, how can they have the life of
God in them?

Again, if naturally we have this life of God in us, it must be in our souls,
or in our bodies. It is neither in our souls, nor in our bodies: therefore not
at all.

Touching our souls, what life of God can be in them, when as we cannot so
much as think a good thought of our selves? 2. Cor. 3. 5. but all the
imaginations of our heart are continually evil: Genes. 6. 5. and when as we
cannot so much as will any thing that is good of our selves; but it is God that
works the will as well as the work? Philip. 2. 13.

Where there is any life, there will be some hunger and thirst after meat and
drink for preserving of life, or at least some desire of other means of life.
But (alas) so far are we from all hunger and thirst after either bread or
water of life, that we do utterly refuse them and reject them offered unto us.
Yea, (that which is more) we lay forth our silver for that which is not bread:
and we labor and take great pains for that which will not satisfy us: Isai.
55. 2. Those things therefore being as it were the very breath of the life of
God, if we have them not, how can we have that life of God it self? For what
life can there be without breath?

If our souls be thus dead, what life of God can be in our bodies? As our
Savior says: If the light that is in us be darkness, how great is that
darkness? Matthew. 6. 23. so may I say, If the life that is in us be deadness,
how great is that deadness?

Our ears cannot attend to the word of God, (therefore also not to any other
goodness) except God open our hearts, Acts 16. 14. we cannot so much as turn
our eyes from any vanity except the Lord do turn them, Ps. 119. 36. we cannot
open our lips that our mouth may show forth the praise of God, except God do
open them. Psalm. 51. 15. neither can we so much as say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the holy ghost: 1. Cor. 12. 5.

Moreover, this our spiritual death does appear by our bearing all spiritual
burdens (though never so heavy) without any sense and feeling of them. What is
heavier then sand? yet all the sand ^n the whole world, yea the whole earth
with all the minerals of silver, gold, lead, iron, tynne, and pewter, with all
the quarries of stones, with all the buildings and all other creatures
thereupon, is not so heavy as sin. Did not the imputation only of other men's
sins unto Christ lie so heavy upon him, that he (though he were God and man)
was in such an agony that his sweat was like drops of blood: yet do all men
remaining in their natural state, and not being born again, go under their
own inherent sins, original and actual, how long so ever they have
continued in them, and howsoever they have multiplied and aggrauated them; they
go under them (I say) as lightly, without any sense or feeling of the weight
and burden of them, as though indeed they had none at all. Is not this an
evident argument of extreme deadness? For what do they that are once dead
feel, whatsoever is laid upon them? To speak all in a word, and not to stand
any longer upon particulars, the Apostle from other scriptures does not only
say that we are dead unto all goodness, but also that in every part and member
of our whole man, we are alive unto all evil. For thus he describes the
natural state of all men: There is none righteous, no not one. There is none
that does understand: there is none that seeks God. They have all gone out of
the way: they have been made altogether unprofitable: there is none that does
good, no not one: their throat is an open sepulcher they have used their
tongues to deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their lips. Their mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood, etc. Romans 3.
10. By these things we see, that though natural men do live, yet as it is said
of the widow that lives in pleasures, that she is dead, whiles she lives, 1.
Tim. 5. 6. so it may be said of all natural men, living in the pleasures of
sin, that they are dead whiles they so live.

This our living unto sin and in sin, (being dead to all goodness) may in
some sort be called a spiritual life: not as spiritual is opposed to carnal,
but in two other respects: first, because it is from that unclean spirit,
Mark. 1. 23. and 7. 25. 26 who is not only the father of lies, Ioh. 8. 44. but
also of all other evil: secondly, because all the works of a sinful life are
performed to the same unclean spirit.

Therefore the Apostle says not only, that we are (naturally) dead in
trespasses, but also that we walked in them after the Prince that rules in
the air, that is, according to his commandment and prescription: Ephesians. 2. 2
Our Savior also says that such sins are the works and lusts of the devil:
Ioh. 8. 41. 44. And as Idolaters are said to sacrifice to devils, 1. Cor. 10.
20. so all wicked men may be said to do all that they do unto devils. Thus we
see in part the miserable and woeful state of all natural men. For what is
more fearful then death? when Saul did but hear (only by the father of lies
in the likeness of Samuel; and therefore the rather speaking the truth, that
he might the more confirm Saul in his error touching the raising of Samuel)
when (I say) Saul did but hear, that the next day he should be delivered into
the hands of the Philistines and be slain, how did it affect him? How did it
strike him with fear? verily so, that he fell straightway all along upon the
earth, and there was no strength in him: yea so that neither the woman, (the
witch that had raised up the devil in the likeness of Samuel) nor any of his
own servants with him could scarce fasten any comfort upon him: 1. Sam. 28. 20.
etc. If the very tidings of this natural death be so fearful, how much more
fearful is that spiritual death before spoken of?

Having thus in part showed our natural misery by these things spoken of our
spiritual deadness, let us now see the change that is made in us by our
incorporation into Christ, in our adoption, and regeneration. Let us therefore
understand that in our said regeneration and new birth by Jesus Christ, we are
delivered from that our foresaid miserable state. As before we did bear the
image of the earthly man. so now we bear the image of him, that is from heaven
heavenly: that is, of the Lord Christ. As Christ in his divine essence, is the
brightness of the glory of the father, and the ingraued form of his person,
Heb. 1. 3. so we in quality being made partaker of the divine nature; and being
in Christ made new creatures, and being also the workmanship of God in Christ
Jesus, created unto good works, that we should walk in them, (as has been
before showed by several scriptures) we are by this means made like to Christ
Jesus, and consequently also to God himself.

As therefore the Apostle says that naturally we are dead in sins and
trespasses, so he says in the same place, that God which is rich in mercy,
through his great love wherewith he loved us even when we were so dead by
sins (or in sins) has quickened us, (or made us alive) in Christ, Ephe. 2.
4. 5. Where let it be observed that the word (quickened) is only expressed
originally in that Note.
fifth verse, and that although it be interposed by translators in the first
verse, for perspicuities sake (as they thought) yet it is rather there to be
omitted: and that that first verse is rather to be read with the last verse of
the first chapter of Christ's filling all things in all things (or with all
things) that is, with all gifts fit for every one: so that the verb filled, is
rather to be understood in the first verse, then the verb quickened: and that
first verse to be understood as an amplification of the general handled in the
end of the former Chapter, by the particular instance of the Ephesians, as if
he should have said: As Christ has generally filled all things given unto him
by the father, with all gifts fit for them, so particularly he has filled you
that were by nature dead in your trespasses and sins: and so he describes by
that occasion their natural state: verse. 1. 2. 3. and then he describes our
new and spiritual state in the 4. and 5. verses by Jesus Christ.

But to leave this place, and to return to the former point of Christ's freeing
us from spiritual death, and quickening us and making us alive again, Paul
says further, that Christ has abolished death, and brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel: 2. Tim. 1. 10. which Gospel is
therefore called the word of life. Ioh. 6. 68. Philip. 2. 16.

Our Savior likewise says: Verily verily I say unto you, the hour shall
come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and
they that hear it shall live. For as the father has life in himself, so
likewise has he given to the son to have life in himself. Ioh. 5. 25. 26.
viz. to bestow life upon all that the father has given unto him. Ioh. 10. 28.
29. Every where (says Paul again) we bear about in our bodies, the dying of
our Lord Jesus (that is, every where we do in a manner die daily for Jesus his
sake. 1. Cor. 15. 38.) But wherefore? That the life of Jesus might also be made
manifest in our bodies. 2. Cor. 4. 10. But what means he, by making manifest
the life of Jesus in our bodies? Nothing but this, that by their constant,
patient, and cheerful sufferings of so many things (as it were so many deaths
for Christ's sake) all men might the better see, how Christ had quickened them,
and what great measure of spiritual life he had wrought in them? So the
Apostle tells the Romans, that they were dead to sin, but alive to God, in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6. 11. Of himself he says, I am crucified with
Christ, but I live: yet not I any more, but Christ lives in me: and in that
that now I live in the flesh, (that is, in this frail and mortal condition,
as the word flesh is taken, Heb. 5. 7.) I live by faith in the son of God,
etc? Gal. 2. 20. Many other the like places to the same purpose, I do
willingly for bear, that I may not be too tedious. By these we do
sufficiently see, that being borne anew unto God in Christ, we are not
still-borne (as men use to speak of children dead before birth) but that we
have a spiritual life in him and by him. Yet let us understand this by the
way, that our spiritual life by Christ Jesus, is not altogether the Note.
same that our former spiritual death was by Adam, and by our sins traduced
from Adam. For, as we have heard, we were perfectly dead, (not half dead) in
our sins by Adam: even so dead that we were altogether void of the life of
God, and without any remnants of the former image of God in us. But our life
renewed by Jesus Christ, is not in this world perfect, and without some remnant
of the old Adam in us. Therefore we are willed every day, to put off the old
man: Ephesians. 4. 2. and that we cast away all filthiness, and superfluity of
malitiousnesse. I am. 1. 21. 1. Pet. 2. 1. as also that we put on Christ: Romans
13. 14. and the new man, which after God (or according to God) is created unto
righteousness in true holiness: Ephesians. 4. 24. etc. No man therefore has so
put off or cast off the old man, but that there be still some rags and
patches remaining of him. No man has so put on the new man, but that he may
put him on somewhat more. As no man puts on all his apparel at once, but
first one thing, then another, so is it with putting on of Christ Jesus. All
our life here is but as it were the morning of the life to come, to dress us
for our marriage unto Christ: as Paul says that he had prepared the Corinthians
(that is, he had labored to dress them) for one husband, and to present them
a pure virgin unto Christ: 2. Cor. 11. 2. Notwithstanding that which remains
of the old man, is but (as I said) pieces and patches. For there is such a rent
made in him by Christ, that all remaining is but as rags, torn one from
another, and not sown together, and therefore such, as in the end will be the
more easily shaken off. Though all our former sins do remain in substance
in us, yet Christ has so taken away their life from them, that they are but as
wounds in a dead body. As Christ in his resurrection Note.
had some scarres remaining in his body (of the wounds which he had received
before his death) and that the better to assure weak and unbelieving Thomas,
and all other therein like to Thomas, that he was the same that had been before
put to death: so in our regeneration to be the children of God, whereby we are
buried with Christ unto his death: Romans 6. 4. Colos. 2. 12. and raised up
likewise with him by his resurrection to newness of life, Coloss. 3. 1. there
remain some scarres of our old man and of those things whereby and wherein
before we were dead, to put us the better in mind, what we were by nature
before Christ quickened us and restored us to life. The said sins also so
remaining touching their bodies (as it were) are so without life by Christ's
quickening of us, that they are but as dead carcases, to show what a mighty
victory Christ has gotten in us. Furthermore the most that can be said of the
sins remaining in the regenerated, is this, that being wounded to death, they
are mortified, as quicksiluer is mortified in ointments. For as the quicksiluer
in the bodily substance of it remains, but is killed touching the life and
all hurtful power that before it had, and so is made sovereign to some
healthful uses by mixture of other things with it (which also may be said of
the converting of any other things of a venomous nature in themselves, to be
antidots and preservatives against poison by art, and mixture of other things
with them:) so the sins of the regenerate remaining touching their carcases,
are spoiled of their life, and of all hurtful power before in them: and being
mixed (as it were) with the grace of God infused in us, and communicated unto us
by Christ, in some respects (partly before, and partly afterward to be more
spoken of) are turned to our good. Finally touching the life of our sins
remaining in us, after regeneration, it is no other then the life that
remains in the body of a serpent, the head whereof is crushed in pieces. For
though the body of such a serpent, may perhaps move a little; yet it is but for
a time, and it can do no harm at all.

This spiritual life thus hitherto spoken of, is to be discerned by our
spiritual breathing, and by other spiritual effects thereof. As the natural
life is to be discerned by natural breathing, and by other natural effects
suitable thereunto: so is our spiritual life by spiritual breathing, and by
other spiritual effects. By spiritual breathing, I mean spiritual thoughts
and meditations of the mind and the like motions and affections of the heart.
If therefore, whereas naturally our minds are set altogether upon earthly
things, there shall be such a change wrought in us, that they shall be as much
set upon the things that are above where Christ Jesus sits at the right hand
of God, Coloss. 3. 1. as before they were set upon the things here below: and
if we shall covet and desire, and every way affect heavenly things, as much as
ever we have done earthly, then shall we have good testimony to our selves,
that we are borne from above and are the children of him that is the father of
lights and of every good and perfect gift: whereas before also we loathed the
Manna that came down from heaven, as much as the people of Israel even loathed
that Manna that God gave them in the wilderness for feeding of their bodies,
we shall on the contrary hunger as much after the bread of God that lasts to
eternal life, and thirst after the water of life, which whosoever drinks of
he shall never thirst again; and if we shall as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word that we may grow thereby, 1. Pet. 2. 2. this shall be
a further assurance to our own hearts that we our selves are borne of God.

The like is to be said of other spiritual actions, so also of our spiritual
growth and increase. For as the natural child newborn does daily wax and
increase in stature and in strength till it be able to go and to do other
things answerable to the growth thereof, as digesting of stronger meats,
bearing of burdens, speaking like a man, etc: so is it with all that are newborn, not of mortal but of immortal seed by the word of God. They will be
able to digest high points of doctrine, and not say of some things, as some
said of Christ's doctrine touching his flesh to be meat in deed, and his blood
to be drink indeed, This is an hard saying; who can hear it? and so take
occasion to leave Christ, and to walk no more with him: Ioh. 6. 60. and 66.
They will be able to walk strongly up and down, not stumbling at every straw.

They will be able to bear Gods chastisements without murmuring, and wrongs
at the hands of men without seeking revenge, etc. They will be able to do the
works of God, both belonging to all Christians, and also which are more suitable
to their special callings. These things (I say) and such like, will all borne
again, grow to do: and by these things they shall discern their spiritual
birth, and the life of God to be in them. Notwithstanding these things are not
alike in all that are newborn, no not in all of the same spiritual age. For
as it is amongst natural men touching natural strength, some are of a low
stature, some of a taller, some are strong men, some are weaklings, yea,
sometimes the younger are taller and stronger then their elders by many years:
so is it amongst spiritual men touching this spiritual life, and this
spiritual birth whereof now we speak. But these things shall be more manifest,
by other things after to be spoken.

This life of God is the more excellent, because it is everlasting: Being once
begun, it shall never have end: being once given, it shall never be taken away.
Our natural life shall have an end: (I mean the life of the body and soul
together, begun and continued by natural means) and no man knows how soon.
But the life of God shall continue, as God himself abides for ever; and as
the seed whereby men are begotten to this life, is not mortal but immortal.
But of this also more afterward.

In the mean time, by that which has been said, it may appear, that this
benefit of our spiritual life, is a matter well worthy of all good account and
reckoning. This present life, which our bodies do live in this world, by their
communion with the soul, is greatly to be esteemed: yea, more then all other
things appertaining thereunto. Satan himself could say unto God, Skin for
skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his life. Job 2. 4.
Amongst the benefits for which wisdom is commended about silver and gold, and
pearls, and all things that can be desired, length of days is not only one,
but also the first, and placed in the right hand of wisdom, whereas riches
and glory are in the second place, and said to be in the left hand. Pro. 3. 16.
Our Savior says, Is not the life more worth then meat? Mat. 6. 25. What then
is to be compared unto it? what benefit shall a man have by any other thing,
yea, by all other things, if he have not meat? The Prophet says, that none of
those that trust in their goods, and beast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, can redeem his brother (viz. appointed by God to dye) or give a
ransom for him (that is, no man can by any money prolong the days of his
friend, or buy out his death) so precious is the redemption of their souls,
etc. that he may live for ever. Psalm. 49. 6. 7. 8. 9. Is this natural life so
precious, which yet (as I said) shall have an end, and no man knows, either
how soon, or in what place, or in what manner? How excellent then is that
spiritual life, the life of God, and the life that is eternal? The more
excellent therefore that this life is, (being a part of that matter wherein
consists our new birth, next to Christ himself, and coming by Christ,) the
more excellent also is the new birth it self of the children of God, and their
state and condition thereby. Thus much for the life of God, which all the
children of God have in their regeneration by Jesus Christ.

CHAP. X.
Of some other things further concerning the matter of the regeneration of the
children of God, and of their very being the children of God: viz. of their
knowledge of God, and of their true wisdom, declared by the opposition
thereunto of the ignorance, foolishness, and madness of all mere natural,
wicked, and unregenerate men.

TO proceed further in declaration of other things concerning the very matter
and being of the children of God, the next point to be considered, is the true
knowledge, understanding and wisdom wherewith all the children of God are
endued and enlightened. And these things are to be taken as some particular
degrees of the life of God generally before spoken of, as also as parts of the
new man, and of the image of God repaired and restored in our regeneration: yea
finally as parts also of our said regeneration it self: Of these things I will
speak as before I have done generally of the life of God: viz. by opposing
unto them the natural ignorance, foolishness, and madness of all natural
men not regenerated, that so by this opposition of their contraries, the said
true knowledge, understanding and wisdom, may be made manifest to be the more
excellent things, and the more to set forth the dignity of our regeneration.
Now as these things (I mean this our natural ignorance, foolishness, and
madness) be contrary to true knowledge, understanding, and wisdom, so the
contrary may be said of these evils, that has been said of those virtues, viz.
that as those virtues are degrees and parts of the life of God of the new man,
and of the image of God newly created in all that are regenerated: so these
evils are also to be accounted as degrees and parts of that death; of that old
man, and of that image of Satan in all the unregenerate, before generally
touched.

Touching both these contraries, they are expressed first by certain
metaphors, the better to set forth their nature. These metaphors are, light and
darkness; sight and blindness, and such other phrases as are suitable to the
said metaphors. Secondly, they are further taught by their own proper words,
even the words before mentioned. Touching the foresaid metaphors the Apostle
says first of the two first couple (light and darkness) The night is past and
the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armor of light. Romans 13. 12. And again: Ye were once darkness,
but are now light, walk as the children of the light. Ephesians. 5. 8. And have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, verse 11. And again, Who
has delivered us from the power of darkness and translated us into the
kingdom of his dear son. Coloss. 1. 13. So he teaches, that there is no
participation of the kingdom of Christ, except first we be delivered from the
power of darkness: And again: But ye brethren, are not in darkness that that
day should come on you as it were a thief; ye are all the children of the
light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, neither of
darkness: 1. The. 5. 4. 5. Peter says: Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood an holy nation: a peculiar people: that ye should show forth the
virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light:
1. Pet. 2. 9. John says: The darkness is past and the true light now shines.
1. Ioh. 2. 8. Zachariah the father of John Baptist says: that the day spring
from on-high had visited them, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death. Luke 1. 78. 79.

By darkness in all the places before alleged is meant that extreme ignorance
without any knowledge of God, wherewith the minds of all men naturally are
overwhelmed before such time as they be regenerated. The same is likewise
signified by the word blindness in diverse other places. The Lord gives light
to the blind. Psa. 146. 8. that is, the Lord gives knowledge to them that are
ignorant. The Prophet also setting forth the glory of Christ's kingdom, says:
Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened: Isai. 55. 5. that is, then they
shall beenlightned with the true knowledge of God, that before were altogether
ignorant of him, and knew no more for their salvation, then a stone-blind man
does see colors. The same Prophet speaking of the office of Christ says, that
the Lord had called him etc. that he might open the eyes of the blind, and
bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of
the prison house. Isai. 42. 7. The Apostle Paul also speaks the very like of
his Apostleship, noting the end thereof to have been to open the eyes of the
Gentiles (here he signifies that before they were spiritually blind) that they
might turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Acts
26. 18. Our Savior says of every plant whom the father had not planted, that
they were blind leaders of the blind, and, if the blind lead the blind, they
shall both fall into the ditch. Matthew. 15. 14. Upon the opening also of his
eyes that had been borne bodily blind, our Savior says: I am come unto
judgment into this world that they which see not (that is, which are blind and
ignorant of God and of the things pertaining to their everlasting peace) might
see: and that they which did see (that is, that thought they knew much) might
be made blind: (that is, might have that taken from them which they seemed to
have: Luke 8. 18.) Upon which words of our Savior the Pharisees replying, Are
we also blind? our Savior answers further, If ye were blind, ye should not
have sin etc. John 9. 39. 40. 41. that is, if ye were ignorant indeed, your
sin should be so much the less. I might heap up many other the like
testimonies touching the said metaphors of darkness and blindness so applied:
But these alleged shall be sufficient. They are both used in the former, and in
other places to signify the same thing, viz. the darkness, blindness and
extreme ignorance of our minds concerning God and our salvation, because indeed
they are both of like nature. For he that is in darkness can see nothing,
though he have never so good eyes: and he that is blind can likewise see
nothing, though the sun, or moon or stars, or candles, or fire be never so
clear or bright.

By these metaphors does the holy ghost so often express our ignorance,
because they do best agree with that which before we heard of our being by
nature the children of the devil, who is called the prince of darkness:
Ephesians. 6. 12. and whose kingdom is said to be the place of utter darkness.
Mat. 8. 12. and 22. 13. and 25. 30. as also because they do well agree with
the maine thing before spoken of the spiritual death of all natural and
unregenerated men: for they that are dead are also deprived of all sight: and
therefore they be in continual darkness. In which respect death is described
to be the land of darkness. Job 10. 21. and the Psalmist says: Will thou
show a miracle to the dead, or shall the dead rise and praise thee? Shall thy
loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in destruction?
then he adds, Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark, etc. Psalm.
88. 10. 11. 12. And finally that so we might the better see the uncomfortable,
woeful, and most miserable estate and condition of all men naturally, to make
them the more thankful for their comfortable, joyful, and most blessed change
by grace and regeneration. For is not darkness one of the great judgments
inflicted by the Lord upon the sons of men for their most heinous sins? was
it not one of Gods fearful judgments in Egypt? Exodus 10. 22. When our
Savior was most wickedly and unrighteously put to death (the greatest sin
that ever was before committed) was there no: darkness in all the land from
the sixth hour to the ninth? Mat. 27. 45.

The like may be said of blindness: When the Sodomites came upon Lot, to have
abused the Angels entertained by him, did not the said Angels smite them with
blindness: Genesis 19. 11. Amongst the rest of the judgments also which the Lord
threatens to the Israelites, if they should not obey him, etc, does he not
threaten to smite them with madness and blindness? Deuteronomy. 28. 28.

Where let it be observed that he conioineth madness and blindness: let
this (I say) be observed, for the better manifestation of that which afterward
I shall say touching the madness of all men naturally. When Elymas also the
Sorcerer resisted Paul, was he not stricken with blindness for certain days?
Acts 13. 8. Again, who knows not by his own experience, how fearful a
thing darkness and blindness is? when the mist and darkness before signified
fell upon Elymas, did not he go about seeking one to lead him? does not any man
that is blind or in darkness groap here and there? Is he not every minute in
danger? at least does he not, and may he not continually fear? Is it not more
uncomfortable to walk or ride one mile in the night, then six in the day time?
If outward darkness, and bodily blindness be so uncomfortable, what (alas)
is to be said of inward darkness, and of the spiritual blindness of the
mind? If it be an heavy thing to be deprived of all light of Sun, Moon,
Stars, candle, and other fire, how heavy is it to be utterly destitute of the
light of the Sun of righteousness?

As darkness and blindness be most uncomfortable, so who knows not how
sweet and comfortable the contrary light and sight are? And if the outward
light and bodily sight be so sweet and comfortable, how much more sweet and
comfortable are spiritual light, and the sight of the inward man? These things
I might amplify by many arguments, the more to set forth the dignity of Gods
children, that do only enjoy the said spiritual light, and whose minds do
behold and understand the high things of God, pertaining to their salvation:
but because it follows to speak of them in the next place, therefore this
shall be sufficient to have spoken here.

Thus to leave the former metaphors, I come to the things signified by them.
Touching therefore the ignorance of God in all natural and unregenerate men,
we heard before that the Apostle speaking of the Gentiles as they were such,
had joined these together, having their understanding darkened, and being
strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in them. Ephesians.
4. 18. To the same purpose speaking again of the state of himself and other
before regeneration he says, We were in times past unwise, etc. Tit. 3. 3.
That which before we alleged out of the third to the Romans, as by other
things to describe the natural state of all men, so by this that none
whatsoever does understand any thing, shall not need here to be repeated. Yea,
so far are all men naturally from all true knowledge of God, that they are
utterly incapable thereof. For the natural man perceives not the things of
the spirit of God. for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know
them; for they are spiritually discerned: 1. Cor. 2. 14. Yea, the more natural
wit and understanding men have (which is called natural wisdom, or the
wisdom of the flesh) the further off they are from all true knowledge and
wisdom of God. For the wisdom of ^he flesh is death, enmity against God;
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be* Romans 8. 6. 7. Therefore
elsewhere the Apostle says, that God has not chosen many wise men after the
flesh, but the foolish things of the wo^ld, and things that are despised, to
bring to naught things that are, etc. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. By the neuter gender
here he means the masculine, and by things he understands persons: as
also we have the like phrase: John 6. 37. Colossians 1. 20. Ephesians 1. 10.

This is a point of great moment, and the more worthy a little more to be
insisted upon, because many natural men are men of great humane learning, in
the tongues, in the arts, in all philosophy, in the laws and statutes of
kingdoms: in martial and civil affairs for war and for peace. And for
such learning they are often times in great reputation, in great honor and
authority: even advanced to be great states men, to stand before the mighty
Princes of the world, to give counsel unto them, and accounted the only men
for policy and government of kingdoms. Such were Achitophel and Ioab; and such
(no doubt) are many in these days in many kingdoms: and such have been many
in all ages: which notwithstanding are so far from all true knowledge of God,
that they do utterly distaste the same, and oppose themselves with tooth and
nail, with might and maine thereunto.

Some also (mere natural men) have such knowledge in the mysteries of God,
that they can teach other, and being called to the ministry do convert
others, themselves being castawaies. For Judas received gifts, and a commission
to preach as well as other: and it is not to be doubted, but that he did some
good by the exercise of his gifts, and execution of his commission, as well as
other. For there is no commandment or commission from God, without a promise
of a blessing: and there is no promise of a blessing, but that God some way or
other, and in some measure or other does perform the same: because he that
has promised is faithful, Heb. 10. 23. Therefore our Savior says, that in
the last day many should plead that they had prophesied even in his name, and
that in his name they had cast out devils: whom notwithstanding he would reject
as mere natural and wicked men, saying unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. Mat. 7. 22. 23. what shall we say of such men,
so highly accounted of in the world? so greatly advanced? so deeply learned,
even in divinity? and doing so great things? Are they all unwise? Are they all
without understanding? Are they all fools? yea verily: the Scripture and God
himself that is only wise, and knows best what men are, has so pronounced
of them. Man therefore need not fear to give the like sentence and judgment
of such, so long as they continue natural and wicked men themselves, though
they convert, and make never so many other wise and righteous. Such sentence
and judgment, is not the sentence and judgment of man, but of God.

This appears by the description of true wisdom in the word of God. For
Paul by opposing the word unwise, to the understanding of the will of the Lord,
and saying: Be not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians.
5. 17. does plainly teach true wisdom to be understanding the will of the
Lord, and that all that do not understand, what the will of the Lord is, are
unwise. But what will of the Lord does the Apostle mean? Only that that is
revealed in his word. Therefore it is said that the testimony of the Lord
gives wisdom unto the simple. Psalm. 19. 7. and that the scriptures (that is,
the word written) are able to make men wise to salvation. 2. Tim. 3. 15.

Therefore also the fear of the Lord (which is the keeping of Gods
commandments. Eccles. 12. 13.) is often called the beginning of wisdom, or
the chief and most principal wisdom. Job 28. 28. Psalm. 111. 10. Pro. 1. 7.
Yea, the truth is, that there is no good and sound policy for the government of
kingdoms and common wealths, but by the word of God. Therefore in this very
case the Prophet speaks thus, to the Priests, and Prophets, and Doctors of
the Law, that took upon them to be politicians and states men without the word
of God: They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?
Ierem. 8. 9.

So when Saul had made more haste then good speed in offering sacrifice before
Samuels coming, and that contrary to Samuels direction in that behalf, Samuel
feared not to tell him, that he had done foolishly, because he had not kept
the commandment of God: and that the Lord would have stablished his kingdom
for ever: but that now his kingdom should not continue, etc. 1. Sam. 13. 13.
14. Because also Asa, (though otherwise a worthy king) had made a covenant with
Benbadad king of Syria, to aid him against Baasha King of Israel, Hanani the
Seer, did rebuke him in the very same terms, telling him that he had done
foolishly, etc. as Samuel had reproved Saul: 2. Chro. 16. 9. If therefore they
were justly charged to have done foolishly, because they had done that which
they did against the commandment of God: then by the same reason, all natural
men be no better then fools, for as much as they do all neglect and contemn
the commandments of God.

The same is further manifest, because Moses exhorts the Israelites to the
keeping of Gods commandments by this argument, that they should be their
wisdom and their understanding in the sight of the people; which hearing all
those ordinances should say, Only this people is wise and of understanding.
Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

Moreover, Christ Jesus is called the wisdom of his father, Luke 11. 49. he
is said, to have all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge hid in him:
Coloss. 2. 3. Upon him the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord
does rest, Isai. 11. 2.

Where the uniting the spirit of wisdom, understanding, Note.
counsel and knowledge, with the spirit of fear, does teach, that where there
is not the spirit of fear, but the spirit of boldness, security, presumption,
and other impiety, there is not the spirit of wisdom, of understanding, of
counsel, or of any true knowledge, according to that before said in that
behalf; He has the seven spirits of God in his hand Revel. ^. 2. that is, all
the gifts of the spirit of God: which though he be but one in his essence, 1.
Cor. 12. 11. Ephesians. 4. 4. yet is called seven in respect of the diversity of his
gifts, and more specially because of the seven Churches, to which he writes
those seven Epistles: and yet all that variety of gifts is called by the name
of spirits, because one and the self same spirit works them all, or
distributeth them all, as the former place to the Corinthians witnesses. As
therefore none could have any corn in Egypt but by the hands of Joseph, so
Christ Jesus is the high Lord Treasurer of heaven for the dispensing of all the
gifts of the spirit; in respect where of none can have any but such only as
come to his gates and give attendance at the posts of his doors. Pro. 8. 33.

To comprehend all the arguments hitherto used in one, thus I argue against all
natural and wicked men: They that have not the understanding of Gods will
revealed in his written word: They that fear not the Lord in keeping his
commandments: They that are without Christ Jesus, are utterly void of true
wisdom, and therefore be stark fools. All natural and wicked men are
without understanding of Gods will revealed in his written word; They fear not
God in keeping his commandments, and they are without Christ: Therefore they
are utterly void of true wisdom and be stark fools.

If any shall reply and ask how it can be that all before mentioned (natural
and wicked men) may be said to be without knowledge, or understanding: I answer
as before, with addition notwithstanding of John's words: He that says, I know
him, and keeps not his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
1. Ioh. 2. 4. For indeed how can any man say that he knows God to be most
just, almighty, and able to be revenged of every sin against him, and yet
dares to break his commandments? And how can any man say that he knows God
to be most wise, most gracious, most kind, most merciful, and long suffering,
and yet does not love him? Or how can he say he loves him, and keeps not his
commandments? Ioh. 14. 15. It is therefore most certain, that no man does
truly know God, that does not love and obey him.

But let us show the former point (all natural men to be unwise and foolish)
by some other reasons. Thus therefore I proceed. True wisdom makes them that
have it the better. All natural and wicked men are no whit the better for all
the learning and other knowledge they have. They lose all that they do
according to such learning and knowledge. They get nothing thereby but only
heap up the more judgment and condemnation to themselves. Luke 12. 47.
Therefore consequently they are unwise and fools. Do we not so account of men
in the world? viz. that they are very simple men, and of no understanding, yea,
stark fools, that shall altogether busy themselves, and spend their time,
their strength, and their wits, and their money about matters of no profit? or
that shall toil and moile, early and late for trifles, and neglect matters of
moment, and great worth? The best we say of such is, that they are penny wise,
and pound foolish. Why then may we not so judge and speak of natural men, and
of all continuing in their natural condition, which (as was said before by
Isaiah) lay out silver and not for bread, and labor and be not satisfied? Isai.
55. 2. and which follow altogether vain things (as Samuel speaks, which
shall not profit them? 1. Sa. 12. 21. For certainly when they have done all that
they can, yet it may be said to them as Paul speaks to the Romans, What
fruit have you in those things? Romans 621. Yea, though they should get never so
much honor, and wealth in the world, yea, though they should win the whole
world, yet what profit shall they have, if they lose their own souls? Mark. 8
36. May not God say unto such (for all their reputation, for wisdom, etc.) as
he said to the rich man, that having great increase of corn, took care only
for building his barnes greater, and living after in pleasures, and never
thought of any thankfulness to God or of doing any good with his abundance
unto men, O fool? etc. Luke 12. 20.

Moreover, as the word before translated unwise, Ephesians. 5. 17. Tit. 3. 3. and
foolish, Galat. 3. 1. signifies mad men: so in truth natural men are no
better then those whom for distraction or loss of their natural wits, we
account mad men; yea, many distracted in their wits, or bereaved of their
understanding, either by abundance of melancholy, or by fears, or by some
accident, or by age, etc. are in a far better state for the life to come then
mere natural men, so long as they do so continue. For I doubt not but that
the very dear children of God regenerated by the spirit, and believing in
Jesus Christ, are subject to that outward calamity as well as other; and as
well as themselves are subject to other diseases arising of natural causes:
and yet The foundation of God remains firm touching them: The Lord knows
who are his. 2. Tim. 2. 19.

That it is so, that is, that natural men (whiles they be such) are no better
in their said natural state, then mad men, yea, and that they are possessed with
a spiritual frenzy, or that at least they are no better then such as we call
idiots or naturals, I make plain by these furtherreasons.

1. When the prodigal child began to consider of his ways, and to bethink
himself of returning to his father, then he is said, to have come to himself.
Luke 15. 17. The prodigal son therefore representing the state of all
unregenerate men, thereby is signified, that as before his return and
submission to his Father he was no better, then as a man beside himself, and
out of his wits, so all are the like before regeneration.

2. All that make more account of bells and bables, of counters and rattles, and
of such other triffles, then they do of silver and gold, etc. are no better
then mad men, or at least then natural fools.

3. All that refuse meat, drink, and apparel (especially of the best sort)
for their bodies and for this life, are no better then mad men, or at least
then natural fools.

4. All that do continually hurt and wound themselves, and that seek by all
means to destroy themselves, are no better then mad men, or at least then
natural fools.

5. All that put no difference betwixt any men but account all alike, and that
especially regard the meanest more then the greatest, and their enemies more
then their friends, and that will be advised rather by fools then by wise men,
are no better themselves then mad men, or at least then natural fools.

6. All that wilfully transgress the lawful commandments of Kings, and so
sin against their own souls, are no better then mad men, or at least then
natural fools.

7. All that will not be kept within any bounds, but break off all bonds, are
no better then mad men, at least then natural fools.

Such are all natural and wicked men, so long as they continue in that state
and condition.

2. They make more account of the riches, honors, delights and pleasures of
this world, then they do of the most precious word of God, and of the things
that belong to the life to come, in respect whereof all things in this world
are no better then trash and dung.

3. They refuse Christ Jesus, and all other things pertaining to their
salvation in him, offered unto them in the word, as meat, and drink, and
apparel for their souls, of far more worth then all meat, and drink, and
apparel for their bodies.

4. They do daily hurt and wound their own souls, and seek by all means
everlastingly to destroy themselves, even by so many sins as they do daily
commit.

5. They account no better of one man then of another: at least they account
best of them that are the most vile: They do more regard and fear simple,
silly, weak, and mortal men, then they do the most wise, mighty, fearful,
and immortal God: and have the enemies of their salvation, which sooth them up
in sin, and provoke them daily thereunto by words and by example, in more
estimation, and they are rather advised by flattering worldlings (such as savor
only the things of the world, not the things of God.) then they do regard
their most true hearted friends, that unfeignedly wish, and by all means
(admonition, counsel, reprehension, conference, and prayer) do seek and
endeavor their salvation, or then they will be advised by such as are wise in
the Lord.

6. They do every day wilfully transgress the most holy and just
commandments of the most holy and righteous God, and so do more and more
provoke his indignation against themselves, that is the king of kings.

7. They will not be kept within any compass, they will not be directed in the
way that leads to eternal life, but break over hedge and ditch out of that
way: and they speak as the heathen did of whom the Prophet writes, saying:
Let us break their bonds, and cast their cords from us. Psalm. 2. 3. Therefore I
may well conclude them all to be no better then mad men, or at least then
natural fools.

They indeed do so account of the most excellent servants of God. For so was
the Prophet termed that anointed Iehu to be king of Israel, 2. Kings 9. 11. So
did Festus call Paul, when he spoke most excellently of heavenly things. Acts
26. 24. and so natural and worldly men do daily cast this reproachful name
upon the best children of God, esteeming them no better then a company of
fools, and mad men: but the truth is, that this belongs to themselves, and
they specially are the fools, and mad men of the world, as the former
arguments do demonstrate.

Let no man so wrest my words, as to understand me to condemn natural wit,
and understanding, or policy, and learning, etc. I do not condemn them, but
acknowledge them in themselves to be the good gifts of God. Notwithstanding
such is the corruption of nature before and without regeneration, that mere
natural men not knowing how to use them, do therefore abuse them, the more to
the dishonor of God, and to the increase of their own condemnation, even as
men reaued of their natural wits having a sword put into their hands or any
other thing (good in it self) committed unto them, do rather abuse all to the
hurt of themselves and other, then do any good at all therewith.

In respect of all these things hitherto handled, as it is said of images that
they are laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath in them, Hab.
2. 19. so it may besaid of mere natural men touching the life of God, that how
trim and gay soever they be in the world, and how great and glorious soever
they appear by their wit, or learning, or policy, etc. yet indeed they have
no breath at all of that life in them, neither any spark of true wisdom. How
base therefore is their state and condition? yea, how fearful and lamentable?
For who does not pity the state of mad men, and of such as by any means have
lost their wits? Many carnal men (I grant) do carnally make a sport of mad
men and natural fools: they make themselves merry with such (as the
Philistims abused the blindness of Sampson and used him therefore to play
before them, and to make them pastime, in their great meeting, and in their
sacrifice to Dagon their God. Judge. 16. 25) Many (I say) do even so abuse the
simplicity and lamentable madness of other to make themselves merry, but they
should rather use such examples as glasses wherein to behold the judgment of
God upon such, that may (perhaps more justly) fall upon themselves. Therefore
every time they look upon such they should fear and tremble, lest God smite
them with the like: yea they should be thankful to God, and consider of his
goodness in sparing them so long, whereas he might have made them such as
those are, and those as witty naturally as themselves. In which respect also
they should be the more careful to use their natural wit and understanding
the more to Gods glory. Achish king of Gath, (though a natural man, a wicked
man, and an heathen man) when David was brought into his presence, and fained
himself mad before him, scrabling upon the doors of the gate, and letting his
spittle fall down upon his beard (in driueling sort) said unto his servants,
lo, the man is beside himself, wherefore have ye brought him unto me? Have I
need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my
presence: Shall he come into mine house? 1. Sam 21. 13. 14. 15. So little
pleasure did Achish take in such: so far was he from making himself merry with
such, and from laughter at their behavior, that he was highly offended with
them, that had brought him before him. Hereby then we see how odious a thing
madness is. And indeed though some foolishly take pleasure in the foolishness
and madness of other, yet touching themselves, who abhors not the name of a
fool? and who fears not the state of madness? And who (I say again) not
altogether void of reason himself, especially having any spark of grace, does
not pity both them that are void of natural understanding, and also them,
that having had reason (for some secret cause) are deprived thereof (with
Nabuchadnezar) and possessed with the spirit of frenzy? Oh then what can be
said of spiritual simplicity, and of spiritual madness?

The more woeful therefore and fearful these things are, the greater is the
dignity of the children of God, who only are enlightened, and have the eyes of
their minds opened to behold the excellent wisdom of God; yea, who also are
partakers thereof. For as Christ is before generally showed to be their life,
so particularly he is their light, their understanding, and wisdom. For
therefore is he called (as we have heard) the sun of righteousness, Malac.
4. 2. and, the light of the world. Ioh. 8. 12. and 9. 5. yea, (that it may the
better appear that life and light go together) he is in one place called both
life and light, Ioh. 1. 4. As therefore the children of God being partaker of
Christ, cannot but be partaker also of life, so they must be also partaker of
light: If they be in the light, and the light in them, how can they be in
darkness? The like is to be said of knowledge and wisdom: For Christ being
the wisdom of his father, having all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
in him, and having the spirit of wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, yea,
having all the seven spirits of God (as has been showed) it must needs be that
they that have him, have also true knowledge, and true wisdom. If they that
have him not neither have life, nor light, nor knowledge, and that because they
have not him: then it must needs follow that they that have him, have also all
those; and that because they have him, and so far as they have him. Therefore
Christ is said to be made unto them not only righteousness, but also wisdom,
1. Cor. 1. 30. So then, as all newborn being incorporated into Christ, are
also partaker of his wisdom: so also all that are out of Christ are also
without wisdom. Therefore our Savior speaking of his children, says, that
to them only it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God. Mat. 13.
11. Which are hid from the wise and from men of understanding. Mat. 11. 25.
viz. from them that are worldly wise: and who being after the flesh do savor
the things only of the flesh: Romans 8. 5.

If also the fear of the Lord be (as we have heard) the beginning of wisdom,
and that wisdom do consist in keeping Gods commandments, then all that are
newborn, and so cleansed from their sins, and sanctified to the fear of
God, cannot but in that respect also be wise: the rather because it is expressly
said, that whosoever is borne of God, sins not, neither can sin, etc. Ioh.
3. 8. David testifies that by keeping Gods commandments, etc. God had made
him wiser then his enemies: of more understanding then all his teachers: and
then the ancient. Psalm. 119. 98. 100. Though every one of the children of God
cannot thus compare for wisdom with their teachers and ancients, yet they may
with their adversaries: yea, why not also with their ancients and teachers, if
such be not regenerated? For they that know the will of God and do it, are
more learned Doctors (though otherwise they be but simple men, yea, not book
learned, viz. not able to read) then all other great doctors in the world, yea,
then al doctors in divinity that are able to teach other, and do teach other,
and yet do not themselves the things which they teach other. For hereby (as we
have heard) are we sure that we know him (viz. truly and rightly) if we keep
his commandments. He that says he knows him, and keeps not his
commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1. Ioh. 2. 3.

Such great Doctors therefore as have knowledge without obedience according to
their knowledge, do indeed know nothing as they should. For what are they the
better by the knowledge of any thing, if they know not him rightly that knows
all things, and in the right knowledge of whom, and of Jesus Christ his son,
whom he has sent, is eternal life. Ioh. 17. 3.

Now touching the excellency of knowledge and wisdom, and thereby also of the
state and condition of Gods children, as it appears by the metaphors before
used, so the same is further manifest by many testimonies of Scripture. Job
magnifieth wisdom above gold and silver, and the wedge of gold: above
crystal, and the plate of fine gold: above the coral, and the precious
pearls, above the topaz of Ethiopia, and the wedge (again) of pure gold, etc.
Job. 28. 15. etc. Solomon extolletn it above the merchandise of silver, the
gain of gold, and above pearls; yea, he says that all things that a man can
desire are not to be compared unto her, etc. Pro. 13. 14. 15. etc. Where also
it is commended by diverse excellent fruits, as by the length of days, riches,
glory, pleasures eternal life and blessedness. It is in like manner
commended, Pro. 8. 10. 11. and 16. 16. In another place, he prefers it
before strength and weapons of war: Eccles. 9. 16. 18. where in the latter
comparison, the opposition he makes of wisdom is to be observed, viz. that
he says not but one fool destroieth Note.
much good. but that he says, but one sinner destroieth much good: so he
shows his meaning by wisdom to be such wisdom, as whereby men take heed
of sin, and that (according to my former writing) all sinners are fools;
whereunto it accords that David says not, The wicked man, or the sinner,
but, The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1. and 53. 1.
by the fool meaning the sinner and the wicked man.

Again, what was it that first deceived our first mother Eve? was it not a
false hope of further knowledge? does not this therefore show that knowledge is
a thing much to be desired? and that true knowledge is highly to be esteemed?
Does not Paul profess that he accounted all things loss, yea, as very dung:
even a^ the dung that is in the inwards of beasts (so the word signifies) in
respect of the excellent knowledge of Christ his Lord? Philip. 3. 78.

All these things do plainly show the great dignity of the children of God in
respect of the said knowledge and wisdom, as wherein as well as in other
things consists the very matter as it were of their so being the children of
God.

CHAP. XI.
Of some other branches of the former life of God, in all newborn, viz. of
holiness and righteousness both generally, and also in someparticulars.

LET us now proceed to some other points, both of the life of God before
mentioned, and also consequently of the further matter of our regeneration, and
new birth; that is, of other things, wherein our said new birth and
regeneration does consist; and that according to our former method in this
point, viz. of opposition of contraries. Here therefore let us remember that
before said, namely that even when men are dead in their sins and utterly
void of the life of God (before handled) then they are alive unto sin. Being
so alive unto sin they are likewise servants, not only thereunto, but also to
satan himself. For to whomsoever we give our selves as servants to obey, his
servants we are. Romans 6. 16. Job. 8. 34. 2. Pet. 2. 19. This service is the
greatest slavery and bondage of all other: far greater then the bondage of the
Israelites in the house of bondage, in the land of Egypt: because that was with
such feeling that it wrought great heaviness in them, and many prayers and
earnest desires to be released thereof. But this bondage is such by the means
of spiritual death, that there is no sense at all either of the heaviness of
sin (as has been before showed) or of the bitterness thereof: yea, though
for bitterness no wormwood nor gall be comparable to it, yet they think it
as sweet as honey and the honey comb: yea, such delight and pleasure do they
take therein, that they commit the same with greediness. Ephesians. 4. 19. Therefore
being offered liberty with most gracious conditions, they will by no means
accept thereof.

Fearful therefore in this behalf is the estate and condition of all men by
nature: yea, hereby also does that the better appear which before I handled,
concerning the natural foolishness and madness of men. For who but fools
and mad men could bear such burdens as sins are, without sense and feeling?
As therefore the very Philosophers accounted such sottish and senseless
persons for servants by nature: so this servile and slavish condition of all
men by nature, is the more fitly handled in this place, next to that before of
the foolishness and madness of all natural men, because it is an effect or
at least a consequent thereof. But what is the state of men by Jesus Christ in
their regeneration? Truly a most sweet and gracious liberty and freedom. For
as Christ is made wisdom and righteousness, so also is he made redemption
unto us. 1. Cor. 1. 30. and often do we read that Christ has redeemed us.
Tit. 2. 14. Galat. 3. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 19. and often elsewhere. Our Savior
himself says, that If men did continue in his word, then they should show
themselves to be his disciples indeed, and they should know the truth, and the
truth should make them free. Ioh. 8. 32. and again, If the son shall make
you free you shall be free indeed, verse. 36. He means in this place, freedom
from the yoke, bondage, and extreme slavery of sin. When Peter had answered
our Savior that Princes took toll or custom of strangers, our Savior
replieth, then are the children free. Mat. 17. 26. That which our Savior
speaks in that case, may be much more understood in this whereof now we
speak, because we speak of the children of God.

What Prince of power to deliver, will suffer his subjects, especially his
children, to be in bondage and captivity? How then can it be, that God being of
all power, should suffer his children to be in bondage? especially so great a
bondage as the bondage of sin?

Notwithstanding being freed from the servitude of sin, we are made the
servants of righteousness. Romans 6. 18. But this service is perfect freedom.
When any child, especially the son of a Prince, having been in captivity to
some enemies, is freed from the said captivity, does he account it any bondage
to serve his Father and sovereign? No it is his liberty and great honor that
he may serve him. When men therefore are freed from the bondage of sin and
Satan, how great is their liberty, how unspeakable is their honor, to serve
their heavenly father, the king of kings? It is not possible to serve God in
holiness, and righteousness, till first we be delivered from our enemies.
Luke 1. 74. 75. As a man laden with many fetters and irons, cannot in any
thing serve his Prince, till his said fetters and irons, be knocked off; so no
man can serve God, except first he be discharged from the bolts and fetters of
sin, ten thousand times more heavy then any irons. Therefore Paul says in
the place before alleged, that Christ gave himself for us, first, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity; secondly, that he might purge us; and
thirdly, to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works. Tit 2.
14. We cannot therefore be zealous of good works, except first we be redeemed
from the guilt of all iniquity, and purged from the blemish, and freed from the
bondage thereof.

This our freedom likewise and liberty is signified by that which before was
alleged, that he that is borne of God, sins not, neither can sin, because
the seed of God abides in him. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. that is, sin has not dominion
over him as before it had: neither can have: because being once freed, he shall
never return into the bondage thereof: neither does he sin with delight
therein so far forth as he is regenerated and borne of God. That sin
wherewith at any time he is overtaken, is but a sudden passion of the old man
remaining in him: suffered by God himself to prevail in some things, as for
some reasons before mentioned, so also for some afterward to be spoken of. By
denying also the newborn of God to sin, the Apostle insinuates that
serving of God, in holiness and righteousness which was before touched: and
so the word not to sin, is taken by our Savior, when he says to the man
restored to his limbs, Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. Ioh.
5. 14. He means not only that he should abstain from the evils forbidden,
but that also he should perform the things required in the law of God. For the
law of God saying not only Eschew evil, but also Do good: Psalm. 34. 14. he
must be a transgressor of the law, not only that does commit the evil
forbidden, but also that neglects or omitteth the good commanded. So the
distinction of sins of commission, and of sins of omission is as sound and
true, as it is ancient and common.

As God himself is not only free from all evil, but infinite also in all
goodness: so his law is like himself, and does as well command that which is
holy and just, as it forbids all unholiness, and unrighteousness.
According to this law men shall be condemned, and that most justly, as well for
leaving undone good duties, as for perpetrating and acting of those things that
are evil. It is not said, That every tree that brings forth evil fruit, but
which brings not forth good fruit shall be bewen down (or stubbed up by the
roots) and cast into the fire. Mat. 3. 10. And our Savior pronounces sentence
of condemnation, for not visiting the sick, entertaining the strangers,
feeding the hungry, clothing the naked etc. Mat. 25. 41, etc. By condemning
notwithstanding them that have not done good, he teaches that much more they
shall be condemned, that do commit that which is evil. Mat. 12. 36. 37. 1. Cor.
6. 9. Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15. So then this freedom of Gods children, is not
only a release from the most grievous servitude of sin, but also a
participation of holiness and righteousness. Without this holiness and
righteousness our life before spoken of were no life; neither were our
freedom any freedom, at least not worth the having. The soul of man may be
as well without motion in the body, as the life of God without the fruits of
righteousness. That which is spoken of faith James 2. 20. is true also of the
life of God. What freedom also of any city is without commodities belonging
thereunto? But of this anon.

This also touching the fruits of righteousness, is to be understood in
respect of the knowledge and wisdom before handled. For how can a man be
accounted a man of knowledge and wisdom, that shows not the same by his
works of knowledge and wisdom? And indeed we have heard before that our
knowledge and wisdom consists in the fear of God, and keeping of his
commandments. And the Apostle Paul describes that excellent knowledge of
Christ before spoken of, to be not the knowledge of his natures, and person
only as they are things in Christ himself, but as they are effectual in
other, both to justification, and also to sanctification by the power of his
death, and the virtue of his resurrection; of the one to our release from that
bondage of sin before handled; and of the other, to the quickening of us to
newness of life. Philip. 3. 8. 9. 10. Therefore also Christ in the place
before diverse times alleged, is said to be made unto us not only wisdom,
righteousness, and redemption, but also sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Therefore without Christ no more sanctification, then wisdom, righteousness,
or redemption. In this respect, Christ is not only said to have given himself
for us, that we might be pure or purged, and holy or sanctified: these things
(I say) are not spoken in the nowne, or in the verb passive, as if either we
or some other might purge and sanctify us, but in the active verb, that he
might purge us, etc. Note.
Tit. 2. 14. and that he might sanctify his Church, etc. Epo. 5. 26. to teach,
that the purging and sanctifying of us is the work only of Christ, as well as
the redeeming, saving, and justifying of us. The same is yet further taught by
our Savior himself; As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me: and again; without me
ye can do nothing, viz. that good is. John 15. 3. 4. 5. and Paul accordingly
says, that the fruits of righteousness are by Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 11.

All this is to be understood of Christ, not as God only but as God and man,
the mediator betwixt God and man, and as in that respect he is the head of the
Church, and so communicates his virtue to all in regeneration incorporated
into him, and in whom he dwells by faith, even as the natural head of a
natural body, communicates the virtue thereof to all the members of all the
said natural body. So that also is to be understood, that of his fullness we
do all receive grace for grace: or grace upon grace, or grace after grace.
John. 1. 16.

All hitherto spoken of our life, of our knowledge, and wisdom, of our
redemption, freedom, and liberty, and of our sanctification, and holiness,
and righteousness (as the matter of our regeneration, and things wherein the
Note.
same does consist) must be understood to be by Jesus Christ in a double
respect: first in that he has purchased them for us by the same price which
he gave for our selves and for our salvation. Secondly, by working them in us
himself, being apprehended by a true and lively faith: as has been showed
before by the similitude of the vine and the branches, and of the head and the
members.

Moreover touching this holiness and righteousness now in hand, we must
understand, that it must not only be inward, but also outward: not in heart
alone, but also in our outward man, and in our outward behavior. For Let your
light so shine before men (says our Savior) that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. Mat. 5. 16. Cleanse your
selves (says the Apostle) from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit,
that ye may grow up to full holiness. 2. Cor. 7. 1. he speaks not only of
filthiness of the flesh, but also of the spirit: and therefore the holiness
there commended, and opposed to the former filthiness, must be answerable
thereuno viz. of the flesh, that is, of the body, as well as of the spirit and
heart. Peter exhorts them to whom he did write, not only as strangers and
pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts because they fight against their
souls, but also to have their conversation (namely their outward conversation)
honest among the Gentiles, that they which did speak evil of them as of evil
doers, might by their good works which they should see glorify God in the day
of their visitation. 1. Pet: 2. 11. 12. James bids not only to purge our
hearts, but also to cleanse our hands. James 4. 8. The Apostle to the Hebrews
teaches, that none can draw near to God in full assurance of faith, but only
such as whose bodies are as well washed with pure water, as their hearts are
purged from an evil conscience. Heb. 10. 22. that is, such as are sanctified
as well in their outward behavior, as touching their understanding, judgment,
thoughts, memory, and affections.

This well agrees with all before said of our faith, of our life, of our
knowledge, and wisdom. The faith which is without works is dead. James 2.
17. and 20. and again betwixt both, viz. verse. 18. Show me thy faith by thy
works. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
man confesses to salvation. Romans 10. 10. by confession of the mouth he means
the acknowledgement and profession of Christ in all our outward behavior. To
the same purpose the Apostle also applies that of the Psalmist, I believed,
therefore I spoke, and says, We also believed, and therefore speak. Psalm. 116.
10. 2. Corinthians. 4. 13.

The life of God before handled, has been showed not only to be inward, but
also to show it self outwardly. The knowledge also and wisdom of God renewed
in the regeneration of the children of God, has been declared to consist in
the fear of God, and keeping of Gods commandments, which concern as well the
good carriage of all the parts and members of our body, as the disposition of
our minds and hearts.

This holiness therefore and righteousness must be showed by the government
of every member, of the eye, of the ear, of the mouth, of the hands, of the
feet, and of the whole body according to the rules prescribed in the word for
direction of every such member. I forbear the particular confirmation of these
things by showing the particular scriptures for direction of every particular
member, because the labor were too great for me the writer, and for any reader.
For indeed it would require a whole volume by it self. Yea and Otho Casmannus
(in the beginning of this treatise mentioned) has learnedly and religiously
performed this. For his book entitled Hominis Spiritualis anatomia, etc. The
anatomy of a spiritual man, is altogether of this argument. Whereunto the
learned desirous to see the former point more particularly and largely handled,
may repair.

That this holiness and righteousness whereof now we speak (both inward and
outward) is not alike in all that are regenerated, yea, that are of the same
age in regeneration, I shall not need here to speak; since that which has been
said before in that behalf of the life of God, does also belong to this
holiness and righteousness, which are but effects or fruits of our said life.

Now let us further understand, that as all other virtues are comprehended,
under the former life, liberty, wisdom, holiness, and righteousness, so
specially that sobriety that is so commended in the scripture is a principal
branch, as of all the former generally, so particularly of that wisdom. The
rather because the word translated soberly, Tit. 2. 12. signifies wisely: and
the like word translated, Be sober, 1. Pet. 4. 7. signifies to be wise: as
also the word translated modesty, or sobriety, Note.
1. Tim. 2. 9. and 15. signifies wisdom; and the same word translated
soberness or sobriety, is opposed to the word that signifies being mad: Acts
26. 25. and 2. Cor. 5. 13.

By all these places (wherein the holy ghost speaking of sobriety uses a word
that signifies also wisdom) we are taught that sobriety is a special point
of true wisdom.

This sobriety notwithstanding that now we speak of, is not only the
moderation of our selves for drink (which is apposed to that foul sin of
drunkenness, in these days too too common) neither that only which is in
apparel (contrary to the disguised attiring of men and women, whereby the
people of one country conform themselves to other countries, directly against
Gods word, Zeph. 1. 8. yea (like monsters), to other creatures; at least one
sex to another, the women especially wearing men's apparel, and men suffering
their hair to grow like to women; both directly also against the word, that
Deuteronomy. 22. 5. and this (as contrary to nature it self) 1. Cor. 11. 14. and
whereby likewise the professors of sincerity conform themselves to the world,
and to the vanity used by the world, which is to be understood as well
forbidden by the Apostle in apparel as in other things, Romans 12. 2.) Neither
also is this sobriety (now spoken of) only that which is repugnant to other
lightness, either in countenance, or in gesture (condemned with the former of
apparel: Isai. 3. 16. and by it self alone generally in all persons by
opposition thereunto of the contrary, sober and wise gestured: Pro. 17 24. and
more specially in women as a trick of harlots. Pro. 7. 13. This sobriety (I
say) does not consist only in these things, but it consists in moderation of
our selves, and of all our affections in any slate of life, (in prosperity and
in adversity) that in the one we be not drunken with delights and pleasures,
with wealth and riches, with honors and preferments of this world: and that in
the other we be neither surfetted with cares and fears: nor overcome with
sorrows and griefs: whereby (as drunken men) we should be unfit for other
duties belonging unto us.

He that is sober in this manner, is a wise man indeed. And this sobriety is
the spring of all other holiness, and righteousness, or that which
comprehends them both.

All the other kinds of sobriety, before rehearsed, are no other but such as
may be, and often times are, even in mere natural men. Many natural men, are
as abstemious from wine and all strong drink, and as far from all drunkenness
that way (I mean in their outward behavior) as any other men. Many are as
sober in their apparel, and as grave and modest in their countenance, gesture,
speech, and all other behavior, as any other: so that these kinds of sobriety
are not proper and peculiar only to the children of God, but common also to
other.

But this sobriety that consists in moderation of our selves and of our
affections in every state of life, in prosperity and in adversity, especially
in such sort as the Scripture commends the same, is only in them that are newborn of the spirit of God, and by incorporation into Jesus Christ, are made
the sons and daughters of God.

They that are not newborn, in their prosperity, pride is unto them as a
chain, and cruelty covers them as agarment. Psalm. 73. 6. The wicked is so
proud, etc. that be thinks there is no God. His ways prosper, etc. therefore
he desieth all his enemies. He says in his heart, he shall never be moved,
etc. His mouth is full of eursing, and deceit, and fraud: Under his tongue is
mischief and iniquity: he heth in wait in the villages: in the secret places
he does murder the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poor: He lies in
wait secretly, even as a lion in den: He lies in wait to spotle the poor,
when he draws him into his net. Psalm. 10 56. 7. 8. 9. etc. Yea, he had said
before in the same Psalm, verse 2. The wicked does persecnte the poor, etc.
he has made boast of his own hearts desire, and contemns the Lord.

No marvel then though such contemn men especially their inferious. And thus
indeed we daily see, how the wicked abuse all the mercies of God, either by
all in temperancy (as if they were absolute Lords of all that they have, and
were not to give any account to any) or by extreme pride and cruelty, carrying
themselves like Lords and Kings over other, scorning them, contemning them, and
oppressing them at their pleasure.

But the children of God on the contrary, knowing that they are but for a time
the Lords ftewards of all that they have, use this world, and all things they
have in this world (honors, riches, authority, friends, etc) as though they had
them not: that is, they so possess them, and so dispose them, that they be no
hindrances unto them, but rather furtherances of them concerning the life to
come. Therefore if they be rich in this world, they put not their trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God: and they be rich in good works,
distributing and communicating unto other according to need: and so laying up a
sure foundation to themselves against the time to come, toward eternal life
1. Tim. 6. 18. etc. They eat not their bread alone, but the fatherless eat
thereofwith them. They see not any to perish for want of clothing: nor the
poor to go without a covering: but do cause their loins to bless them.
They lift not up their hand against the fatherless, when they see they may
help them in the gate, etc. Job 31. 17. etc. They make not their gold their
hope: neither say they to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. verse. 24.
Thus did Job. Thus did other that have received the same spirit of adoption
that Job had. Is not this excellent wisdom? so to provide toward eternal
life as before we heard? and so to make themselves friends with the riches of
iniquity that when they shall want, they may be received into ever lasting
habitations? Luke 16. 9. Let the world account of this as they will. All they
that use it, shall find it a principal part of wisdom.

The like may be said of their using authority and honors: not to the vexing
or oppressing of any, but to the good and comfort of all. They open their mouth
for the dumb in the cause of the children of destruction: they open their
mouth and judge righteously: and judge the afflicted and the poor. Pro. 31. 8.
9. They deliver the poor that cr^e, and the father less and him that has
none to help him. The blessing of them that are ready to perish are upon them,
and they cause the widows heart to rejoice. They put on justice, and cover
themselves: Their judgment is as a robe, and a crown: They are eyes to the
blind, and seet to the lame: They are fathers to the poor, and when they know
not their cause, they seek it out diligently. They break the jaws of
unrighteous men, and pluck the prey out of their teeth. Job 29. 12 etc.

Thus the children of God go upright in their prosperity, they reele not
neither stagger, either to the right hand or to the left hand (as drunk with
their riches and honors) but walk on right in the way, that God has laid out
before them towalke in. But what do they in adversity? The brains (as I may
so speak) of their minds are no more distempered, neither are the affections
of their hearts any more disordered therewith, then before with prosperity. For
they carry not themselves as men without hope, but cheerfully and comfortably
they look to the cause in themselves: to the hand from heaven that sends the
same: to the love from which it does proceed: to the end why it is sent: they
remember what a blessed end other have had of the like afflictions: and they
forget not what comfort themselves have had in former times in the like:
perhaps also in greater dangers. According to these things they make such use
of all their afflictions, that they shall be able truly to say, It is good for
us that we have been afflicted that we may learn thy statutes. Psalm. 119. 71.
So they neither be too much cast down with that which the righteous Lord lays
upon the^: neither do they make too light account thereof. If they lose all
that ever they had, wealth, and honor, and friends in one day, they murmur not
against God, but humble themselves and say, Naked came we out of our mothers
wombes, naked shall we return thither: The Lord has given; The Lord has
taken: Blessed be the name of the Lord. Job 1. 21.

This sober and cheerful carriage of themselves in such a state, is the greater
point of wisdom, if we shall consider how the wicked are either hardened like
brawne, that they make no reckoning of it, yea, that they scarce feel it (as
Belshazaer in the midst of his cups hearing that he was found too light, and
that the Medes and Persians should come and take from him his kingdom, and his
life, was not a whit moved with it, but in a bravery for all that commanded
Daniel to be clothed with purple, and to have a chaiue of gold put about his
neck, etc. Dan. 5. 29) or else they are moved with it only for a time (as
Ahab, 1. Kings 21. 27.) returning afterward to their former sins that
procured it: or else they fret and rage like mad men (as they are) not only
being most impatient toward all about them, but also blaspheming the God of
heaven himself. But I will not stand upon these things; being especially more
particularly handled by M. Rogers in his sixth treatise, viz. of the privileges
of Christians: and having my self some occasion to speak of them afterward in
this treatise. In the mean time we see the wicked in every condition of life
to reele and stagger like drunken men: in either of both conditions falling
most dangerously: and (as Solomon speaks of drunkards, Pro. 23. 29.) every
where meeting with woe, with sorrow, with strife, etc. with wounds, without
cause.

The like may be said of the children of God touching the moderation and
sobriety of all their affections, anger, joy, grief, love, fear, etc. in
other matters: as also of the distemper of the affections of the wicked.

As the children of God are sober (according to that before spoken) so likewise
they are always in such sort watchful, that although the devil their
adversary compass the earth to and fro, and walk about never so often. Job 1.
7. and never so diligently, like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may deuoare, 1.
Pet. 5. 8. yet he does not take them so napping, that he does so prevail
against them, as he does against other: neither does any evil so overtake
them, but that before hand they be in some measure prepared for it.

This watchfulness is an effect of the said sobriety, as sleepiness,
drowsiness, and security is an effect of the contrary. For as it is in that
sobriety which consists in abstaining from wine and strong drink, and in the
contrary thereof, namely being drunken with wine wherein is excess. Ephesians. 5.
18. viz. that the more sober and abstemious any man is, the more vigilant and
watchful also he is; yea, the apter for vigilance and watchfulness: and on
the contrary, the more any man is overcome with wine, or other strong drink,
the more apt he is to sleep; yea, the more heavy and drowsy: so the more
sober any man is touching the former moderation of himself in every state and
condition of life, the more vigilant and watchful he will be to take heed of
all spiritual danger: and on the contrary, the more liberty men do give to
their affections, and the more they are drunken and overcome either with
riches, honors and pleasures, on the one side; or with cares, fears, and
sorrows on the other side, the more sleepy also they are in their minds, and
the sooner overtaken with danger. This watchfulness is according to the former
sobriety, viz chiefly of the inward man. As the former sobriety is of the
affections, so this watchfulness is of the mind; namely, when that is always
forecasting of dangers, and seriously studying and meditating how to shun and
avoid the same. In which respect it is said, that the wise man's eyes are in his
head: but the fool walks in darkness. Eccles. 2. 14. that is, a wise man is
never secure, but always careful and looking about him, for the preventing
and avoiding of dangers: but a fool is always in danger and continually
overtaken with some evil or other, as one that walks in darkness falls
into this hole or that: or at least stumblethat at this and that. That like is
in another place, A prudent man sees the plague, and hides himself, but the
foolish go on still and are punished. Pro. 22. 3. and 27. 12. In these places
it is to be observed, that this watching (whereof now I speak) is commended as
a special point of wisdom: and that therefore as it concurreth with the
sobriety of the inward man before spoken of, so also it is not unfitly here
handled with that before said of wisdom. Does not this therefore much also
increase the foresaid dignity of Gods children? verily it does: this being
considered that wicked and natural men do daily fall into infinite dangers, as
even now was showed, by want of this watchfulness.

CHAP. XII.
Of the true love of God and of men, only found in the children of God: and so
of the further dignity of the children of God in respect thereof.

AS I have before spoken of some particular branches of the life of God and
wisdom, and holiness before generally handled; so I might likewise speak of
the rest: For the very least is of great price, and does not a little amplify
the dignity of Gods children. But so to particularize in this place, would be
too tedious. I shall also by other occasions speak of some of them afterward:
and such as I shall not at all speak of, may be esteemed by that which I write
of the rest. Notwithstanding that such as I have not handled, or shall not
speak of, may be the better considered, let me add something touching the
love of the children of God, toward God and men, as that indeed which
comprehends all that shall be omitted, which is also the fountain of all the
other particulars of the former life of God, etc. it being the fulfilling of
the law and bond of perfection, as before we have heard.

But of this love of the children of God toward God and men, I will only
speak very briefly, leaving the rest to the consideration of the reader.

Some perhaps may look that I should have spoken thereof before; but seeing
our freedom from sin to serve God in holiness and righteousness, does so
depend (as we have heard) upon wisdom, (such as be fools being commonly
accounted servants by nature) and seeing the sobriety before handled is of so
near kindred (as it were) to the said wisdom, that it is called (as we have
likewise heard) by the same name: and seeing the foresaid watchfulness does
also so depend, (as has been showed) upon the said sobriety, therefore I
thought it not amiss to handle all the said particulars together, as I have
done.

To come now to the love of God and of men, let us only observe this one point,
namely, that it is as proper to the children of God only, as the life of God,
wisdom, freedom from the bondage of sin, with liberty to serve God in
holiness and righteousness, the sobriety and watchfulness before handled.
All that are not the children of God, but be wicked and mere natural men, are
as far from all right love of God and men, as they are destitute of the former
life of God, of the former wisdom, and of the other things before spoken of.
As none have the life of God, neither are wise, neither are freed from sin,
neither can serve God in holiness and righteousness of life; neither are
sober in the manner before described, neither can be watchful for the avoiding
of dangers, but only the children of God; so none can rightly love God or men
but only they.

Touching the love of God this is manifest, because if we be the friends of
Christ, if we do what soever be commands us, Ioh. 15. 14. then it must needs
follow, that they are the enemies of Christ, and consequently of God, that do
not that which is commanded them. If the wicked be Gods enemies, how can they
love him? Again, these words are often confounded in the Psalms, viz. the
wicked, and the enemies of the Lord. The wicked shall perish and the enemies of
the Lord shall be consumed as the fat of lambs Psalm. 37. 20. Psalm 68. 1. the
wicked are said to be enemies to the Lord, and hate him: and again; God will
wound the bead of his enemies, and the harry pate of him that walks in his
sins: verse. 21. So the wicked (according to that spoken before of wisdom)
are said to be foolish ones, and the Lords enemies. Psalm. 74. 18. and 23. So
the wicked, (especially that are enemies to the Church) are called haters of
the Lord: Psalm. 81. 14. 15. The like is in many other places: Psalm. 83. 2.
Psalm. 89. 10. Psalm. 92. 10 and often elsewhere.

Last of all, we have heard before, that the wicked do not know God. Can they
love him, whom they know not? The same is to be said of their love toward men.
For how can they love men, when they love not God? How can they love the less,
when they love ^ot the greater? If they love not God of whom they receive all
that they have, and who receives no^^ (...) them, ^^ther is any ways
chargeable unto them; how can they love them from whom they receive nothing, or
very little, and that only as from the instruments of God? and upon whom they
are forced to bestow something of their own, and so to be at charge with them?
For these reasons and the like, when the Apostle in the place before alleged
had described us in our natural state, and being unregenerated, to be unwise,
disobedient, deceived etc; he adds further that we were hateful, and hating
one another: Tit. 3. 3. So the wicked are both hated of other, and do also
hate other: and nothing but hatred is to be looked for amongst them.

This hatred of the wicked against God and men, is a notable testimony of that
extreme foolishness and madness (beforespoken of) which is in the heart of
the wicked. For what extreme madness is it for mortal men, that are but as
the pot in the hand of the potter, to hate the immortal God, who being of all
might and power, is able when he will, to break them all in pieces like a
potters vessel? What folly also is it to hate all other, whereby to make
themselves likewise hateful and odious to all other? Do not such both ways
(as we say) much worse then bring an old house upon their own heads? They that
make themselves odious to God and men, shall certainly smart full deeply and
woefully in the end.

If it be objected touching the love of God, that Paul being but a natural
man, before he knew Christ so loved God, that he speaks much of his zeal,
and that in his said zeal his righteousness of the law was such, that he was
unrebukable. Phil. 3. 6. and that that seems to have been in truth and not
in show.

If any (I say) object this, I answer, that though the aforesaid zeal, and
fervent love of Paul were indeed true, as this word Note.
true may be an attribute of the affections, and is opposed to hypocrisy, or
to that which is but counterfeit and feined, and as it signifies unfeigned and
without hypocrisy; yet as the same is an attribute of the objects of the mind,
and is opposed to erroneous, and signifies right, so it cannot be said that
the zeal or seruent love of Paul was true.

Though he loved God unfeignedly and in the truth of his affections from the
heart, and so was very strict touching the outward righteousness of the law:
yet it cannot be said that he loved God truly, that is, rightly; because his
mind being not rightly informed, his judgment therefore touching the
principal causes why, and the manner how God was to be loved, could not but be
erroneous. For so long as he knew not Christ but persecuted him, and the
doctrine, and professors of him, and so much less believed in him, he wanted
that which should have given life to his love. For, as we have heard, Faith
works by love: Gal. 5. 6. and love must come from faith unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1.
5. The like is to be said of the zeal of God in the Israelites, whereof Paul
bears them witness: and yet says that it was not according to knowledge,
Romans 10. 1. 2. So also of the zeal of many other ignorant men: Howsoever their
love and their zeal may be said to be true, that is, unfeigned, and without
hypocrisy, even in simplicity, yet because it is without knowledge, and much
more without faith, therefore it cannot be right, and therefore also not at all
acceptable unto God. For without knowledge, the mind (or heart) is not good.
Pro. 19. 2. and without faith it is not possible to please God. Heb. 11. 6.
Yea, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14. 23.

That which I have said of this love toward God in mere natural men, may be
said of the like love in the like, toward men: For that which condemns the
love of such toward God how unfeigned soever, condemns also the love of such
toward men, how earnest and fervent soever the same be.

The love therefore that is betwixt man and wife, betwixt parents and children,
betwixt kindred, and betwixt friends, etc. the parties that do so love being
not regenerate but merely natural, cannot be right, as not coming from sound
knowledge and faith unfeigned, neither being directed by the word, which is the
only rule, both of affections, and also of actions.

Again, the love of such toward God and men, is most uncertain, and
altogether unconstant, so that to day a friend, and to morrow a mortal enemy.
I will not stand upon the examples either of ancient or of later times, of such
as have seemed at the first to have been very zealous of God, and for God, and
yet afterward revolted (such in old time were Ioash, 2. Chro. 24. and Vzzta. 2.
Chro. 26. and Demas and many other, Heb. 10. 25. and in late times even here in
England Bonner, Harding, a brother of Doctor Reinolds, that is reported first
to have converted him to the truth, and yet afterward fell away from it, and by
writing persecuted it.) I will not stand upon these examples, but I will
chiefly insist upon the uncertainty and inconstancy of the love of natural men
toward other.

Touching this therefore, as Salomons words may be (by way of similitude)
applied to other things, even to the uncertainty and shortness of the
prosperity of the wicked (as afterward also we shall see) so they seem chiefly
and most properly to be understood of the love of the wicked (either toward
God or toward men, but in that place chiefly toward men) viz. Note.
that it is like the cracking of thorns under a pot. Eccles. 7. 8. that is,
though very great for a time, yet suddenly vanished away. This (I say) seems
to be the most proper and natural sense and meaning of that place: because
Solomon having said in the verse next before, It is better to hear the rebuke
of a wise man, then that a man should hear the song of fools (that is, it is
better to hear some sharp words wisely by wise men spoken in the just
reproof of sin, then the soothing and fair words of foolish men, what
protestation soever they make of their love, and whatsoever their love be for
the present) Solomon I say, having so said, immediately infers the former
words as a reason and confirmation of these, and says, For like the noise of
the thorns under the pot, so is the laughter of a fool; meaning by laughter
that which before he had meant by the word song: and by the word song
understanding the sweet and pleasant words, whereby the wicked do flatter and
sooth up other in any sin, as likewise their actual testimonies, and very
deeds of kindness showed by them, for the better encouragement of other to
such evil as themselves do approve. Of such love Solomon says, that it is
but as the cracking or rattling of thorns under a pot: though vehement, hot and
fervent for a time, yet by and by even upon nothing, or at least upon trifling
reasons (though sometime also upon good ground) quailed, cooled, and brought to
nothing: sometime also turned into extreme hatred. Hereof there are many
examples. At Iakobs first coming to Padan Aram to his uncle Laban, how kindly
and lovingly was he entertained by Laban: what great signs did he show, and
what great profession did he make of love? As soon as he heard he was come, he
tarried not till he came to his house, but he ran out to meet him. What more?
he embraced him. What more? he kissed him. What more? he brought him to his
house. What more? he said unto him, Thou art my bone and my flesh. What more?
he abode with him the space of a month. What more? He said further unto him,
Though thou be my brother should thou serve me for nothing? Tell me what
shall be thy wages? What more? At his first asking he gave him his daughter:
yea, but not the right, but Leah for Rahel. Yea, but presently he gave him
Rahel also. Genesis 29. 13, etc. Here were great matters; who would not have
thought there had been great love; and such as much water would not have
quenched? Notwithstanding how his heart was afterward changed, how his
countenance was estranged, and how many ways he dealt hardly with him, and
worse would have dealt, if God had not appeared unto him, and commanded him to
do nothing but good to Iakob, we know.

Saul at the first is said to have loved David exceedingly: 1. Sam. 16. 22. yet
afterward when David had much more deserved his love, he hated him as
extremely; yea, his own son Jonathan also for his sake: 1. Sam. 20. 30. Yea,
he so hated all the Lords priests for his sake, that for the supposed fault of
one, he commanded them all to be slain. 1. Sam. 22. 18. yea, though he did
afterward with tears relent unto David, acknowledging him more righteous then
himself: 1. Sam. 24. 17. and so making a great show of renewing his first love,
yet presently again he persecuted him as eagerly as before. The like may be
said of the love of the said Saul toward his own Son Jonathan, to whom he
was bound by nature: but of this before. Iehoram King of Israel one while could
call Elisha the Prophet by the name of his father: 2. Kings 6. 21. against whom
notwithstanding such (immediately almost) was his indignation, and fury, that he
said, God do so, and more also to me. If the head of Elisha the son of
Shephat, shall stand on him this day. verse. 31. To day Herod could so reverence
John Baptist, that he heard him gladly, and did many things, etc. yet the next
day he beheaded him, upon the request of an whorish, and wanton damsel. Mark.
6. 20. etc? Demas one while was the familiar friend of Paul, Colos. 4. 14.
Philem. 24. but not long after he forsook him, and made more account of this
present world, that is, both of the things, and also of men of this world: 2.
Tim. 4. 10. What also may be said of the great favor of Ahashuerosh toward
Haman, to whom he did not only command that all his servants should bow their
knees, Ester. 3. 2. but who also was all in all with him, so that he obtained
of him letters written in his own name, and sealed with his own seal for the
destroying of all the Jews in one day? Notwithstanding this great grace did
not only die suddenly, and with speaking of one word, but it was turned also
into such irreconcilable indignation, that Haman was hanged in a moment, upon
the same gallows which he had prepared for Mordecas. Ester 7. 9. 10. So may
all Hamans, even such enemies of the Lord and of the Lords people, be
disgraced, and perish in the end, that do not (as Paul did before his calling)
belong unto the Lord.

The like we see by daily experience: For be the love of the wicked either
toward the children of God, or toward them of their own crew and sort, never
so great, never so hot, never so burning, yet every trifle puts all clean
out: and for every toy they are ready to fall out with their ancientest, and
the best friends they have: and often times they become as bitter enemies, as
ever before they were fervent friends. Sometimes they fall out in play:
sometimes upon the false reports of talebearers: sometimes for a matter of
profit, though perhaps not of a penny value: sometimes for an unkind word:
sometimes upon mere suspicion: sometimes upon mistaking either of some speeches,
or some actions: and sometimes upon other occasions. But why is the love of the
wicked so variable, so mutable, and so easily alienated from them toward whom
it is? Even because it is not well rooted and grounded; neither are they well
rooted and grounded in it. Ephesians. 3. 18. They love for profit, or for pleasure,
or for some other carnal respect. Their love is of the flesh, not of the
spirit. The knot thereof is not made by theeternall spirit of God, therefore it
is easily dissolved; As a stake stuck into the earth and not rooted, is easily
plucked up: As an house without ground^ill and good vnderpinning, especially
standing bleakly, subject to the winds, and having no defense of trees, of
other buildings, or of hills, is quickly ouerthrown: so is the love of the
wicked straight quailed, and with every little blast quite blown over. This
especially may be said of the love of the wicked toward the children of God.
For although such love on Gods part be not without his special providence; yea
and often times wrought by his special power of his special goodness: yet on
the wickeds part, it is for the most part not grounded upon the godliness, or
goodness of such as they love, but upon some special respect unto themselves.
So Potiphar loved Joseph, because he was a good steward for him, and the Lord
blessed him in that which he took in hand: yea, all things that Potiphar had
for his sake. So Pharaoh did afterward love and grace the same Joseph, because
he had well interpreted his dreams: and had given good counsel against the
time of dearth, signified by one part of the said dreams. So Saul loved David
for his skill upon the harp: the same may be said of other.

Thus then we see what the love of the wicked, and of mere natural men is: and
thereby how vile and base their state and condition is. For what a dogged
nature is it to love no longer then they see benefit toward them, and so to
love one while, that presently they hate; and often times do hate more then they
did love? as Ammons hatred is said to have been more against Tamar then his
love had been toward her. 2. Sam. 13. 15. Dogs love in this manner: for let
their masters that do always feed them, but unawares tread a little upon
their foot, and they will be ready to bite them by the leg, if not to sly in
their face.

It is far otherwise with the children of God. For so many as are newborn,
not of mortal, but of immortal seed by the word of God, having purified
their souls in obeying the truth, to love brotherly without feining, do
accordingly love with a pure heart fervently: 1. Pe. 1. 23. Now although that
place be understood specially of brotherly love, yet he that loves them that
are begotten, will much more love him that has begotten.

And indeed how can the children of God but love him, whom they know by his
word to be so mighty, so infinite, so wise, so just, and every way so good in
himself: and so gracious, so loving, and so merciful toward them whom he
has so loved as to make them his children, in such manner as hitherto we have
heard, and shall further hear.

As touching the love of the children of God toward men, especially toward
such as are the children of God with themselves, how can they but love them
that are his creatures, and the workmanship of his hands, yea, and which do
resemble their heavenly father, and their eldest brother, and that are stamped
with the same spirit, wherewith themselves are stamped; that are heirs
likewise of the same inheritance; and for the love of whom there be so many
precepts to command it, so many sentences to commend it: so many promises to
provoke it: so many examples to encourage unto it?

In all these respects, the said love is very excellent and precious; the more
because it does not only come from God alone: but also because that thereby we
know that we are translated from death to life, and that we are of the truth,
and shall before him assure our hearts. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. The Apostle says not
that Note.
thereby we are translated, and that thereby we are assured, but only that we
know our selves so to be. So then this love is a special part of the evidence
of our salvation, and of our comfortable appearance before him both in this
life, and also in the life to come, even in the great day when all flesh shall
be gathered together, and when the books of all men's actions known and secret,
shall be opened before him. That which the Apostle in the former Chapter verse.
29. had ascribed to the whole work of regeneration, is in the places before
alleged, ascribed to this one point thereof, viz. our unfeigned love toward
other the children of God: because indeed all other things are nothing without
it. 1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. and where that is, there are all other graces, either as
causes working it, and by it, or as effects and fruits thereof, coming from
it: and therefore (as before we have heard) it is called the fulfilling of the
law; and the bond of perfection.

Our Savior also says that upon these two commandments, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind:
and thy neighbor as thy self, hangs the whole law and the Prophets. Mat.
22. 40 So that these two points, either as they are to be performed by us, or
as they Note.
be performed for us by our Savior Christ Jesus, are the text (as it were) of
all the rest of the word of God: which is so excellent, that when David had
learned much thereof, yet he prays the Lord to open his eyes that he might
see the wonders of his law. Psalm. 119. 18. thereby nothing that the wonders of
the law of God which he did see, he accounted in a manner as nothing, in
respect of those which he did desire further to behold. So also in further
commendation of the excellency of the said law, he says again, Thy
testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them. verse. 129. If
therefore the word of God be so excellent, is not that also excellent, that is
the chief subject matter thereof and whereunto all that is contained in the
word, some way or other may well be referred?

Notwithstanding, although this love be so excellent, yet it is not (as the
papists blurt it out, and stoutly defend it) the form of faith. For then
should it be a part of faith; yea, the chief part of faith, and that part
without which faith should have no being at all, because the form does give
being to that which is formed, and so it should be no otherwise distinguished
from faith then as a part of faith it self, which is directly repugnant to
that place, which they especially plead for the magnifying of love: And now
abides faith, hope, and love, these three. 1. Cor. 13. 13. For in this place
we see the Apostle as plainly to distinguish love from faith, as he does
distinguish hope: and to make these to be three. How could this be, if love
were a part of faith? and if faith were no faith without love? Indeed there is
no faith without love; but if therefore we should make love to be the
principal part of faith, we should make many a mad conclusion.

Again, love by the doctrine of the Papists, upon the former place, is better
then faith. Can a part be better then the whole? Then it should be better then
it self with addition of another good thereunto.

Love also is an effect of faith, as before we heard out of 1. Tim. 1. 5.
therefore it cannot be the form of faith. Last of al, by faith we mean faith
in Jesus Christ, and every man's believing of the particular forgiveness of his
own sins, and of his own particular salvation by Jesus Christ. The love that
is required of us, was in Adam before his fall, in whom there was no such faith.

But to return to the excellency of the love before spoken of: as we have
heard the love of the wicked to be very variable, and soon quenched, yea,
turned often times into extreme hatred, so the love of the children of God is
most constant, and abides to the end. Love does never fall away, though that
prophesying be abolished, or the tongues cease, or knowledge vanish away. 1.
Cor. 13. 8. The love of the children of God being sincere without
dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. well rooted and grounded, Ephesians. 3. 18. upon the
word, and in Christ Jesus, it is constant without weariness, either in
affection, or in action: Gal. 6 9. As God loves to the end, whomsoever he
loves, Ioh. 13. 1. so his children walk in the steps of the same love: Ephesians.
5. 1. 2. To conclude this point, the more excellent this love is (a special
point wherein consists the matter of our regeneration) the more excellent
also is the estate and condition of all the children of God so regenerated, in
whom alone it is to be found.

The silly Cock does sometimes find an earthly pearl of great price in an
earthly dunghill: and a fool may as soon as a wise man find a great jewel in
the mire of the street: but this heavenly pearl and jewel of love, whereby we
do most resemble God, and show our selves to be borne of him, 1. Ioh. 4. 7.
and whereby all men do know us to be the disciples of Christ, Ioh. 13. 35.
This (I say) is not to be found in the dunghill and myry heart of natural and
unregenerate men, that are only of the earth earthly: It is only to be found in
the children of God, that are borne from above, and by their regeneration are
from heaven heavenly, as he is into whom they are incorporated; whose hearts
are sanctified by the word, Ioh. 17. 17. and purified by faith, Acts 15. 9. as
before we have heard. Thus much of the love of God and men, peculiar only to
the children of God: and so consequently of the further dignity of the said
children of God thereby.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a further degree of the freedom of Gods children.

THus we have heard of the precious freedom of Gods children, in that they are
not only discharged from the servitude of sin, but are also made the servants
of God, and may serve him in holiness and righteousness: from whence it
comes, that they are sober, watchful, and loving, as before we have heard.

There remains yet a further degree of the said liberty and freedom of Gods
children, as one special part (as it were) of the matter of their new birth:
and as one special point, wherein as well as in other things consists their
being as they are the children of God.

This is, that besides that before mentioned, they are also enfranchized and
made free of a most excellent, of a rich, and of a glorious city: even of the
heavenly Jerusalem, whereof many glorious things are spoken, in many places of
the scripture (as the Prophet speaks of the old Jerusalem in the same respect
viz. as it was the Church of God, Psalm. 87. 3.) especially in the 21. Chapter
of the Revelation: where it is most excellently and divinely described, not
only, as it is in heaven with God, and in the presence of God, and of his holy
Angels; but also as yet it is and shall be upon earth. Of this excellent and
glorious city are all the chilldren of God made free, being released from
their natural servitude, and bondage unto sin.

This freedom of the new Jerusalem seems to be noted by the Apostle to the
Hebrews, where after the opposition of many and diverse things whereunto they
were not come, as unto the mount that might not be touched, to the burning
fire, to blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet,
and the voice of words, etc. (by all which he means their deliverance from
the Law which consisted in the letter, not in the spirit) then he adds,
that they were come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
assembly and congregation of the newborn, which are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus
the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, which
speaks better things then that of Abel. Heb. 12. 22. etc. This is a most
pregnant and noble testimony, not only setting forth the excellency of that
City whereof all the children of God are made free; but many other points also
before more largely handled.

To speak yet a little more of this freedom: As apprentices that serve in
Cities (in London, Canterbury, York, Norwich and other) when they have served
a certain time, according to the custom and order of such Cities or other
towns corporate, then they are not only released from their service, but they
are also themselves made free of the Cities, and do enjoy diverse privileges and
benefits belonging to such Cities: so they that are released from the bondage
of sin and satan, are made free also of the heavenly Jerusalem before spoken
of; and do enjoy the privileges and benefits thereof: such as do not belong to
any forrainers, but are proper only to the children of God, and to those that
are discharged of their masters, whom by nature they served. Yet here this
difference is not to be forgotten betwixt the privileges of this heavenly City,
and the privileges of all earthly cities. For the privileges of earthly cities
are intended toward such as have served their times in some trade or other, as
rewards of their said service, supposed faithfully to have been performed by
such servants: but the privileges of the heavenly city now spoken of are no
rewards of our service to sin and satan, (for the reward or wages thereof is
nothing but death. Romans 6. 23.) but only benefits belonging to the children of
God, only of Gods free grace and goodness: yet the more to comfort them
against their former hard service of sin, and against the daily relics of
sin in them, and the manifold storms and tempest^, whereu^to by the means
thereof they are subject.

Now the more excellent this heavenly city is the greater needs must be the
benefits, and privileges belonging thereunto, and therefore also the greater
benefit is the freedom thereof.

The freedom of Rome was wont to be so highly esteemed, Note.
that Claudius Lysias a chief captain for the Romans at Jerusalem,
acknowledged that freedom to have cost him a great sum. Acts 22. 28. Paul
also himself being free borne of that city, pleads his said freedom in that
behalf against those injuries that were offered unto him, verse. 25. and so by
pleading thereof he found the more favor, at least they feared the more to
wrong him, as they had done.

The freedom of many Cities in this land (especially of London, and of the
^inque ports in Kent) is such, that many great men are content, both that their
sons (being of good years and growth) shall serve seven, eight, or nine
years: yea, and to give likewise good sums of money right out with them, that
they may have the benefit of the freedom after their time expired; and also to
procure the said freedom for themselves in diverse respects.

What then is the freedom of this heavenly Jerusalem, whereof now we speak,
and for which Christ has given a greater price, then all the cities in the
world, yea, then ten thousand such worlds are worth? Truly it is this, that
whereas we are here pilgrims and strangers, 1. Pet. 2. 11. yet being free of
the heavenly Jerusalem, we have our conversation in heaven. Philip. 3. 20.
that is, that we behave our selves as citizens of heaven, live according to the
laws which we have from heaven, and do that which we do as cheerfully and
willingly as the Angels in heaven. Is this all? No: we have liberty also to
trade for heavenly wares, yea, necessity lies upon us, and we are bound, and
as it were by our baptism (the seal of Gods covenant) sworn so to do at our
enrolment: yea, daily we may, and we ought to trade even for heaven it self.

As many free of London, by virtue of their said freedom do trade in other
countries for such commodities as will be most vendible in London, and for the
most benefit either of Londoners themselves, or of such as resort to London: so
is it with all the children of God, that being released from their service of
sin, are made free men of heaven. For by this their freedom, they may trade,
and do trade for heaven, and for the daily increase of that heavenly stock,
which in their regeneration their heavenly father does give them to occupy
withal, and wherewith (as it were) to begin the new world: even the world to
come, whiles they live as strangers in this present world.

From heaven, and from the father of lights in heaven, comes every good and
perfect gift. James 1. 17. And this father of lights, being sole and absolute
governor of heaven and earth, will not admit any to trade for any merchandise
of his chief city (heaven) but only such as can (as it were) show by their
Indentures that they are freed from their service, and that they had their
names also enrolled in heaven book. If they can show this they shall be
suffered to trade for any merchandise of the city: yea, they shall be sure,
never to be bankrupts: but that they shall gain well for themselves and their,
Ioh. 7. 37. but of this afterward.

This freedom is such, that there is none so poor but may occupy frankly: for
he may have the best commodities of the city, freely and for nothing. Isai. 55.
1.

This freedom is the greater because the commodities of that city, are better
then all other, and no where else to be had. According to the worth of any
commodities of any country, so is the freedom for trading to such countries
esteemed: especially, if such commodities be not to be found in other countries.

This freedom is such, that as free men of London have certain privileges, as
well out of London, as in London, even wheresoever they dwell: so likewise have
all that are free of heaven, whatsoever part of the earth they do inhabit.

By this freedom all partaker thereof have this singular benefit, (be they
never so poor) that if any man (how mighty soever) do them any wrong,
especially by infringing their liberties any way, they may have their action
against him in the Court of heaven: where they shall have a good advocate
Christ Jesus the righteous, 1. Ioh 2. 1. where they shall be at no costs of
suit: and where they shall be sure to have so good audience, so upright
justice, and so large damages against the defendant that has wronged them,
yea, against any adversary, that he shall never be able to satisfy the same,
but shall be forced to lie by it for ever, except the submit himself and be
reconciled. Mat. 5. 24. 25. For shall not God avenge his elect, which cry day
and night unto him? yea, though he suffer long for them? I te^l you (says
Christ) he will avenge them quickly. Luke 18. 7. 8. Is not this a great
privilege; for poor men to have such justice, against their mighty
adversaries? and to have it speedily without such delays as are often too
usual in the courts of earthly Judges upon earth?

Lastly, this freedom is such that it can never be lost, it can never be
forfeited: No man can ever put us by it. No man? yea, no p^we^^ ^^ all the
power of hell. As the son himself that makes us free. ^oh. 8. ^6. (...) for
ever Hob. 1^. 8. As the truth whereby he makes us free, Ioh. 8. ^2. abides
for ever. Psalm. 19. 9. As the spirit by whom our names are enrolled in the book
of heaven, and we are sealed to be made free, Eph^s. 4. 3^. is an eternal
spirit. Heb. 9. 14. As the city whereof we are made free, is not (as earthly
cities) subject to conquests, to fire, to mundations of seas or other waters,
or to any desolation, but is an abiding continuing city: Heb. 13. 14. and an
everlasting habitation. Luke 16. 9. so whosoever is once free of this city shall
be free for ever: this freedom is an everlasting freedom. Heb. 9. 12.

But touching all earthly freedoms, they may be lost, either by too long
absence, or by not payment of some yearly sum of money: or by not observing
some other rites and customs of the cities whereof such freedoms are: or else
they that have such earthly freedoms, may be so imprisoned in their own
country, or so captiued abroad, or so by sickness detained in their own house,
or otherwise in such condition; that although they have their freedom. yet
they shall not be the better thereby: yea, neither the children of any Princes,
nor any Princes themselves are so free, but that they may come i^to captivity,
and bondage. But the children of God once made free, are free for ever; in all
countries, in all conditions, in prosperity, in adversity, in wealth, in
poverty, in prison, out of prison; in health, in sickness, young or old: under
the tuition of other, or at their own hands: in life, and in the hour of
death. Yea, they always have the benefit of this freedom and liberty, and may
as well trade for the commodities of heaven, in one condition as in another. Oh
who would not have such a freedom! How sweet, how precious, and how honorable
ought the name of this freedom to be! And how great, how ample, and how
excellent is the dignity of Gods children in respect of this freedom!

CHAP. XIIII.
Of true hope, proper only to the children of God, and therefore much making
for their further dignity: and of some special points belonging to all before
said of their life, wisdom, etc.

ONe thing yet remains concerning the matter of being the children of God.
This is true hope of all things promised either for this life or for the life
to come.

And although this hope be the daughter and companion of faith yet I have
reserved my speech thereof till this place, because it arises from all the
former points of the matter of our new birth, and because it does support and
nourish them by the object thereof, as the oil maintains and nourishes the
fire in the lamp.

Although also Peter says that we are regenerated, or begotten again to this
hope. 1. Pet. 1. 3. and so does seem to make this hope the end of our
regeneration, yet because it is wrought in us as soon as the former things,
therefore I may without any absurdity, here speak of it also, as one of those
things wherein our being the children of God does consist. This hope agrees
with faith, in that it has the same author, is wrought and increased by the
same means, is in the same subject, and continues the same time: but herein
it differs, that the object of faith is the whole word of God: but the object
of hope is only the promises in the word. By faith we believe all things
written in the word; of things past, present and to come, (as has been said in
chap. 8.) But by hope we ^^e expect and look for only those things that are
in the word promised to be performed her easter, either generally concerning
the Church, or particularly concerning our selves. So all the good, promised
hereafter to be performed, is believed by faith, and expected or looked for by
hope. Every truth therefore of God revealed in his word written, is the object
of faith: (For by faith we believe the word touching the creation of the world
by the word: Heb. 11. 3.) but hope has only relation to the promises of God.
Therefore the Apostle exhorting the Hebrews to keep the profession of their
hope without wavering. confirms the same by the faithfulness of him that
has promised. Heb. 10. 23. So he restrains hope, only to the promises of God.

As by faith we believe as well the promises of this life, as of the life to
come; and therefore the just man does live by his faith, as well touching this
life, as touching the life to come: so by hope we do expect or look for the
performance as well of the promises of this life, as of the life to come.
Notwithstanding, as the things of the life to come are the principallest object
of faith, so also be they of hope.

This hope is as proper to the children of God as faith it self; because it is
an handmaid only of faith: looking only for the performance of those things,
which faith believes shall be performed. Therefore it is joined with faith, 1.
Cor. 13. 13. Tit 1. 1. 2. 1. Pet 1. 21. and Jude 20. and 21. Therefore also
these words, Faith and hope, to believe and hope, are often confounded, and are
used one for another.

This faith and hope are immortal; they shall never perish. The seed of says
is immortal; Christ Jesus the object of faith is the some yesterday, to day,
and for cuer. By faith we overcome all things, and all things are possible unto
us. How then can faith decav? By faith ^e are also kept unto salvation: 1. Pet.
1. 5. How then can faith itself perish? It faith perish, whereby we are kept
unto salvation, where is our safety? Peter proves faith o be better then gold:
because gold perishes though it be never so well tried and refined in the
fire. 1. Pet. 1. 7. How is this argument good, if faith may perish as well as
gold? If faith do thus continue, then also does hope: for these are twins,
borne together, living together, and lasting one as long as the other. The hope
therefore of Gods children shall never be frustrated: it shall not be
confounded. Those things that prove the perpetuity of faith, prove also the
perpetuity of hope. The same is also evident by the attribute living, whereby
Peter deseribeth the hope of them that be begotten again, 1. Pet. 1. 3. Paul
says, it makes not ashamed: Romans 5. 5. Solomon says, The patient abiding
(that is, the hope) of the righteous shall be gladness. Pro. 10. 28 In this
place and in that of Peter, let it be observed, that hope is limited only to
them that are begotten again, and to the righteous.

This is the more, because we are as often taught that the hope of the wicked
shall perish. When Solomon had said in that place before alleged, The hope of
the righteous shall be gladness, presently he adds, but the hope of the
wicked shall perish. Bildad says, that As the rush cannot grow without mire
(or moisture) so the hypocrites hope shall perish. Job 8. 13. Zophar says, The
eye of the wicked shall fail, and their refuge shall perish, and their hope
shall be sorrow of mind: Job 11. 20. The Psalmist says, The desire of the
wicked shall perish: Psalm. 112. 10. If their desire shall perish, can their
hope continue? Who does not desire that which he hops for? Solomon says
again, when a wicked man die^h his hope perishes, and the hope of the unjust
shall perish. Pro 11. 7.

Examples hereof are many. How vain was the hope of the mother of Sisera, and
of her wise la^^es touching the safe return of Sisera with great so ^ile? Judge
5. 28. How was the great boasting hope of great Goliath decerued? 1. Sam. 17.
44. The like may be said of Ah^b, touching good success against Ramo^h Gilead:
1. Kings 22. 6. and of the hope of Saneherib touching the like success against
Jerusalem, 2. Kings 18 28. So also of the hope generally of all Papists; and
particularly both of the Spaniards in the year 15 88, and also of many of our
own Papists here at home here to fore; and of late in the powder treason, and
of many other.

What an excellent privilege then is this of the children of God, that their
hope grounded upon God word, for things either of this life, or of the life to
come, shall not be frustrated, but certainly accomplished? yea, that we may be
the better assured, that our hope shall not deceive us, it is called the helmet
of salvation. 1. ^ hes. 5. 8. whereby we are taught, that as the helmet, or an
head peace defe^deth the head from all wounds, so likewise hope is a principal
part of the spiritual armor for the defense of a spiritual man, from
spiritual dangers, and for keeping him from despair of salvation. If hope be
a special preservative against despair of salvation, then also must it be
against despair of things promised for the comfort of this life. Fear not
little flock (says our Savior) it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom. Luke 12. 32. By the assurance therefore of a kingdom, he
strengthens them against all fear of want of things for this life. Can we
rightly hope that God will give the greater, and doubt or fear, that he will
not give the less, viz. the things of this life? yea, therefore hope is
compared to a sure and sted fast ancre, of the soul, fastened to that which is
with in the veil. Heb. 6. 19. This is a sweet and most comfortable
comparison, viz. of hope, not to an ancre only, but to a sure ancre, and to a
steadfast ancre; not fastened in the bottom of the sea, in sand, or in any
earth, but in heaven, even in God himself, or in Christ Jesus more firm then
any rock.

How soever therefore the children of God be here (as it were) upon the midst
of the seas, tossed with mighty storms and tempests, yet as a ship by a strong
ancre, with a cable suitable, well fastened, is the more safe in great storms
and tempests, so according to the words of the same Apostle in the same place
verse 18. the children of God by their hope well fixed and fastened upon the
things especially within the veil (that is, in heaven) have such strong
consolation, as that no storms or tempests of all the power of hell it self,
shall be able to remove the same, or at least so to remove it, as that they
shall suffer shipwreck. To the same purpose the Apostle Paul ^oineth these two
together, everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace. 2. I hes. 2.
16. The faith even of the best, and the best faith may sometime be so wounded,
that it may for a time fall into a kind of swoone: as the faith of Peter did
for a while: and of Solomon for a long time. In like manner, their hope may be
much quailed, and shaken, and obseured. For faith being wounded, hope cannot be
found; because it depends upon faith. But neither faith nor hope can be
altogether and utterly overwhelmed.

This then is a most singular privilege and comfort. And hereby the children
of God, in great afflictions of this life, in common death and famine, in
special want and penury, in sickness, in prison, in banishment, in the hatred
and malice of many and mighty adversaries, in crosses abroad, and in crosses
at home: as also in great assaults of Satan, in great accusation of their own
conscience, in remembrance of their great and manifold sins set before them
by Satan in all their colors, and amplified and aggrauated by all the
circumstances that may be: by this hope (I say) the children of God in all
these are most cheerful and comfortable (as Paul was 2. Cor. 4. 8. etc.) when
the wicked hang down their heads, are oppressed with cares, fears, and
griefs, and do utterly despair, and be also incapable of all comfort. But of
these things somewhat has been said before, and more shall be afterward.

Now all before said of our life, knowledge, wisdom, holiness, and
righteousness generally, as also more particularly of our sobriety,
watchfulnes, love and hope, is not so to be understood as if the said things
were in like measure in all the children of God. For all have not the like
outward means, whereby to atteine unto them: neither the like time etc.
Besides, as the hand of a man is greater then the hand of a child; and as the
hand of one man is larger then the hand of another; and the larger the hand of
any is, the more it will comprehend of whatsoever it does apprehend: so there
is difference both in the measure of faith, which is the hand of our heart
whereby we lay hold of Christ, and also in the measure of Christ himself laid
hold of by faith. For although every one that lays hold of Christ, lays not
hold of a piece of Christ, but of whole Christ spiritually touching his
essence, yet it is not so touching his efficacy. So then the more faith any man
has, the more he lays hold of Christ (in manner aforesaid) and consequently
he receives the more life, the more wisdom, the more sanctification
generally, and particularly the more sobriety love and hope.

In the matter notwith standing of justification this holds Note.
not. For he that has the least faith, is as perfectly justified as he that
has the greatest. Our life, knowledge, wisdom, etc. do admit plus and minus,
more and less: But our justification does not so: No man is justified in part
before God, except he be justified perfectly, and altogether. If a man could be
justified and discharged of all his sins, but only of one, and that one the
least of all otehr, yet that one were sufficient to the eternal condemnation
of that party, notwithstanding his justification, and discharge from all the
rest. The work also of our justification is but one work, wrought all at
once, not by degrees. But though our regeneration be so likewise, I mean of
the whole man together (not first of one part then of another:) and though also
in our regeneration, our sanctification be likewise begun, yet our
sanctification is not perfected all at once, but by degrees it is more and more
increased. To show this more Note.
plainly (for I desire to be rather indeed perspicuous for the edification of
the simplest, the^ by obscurity to seem profound, for the affecting of the
learned, or rather of some that are more curious then truly desirous of good
knowledge, to who^ plainnes seems baseness) To show this (I say) more
plainly, as our regeneration is nothing elst ut our new birth, so our
sanctification may be compared to our starure. As therefore a man is but once
naturally borne, not by degrees but all together, and the newborn babe as
soon as eure he is out of the mothers womb, is as perfectly borne as he that
is 20. or 40. years old; but being newborn he is not presently of his
perfect stature, but comes and grows to that by degrees in time, by meat,
and drink, and other means fit for the same: so is it touching our
regeneration and sa^ctification: we are newborn all at once, even the first
day we receive by the word the spirit of adoption, but though the also we begin
to be sanctified, yet we grow more and more therein afterward, as the new born
babe does in stature.

Last of all, the matter of our justification is altogether without us; even
wholly in Christ, as he did actiuely and passiuely obey his father, performing
his whole will for doing and suffering that which he required: but our spiritual
life, and other things before spoken of, are things within us. As Christ first
apprehended by faith aloft (as it were) does justify us in heaven, (having
before notwithstanding here in earth fully satisfied his fathers will in our
behalf) so after ward, and from the very moment of our justification, he
dwelling likewise in our hearts by the said faith spiritually, does sanctify
us here in earth. Within this exc^ption likewise of our justification, to be
without differing degrees of more or less, as are in other things before
mentioned, I comprehend the freedom of the children of God before noted, as
one point of their being the children of God: es^ecially touching the latter
branch thereof; that is, not their freedom from the bondage of sin and
satan, but their freedom of the new heavenly Jerusalem, for trading and
traffiquing for the merchandises thereof, as also for enjoying other
privileges belonging to the said freedom.

For to grant, that the freedom of the children of God from the bondage of
sin is not all alike (though in some respects it must be acknowledged to be
like) yet this is most certain, that the other branch of their freedom is
alike in all. For one as well as another of them that are regenerated and borne
again to God, have the like freedom of heaven, and all may in like manner
trade for the commodities thereof. Notwithstanding as they that are alike free
of a city, neither have all the like stock at the first to begin with, neither
all the like dexterity Note.
to use their freedom, and stock to the most advantage of themselves, whereby
some th^iue and prosper more then other, so is it with the children of God.

Though they be all alike free of the heavenly Jerusalem even of the C^ty of
God which is called the kingdom of God: yet the Lord gives not the like
stock, and portion of his graces to all where with (as it were) to set up, and
to begin, and so they do not all alike thr^ue and prosper.

In all these things hitherto handled from the eight Chapter to this place,
does consist the matter of our being the children of God, and that excellent
and glorious image of God, which being before regeneration altogether defaced
in us, is now by regeneration, through the great grace and mercy of God again
renewed in us.

It is (I say) only renewed in us that are regenerated. It remains still in
all the wicked and mere natural men altogether defaced. Yea as this image of
God so before described, i^ daily more and more increased in all that are newborn: so likewise the image of the Devil, which all natural men have by
nature and by propagation from their parents, is the more increased in such,
the longer they continue in their said natural state. As natural children
borne in favor like their father, the more they grow in stature do the more
resemble their natural Father: so all natural men being (as we have heard)
the children of the devil, and fashioned in qualities like unto him do the
more resemble him, the longer that they continue in their natural state, and
the more they heap sin upon sin.

By this image of God so renewed, and daily increased in all the newborn
children of God, the poorest and meanest of the said children of God, how
deformed soever they be in body (bleare-eied, or squint-eyed, crook-necked,
crook-backed, or crook-handed or legged, or having any other bodily deformity)
are notwithstanding more truly beautiful, then ever was Absalom, though In all
Israel, there was none so much to be praised for beauty as Absalom because that
from the sole of the foot even to the top of his head there was no blemish in
him. 2. Sa^. 14. 25.

This beauty of the body may decay by age, by sickness, and by diverse other
means: There be many sins also, the continuance wherein does take away the
most excellent bodily beauty that is. Does not whoredom this oftentimes? For
does not that foul disease (not fit almost to be named) which for the most
part accompanies that sin) eat up a man within and without? does not
drunkenness cause redness of eyes? Pro. 23. 29. bloughtinesse of face, and
tunne-like growth of the whole body? yea, does it not (as it were)
transubstantiate them into monsters, that were (before acquaintance with that
sin) comely and goodly persons?

As therefore Bathsheba speaks even to Solomon her son whom she knew should
be king, for the better directing of him in choice of a wife, that he might not
respect beauty of the body so much as inward graces and vertu^s (and yet who
should respect beauty if kings may not?) As (I say) Bathsheba speaks to
Solomon touching this matter, so say I, Favor is deceitful and beauty is
vanity. Pro. 31. 30. But the image of God renewed in the new birth of the
children of God, and the spiritual beauty thereof shall continue for ever, in
all sickness and in death it self; yea, it shall every day increase more and
more, as afterward we shall hear; yea, at the last in the resurrection also it
shall be crowned with such a glorious beauty even of the body (as in handling
of the second verse, and of our future similitude to Christ himself shall be
showed) as in respect whereof, the goodliest beauty of any man or woman that
ever was in the world, shall be seen to have been deformity. Does not this also
amplify the dignity of Gods children?

To conclude all hitherto spoken of the things wherein the being and matter of
the children of God (as they are the children of God) does consist, whatsoever
other things mere natural men have, or whatsoever resemblances be in some
hypocrites, either of all the things before handled, or of some of them, yet in
truth all such are utterly void of them.

As before touching the life of God, we compared mere natural men to images,
applying that unto them that Habbakuk speaks of images, that although they
were laid over with gold and silver, yet they had no breath in them: so now
also all those things whereby images be described. Psalm. 115. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
may likewise be spoken of mere natural men, and of all wicked men whatsoever:
They have a mouth and speak not, they have eyes and see not, they have ears
and hear not: they have noses and smell not, they have hands and handle not:
they have feet and walk not: neither make they a sound with their throat.
These things (I say) whereby images are thus described, may also be applied to
all mere natural men. For though such have all such parts of men, yet they
perform no office of such parts either toward God or men, which do belong
unto them.

Thus much touching the image of God renewed in the newborn children of God,
and touching all things wherein the same consists, as also touching the
increase of the dignity of the children of God thereby.

CHAP. XV.
Of the final cause of the regeneration and new birth of the children of God.

AFter the efficient causes both principal and isntrumental, and after the
material causes of our regeneration, so considered as we have done: it
follows now that we should enter into consideration of the form and of the
end of our said regeneration.

Touching the form, it is very hard in so spiritual a thing to distinguish it
from the matter. For what is this form but our similitude and likeness to the
spirit of God, and therefore also to God himself? For is it not said, that we
that are adopted to be the children of God, are sealed by the spirit of God to
the day of redemption? Ephesians. 4. 30. and 1. 13. And what is to be sealed by the
spirit of God, but to have the stamp and similitude of the spirit set upon us?
Is not the sealing of letters or of other writings the imprinting of the
similitude of the seal it self upon the wax affixed to the said letters and
other writings? that is, the impression of the form that is engraven upon the
said seal? And what is all this but that which we heard before, of the
knowledge, wisdom, holiness, righteousness, etc. wherein consists the matter
or being of the children of God? To pass therefore from the form, and not to be
curious in distinguishing thereof from the matter, let us come to the end why
God has so loved us, as to make, or to call, or to declare us to be his
children.

This is noted and expressed, to be the praise and glory of his grace: Ephesians.
1. 6. For these words are not there used as the end of our predestination
only, but also of the end whereunto we were predestined, namely that we
might be adopted, or made the children of God. Afterward also in the same
Chapter, the Apostle repeateth the same end of our election: viz. that we
Which first trusted in Christ, should be to the praise of his glory. Not much
unlike also is that place before alleged, touching the end of our deliverance
from our enemies, namely that we might serve him, etc. Luke 1. 74. For that of
our delivery from our enemies, does import our adoption, because all not
adopted, are still in the hands of their enemies: and all that are delivered
from their enemies are the children of God. When the Lord also says, If I be a
father where is mine honor? Malac. 1. 6. does he not insinuate, that this was
the end why he had made them his children, namely, that they should honor him?
But of all other places, that of James is most pregnant in this behalf: Of his
own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be unto him, as
the first fruits of the creatures: James 1. 18.

In this place the Apostle speaks directly of our begetting again, noting
God himself to be the author thereof: his own will to be the moving cause of
him there unto: the word of truth, to be the mea^s (all which have been
observed before) and that we might be the first fruits of his creatures, to be
the end. What is it to be the first fruits of his creatures? Even to be set
apart in special manner for his service and glory, as in the time of the law,
the first fruits were separated from all other, and set apart from all common
uses (whereto other fruits might be applied) and dedicated only to the special
service of Gods worship. Exodus 34. 25. Deuteronomy. 12 17

What can be greater then to honor or glorify God? In that our Savior
teaches us in the first place, and before all; vea, before the forgiveness of
our sins, to pray Hallowed be thy name, or Glorified be thy name, does he not
thereby plainly teach us, that the hallowing or glorifying of the name of God,
is more then all other things? Does not the Apostle teach, that this ought to
be the end of all the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, viz.
the glory and praise of God? Phil. 1. 11. Does not our Savior himself
complain of the great trouble of his soul, and pray thus unto his father; Now
is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour: but
therefore came I to this hour. Father glorify thy name: Ioh. 12. 27. 28. We
see in this pra^er, Christ to be in such an agony, that (as he was man) he
could scarce tell what he said: yea, that having prayed the father to save him
from that hour, he corrects himself, (not as acknowledging his former
petition to have been evil, but only to make that better that was good
before) that (I say) he so corrects himself, by remembering that hour (from
which he prayed to be delivered) to be the end of his coming, And by the last
clause notwithstanding of the said prayer, Father glorify thy name, we see
further, that he preserreth the glorifying of his fathers name to the
deliverance from that hour, against which before he prayed. Does he not
thereby teach, that he regarded not himself, but was well content still to
endure that agony, so that thereby he might glorify the name of his father? If
Christ therefore did so highly esteem of the glory of God, is it a small
matter, that we are made the children of God for the glory of God? Does not the
Apostle further command, that whether we eat or drink, or what soever do,
we should do all to the glory of God? 1. Cor. 10. 31. If then this ought to
be the end of all things we do, must it not be acknowledged to be more
excellent then all things that we do? For who will, or can deny the end of
things to be more excellent then the things referred to the end?

Again, what can be more honorable and glorious, then to serve him, that is
most honorable and glorious? The greater that men are, the more honorable it
is to serve them: therefore to serve a king, is more honorable then to serve
any other. How honorable a thing then is it to serve the king of kings?

Yea, bu^ (will some man say) The Lord has made all, things for his own sake.
Pro. 16. 4. that is, for his own service and glory. Nebuchadnezer also a
reprobate and a most wicked man, is called for all that the servant of the
Lord: even in and for the destruction of Jerusalem. Ier. 27. 6. and 43. 10.
yea, the devils in some sort do the works of God, in executing the commission
which God gives them. 1. Kings. 22. 22. at least in performing the decree of
God. Acts. 2. 23. If these things be so, (as indeed they are) what singular
thing, or what preferment or prerogative is it for the children of God to be
borne or made the children of God, for the glory of God, and to serve God? For
do not all things, yea, do not the most wicked men; yea do not the devils
themselves the same? I answer, that this that I speak of the end of the
adoption of the children of God, for Gods glory and service, is to be
understood of their serving and glorifying God in a more special and excellent
manner then other do: even so much more as they are nearer to God, and more
dignified and advanced by God then other are How is this? Not by force (as it
were) and only constrained by the ouerruling hand and power of God, but
willingly and cheerfully with a mind to serve and glorify God in that which
they do: and being guided and directed thereunto by the same gracious spirit of
God, whereby they are made the children of God.

In the greater place that any is employed about an earthly king, or for an
earthly king, the greater honor is such emploiment for him that is so employed:
So likewise the nearer the service of any is to the kings own person, the more
honorable is the same service. God has no greater emploiments, neither any
nearer to his own person here upon the earth then those things are, wherein he
emploieth his children. Then such emploiment therefore cannot but be very
honorable unto them.

Though all things be made to the glory of God in a general respect, and so
accordingly do serve his providence, yet the elect and children of God in a
special manner and meaning are called vessels of honor: as contrarily the
reprobate are called vessels of dishonor: 2. Tim. 2. 20. Though therefore
thereprobate themselves do also serve God (in manner aforesaid) vet their
service it is but base in respect of the service of his children, because such
service is altogether seruise.

In the time of the law all beasts and fowls, Psalm. 50. 10. etc. and all
silver and gold, Hag. 2. 9. were the Lords as well as now: yet who knows not
but that any beast or foul, or silver or gold consecrated to the service of
the Lord, either first in the Tabernacle, or afterward in the Temple was the
Lords in a more special, and a more holy, and a more honorable manner?

The like then might be said, and still may be said of the six common days,
and of the seventh. The six were and are the Lords as well as the seventh, in a
general respect: yet the seventh was and is consecrated to the Lord in a more
special manner: in respect whereof it is to be accounted more holy. For these
causes there was more severe punishment commanded to be inflicted upon any
common person, and was often inflicted by the Lord himself upon any person
whatsoever, that should apply such things as were specially consecrated to Gods
service, to any common use, then upon any that should abuse any other thing not
so consecrated to God, though otherwise it were of the same kind and nature.
God spared Belshazzar all the while he did eat and drink in his own vessels
(though it be not to be doubted, but that he did abuse the meat and drink to
exeede, and therefore also the vessels themselves wherein he did so eat and
drink to Gods dishonor) but when besides ^^s own vessels, he must also have
the vessels of the Lord, which had been taken out of the temple of the Lord
house at Jerusalem; when these (I say) were brought out (...), and when he and
his Princes, his (...) in them, oh what a fearful hand of God in (...) of a
man appeared presently upon the wa^ before him: and how fearful contents were
written thereby upon the wall against him? For was not the kings countenance
pre^ently chan^^d? Did not his thoughts trouble him? Were not the joints of his
l^ynes loosed? Did not his knees smite one against another? Did he not in a
great extremity and agony cry aloud for the astrologians, Chaldeans, and
soothsaiers? Dan. 5. 3. etc. Though he were a king, and a mighty king, yet he
had been better to have gone a thousand miles on his bare feet upon an errand
from God: yea, he had been better to have eaten his fingers to the bones: yea,
the very flesh from his arms.

Touching the seventh day, now called the Lords day, though many disgrace it as
being now but an ordinance of the Church not commanded of God himself to be
sanctified, yet by how many judgments of God upon the prophaners thereof has
the Lord commended it to be inspeciall manner holy above all other days?

So though the wicked themselves do serve the Lord genegenerally, yet the
children of God are set apart and consecrated (as it were the first fruits, or
special vessels of honor as we have heard) to the service of God in special
manner. yea, to return again to that similitude (that has been before
closely insinuated) as the counselors to a king for matters of state, are
subjects as well as other: and as they be subjects generally differ not from
other; and yet being made choice of by the king, in some special manner to
serve him, by consulting one with another, and conferring their wisdoms and
counsels together, for the more good of the king, and of the whole kingdom,
and being thereunto also sworn in a special manner: as (I say) such in these
respects differ from other, and are more honorable then other; even then other
of the same quality, sort, and degree: So is it with men adopted and selected
from the common sort of men, to be the children of God. For though they be men
as well as other, and sin as well as other; yet the Lord by making them his
children having advanced them above other, to be, as it were, of his privy
counsel: not to give counsel to him that is the mighty counselor, but to
take his counsels from him: that is, such as to whom be may reveal his
secrets: Psalm. 25. 14. and as the Lord says of Abraham, Shall I hide from him
the thing which I do? Genes. 18. 17. therefore and in this respect they are
certainly more honorable then other men. If it be no small honor to be a privy
counselor to a mortal king: how great should we think that honor to be of
being one of those, to whom the king of glory does reveal his secrets^ Verily
this honor is so much the greater, because our Lord Jesus Christ himself does
give thanks to his father in this behalf: yea because in his said giving
thanks, he testifies the said dignity to be the greater, in as much as the
Lord his father had hid them from the wise, and men of understanding and had
revealed them unto babes, babes, and that only of his mere good will and
pleasure: Mat. 11. ^5. 26. So likewise afterward as he says to his disciples,
to you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, so he says
of other that were not his disciples (much more that were not the children of
God) but to them it is not given: Mat. 13. 11. But of this before, Chap. 10.

Thus much briefly of the form, and of the end of the children of God.

CHAP. XVI.
More largely, laying forth the Communion of the children of God with Christ
Jesus, and of some special benefits they have thereby.

IT may be now expected, that I should in the next place speak of the effects
of the children of God: but I will not be curious in distinguishing effects
from benefits, or commodities belonging unto them. I grant that by the exact
rules of art, benefits properly are to be accounted adjuncts, or appurtenances
and things belonging to another. But herein I will not be curious: but rather
endeavor to be plain, and therefore to write for the understanding of the
simplest, then for the pleasing of such as respect method more then matter.
That which is plain and perspicuous may be understood of all: but that which
is curious and exact altogether according to the rules of art, is most for the
capacity only of them that are acquainted with arts. Some effects of a thing
are not to be denied to be also benefits thereof; or at least beneficial
thereunto: albeit that all benefits cannot aptly be called effects, as
afterward we shall see in this matter of our adoption. For every benefit
belonging thereunto neither aptly or truly can be called an effect thereof.
Justification is a benefit belonging to adoption: yet adoption is rather and
effect or thereof, then that a fruit or effect of adoption. Peace of conscience
also another benefit of adoption, is both a benefit and also a fruit arising
from adoption, as afterward shall appear. The like may be said of other
things. For this cause I will be bold to confound fruits or effects with
benefits and commodities of the children of God. Now because all, both effects
and fruits, and also benefits and commodities of regeneration depend upon the
communion of the newborn children of God with Christ Jesus, therefore
although I have before spoken somewhat of their said communion (Christ Jesus
being showed to be the chief matter wherein their new birth and being the
children of God does consist, and all other points thereof before handled
being effects of the former) yet I will now return again thereunto, and lay
the same more largely forth then before I have done.

Touching therefore this communion, that we may yet better see what other
benefits the children of God have, and what fruits they bring forth thereby,
let us further understand, that it is in the Scriptures expressed by diverse
most significant metaphors, and excellent similitudes.

For first, it is compared to the communion betwixt our bodies and our
garments, in which respect we are bid to put on the Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 13.
14. Secondly it is compared to the communion betwixt us and our daily meat and
drink. In which respect Christ calls himself the meat that abides to
eternal life: Ioh. 6. 27. and the bread of God which came down from heaven,
verse 33. and the living bread, which whosoever eats shall live for ever: and
also says that his flesh is bread, etc. verse 51. and that except we eat his
flesh and drink his blood, we have no life in us, verse 53. because his flesh
is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. And that he that eats his
flesh and drinks his blood dwells in him, and he in him: verse 55.

Thirdly, it is compared to the communion betwixt the vine and the branches. In
which respect Christ calls himself the vine, and us the branches: Ioh. 15.
5. and Paul expressly says that we are branches etc. Romans 11. 17.

Fourthly, it is compared to the communion betwixt the chief corner stone, and
the rest of the building: Mat. 21. 42. Ephe. 2. 20.

Fifthly, it is compared to the communion betwixt a man and the house wherein he
dwells. In which resoect Christ said before, that he dwells in them that
eat his flesh and drink his blood: so Paul says (as before also has been
showed) that Christ dwells in our hearts: Ephesians. 3. 17.

Sixthly, it is compared to the communion betwixt the head and the members. For
he is said to be the head of his Church, and the Church is said to be his body:
Ephesians. 2. 20. and we are called his members: Ephesians. 5. 30.

Seventhly, it is compared to the communion betwixt the man and the wife in
marriage. Therefore he is often called the husband, and the Church is often
called his spouse. And that which the Lord says and promises of marrying the
Israelites unto himsefe for ever in righteousness, in indgement, in mercy, in
compassion, and in faith fulness, etc. Hosea 2. 19. 20. is to be understood as
of all other the elect as well as of Israel, on the one part: so also of the
second person in the Deity (to be, after that prophecy, incarnate and made
man) on the other part. For it cannot be understood of the father or of the
holy ghost, because they were never to assume our nature, whereby to be a fit
husband for us. Therefore also as the man and the wife, being before marriage
(or at least before contract) two, are after marriage and contract called one
flesh. Genesis 2. 24. Mat. 19. 5. 6. so the Apostle using the same similitude of
Christ and us, says, we are of his flesh and of his bones: Ephesians. 5. 30.

To shut up this point, such is the communion betwixt Christ and the children
of God, that the Apostle does not only account them complete in him: Colos. 2.
10. but says also that they are the fulness of him that fills all in all
things: Ephesians. 1. 23. and so he insinuates generally, that Christ is in some
sort imperfect without the children of God, as the husband is imperfect without
the wife: the head without the other members: a man without an house: the rest
of the building without the chief corner stone: the vine without the branches;
the meat and drink without some to receive them: and the garments without
some to wear the same.

Now to return to the former metaphors and similitudes, so many as the
communion betwixt Christ the natural son of God, and us the adopted children
of God is in Scripture expressed by: by so many ways is our dignity by thy
communion amplified and increased.

For touching the first, was it not a great honor for Daniel (as the
commandment of Belshazzar) to be clothed with purple, and to have a chain of
gold put about his neck? Dan. 5. 29. Was it not more, for poor Mordecay
before appointed to the sword, and who had before and who had before sit at the
gate of Ahashuerosh in sackeloth and ashes, to be clothed with the kings
royal apparel? Ester. 6. 8. 9. 10. 11. How honorable then is it for such
beggarly persons as we were (that were not only stark naked, and utterly
without any good apparel, but that also were clothed before with most polluted
garments of all sin, etc.) to be clothed with so rich a garment as Christ
Jesus is? Verily neither Herod himself when he clothed himself In his royal
apparel, Acts 12. 21. not all the Princes in the world (that had not Christ
Jesus) were ever so glorious in apparel, as the poorest child of God is that
has put on the Lord Jesus Christ. It was an honorable thing to the
Israelites, that the Lord led them so through the wilderness, that for forty
years their clothes waxed not old upon them, etc. Deuteronomie 29. 5. How
honorable a thing then is it, for all the children of God (both young and old,
great and small) to be clothed with that garment, which as it is called the new
man, so it will always be new, never worn, never threed-bare, or waxing old,
but remaining as fresh for ever as it was the first day, even the same
yesterdaie, to day and for ever? Hebrews 13. 8. for ever, (I say) not only in
this world, but also in the world to come.

Touching the second Metaphor, was it not an honorable thing for the brethren
of Joseph at their second coming into Egypt, to dine with Joseph, and to have
meats set before them from Joseph's own table? Genesis 43. 16. and 34. So also
for Mephibosheth (though Ionathans own son, and therefore of the blood
royal of Saul) to be fed with meat from David's own table, a^ one of David's
own sons? 2. Sam. 9. 7. and likewise for Chinham the son of Barzillai, not
only to eat of David's meat, 2. Sam. 19. 38. but also to be among them that
should eat at Salomons table? 1. King 2. 7. Was it not a great honor also for
the Israelites to be miraculously fed in the wilderness with Manna from heaven
(which is therefore called angels food) and with quails, and with water out
of the rock? How honorable then is it for the poorest children of God, to
eat of Christ's own flesh, and to drink Christ's own blood? Verily, neither
the meat of David, nor the dainty fare upon Salomons table, in his greatest
glory, nor the dointiest fare of any other Princes in the world in their
greatest solemnities, nor the Manna and quails, and water out of the rock
before mentioned to be given to the Israelites, was ever comparable in any
respect, to this diet of the meanest sons and daughters of God.

Touching the third former metaphor, what a strange thing is it, that such
siences, as we were (though indeed compared to wild olive branches, yet ten
times worse) should be grafted into so precious and pleasant a stock as Christ
is; and thereby bring forth fruits agreeable to Christ himself? John 15. 5.
Philippians 1. 11. Though in our grafting Iouis omnia plena.
the siences which we graft be nourished by the virtue of that stock,
whereinto they are grafted, yet they bring forth fruit according to their own
nature, not according to the nature of the th^cke whereinto they are grafted.
But we being grafted into Christ, (not the better into the worse, but stark
naught into the best) are both nourished by virtue from him; and also do bring
forth fruits agreeable to his nature, not to our own.

Touching the fourth former metaphor, how great a grace is it for us, that were
so rough, and vnhewen stones as we were, to be hewn smooth, and made fit to
be coupled to such a precious corner stone as Christ is?

The same is much more to be understood of the dignity of Gods children in
respect of the first former metaphor: For if it be an honor to be wrought
and carved, and every way made fit to be coupled to such a precious corner
stone as Christ Jesus is, how much greater honor is it, to be made an house
for Christ himself to dwell in? yea, for him, not only as man, but also as
God and man? Having been before habitations of Satan, and houses of unclean
spirits: Mat. 12. 43. etc. Is it not an honorable change of such to be made
houses: houses? yea, more then houses: For God fills all things and all
things; (in some sort, as touching the essence of GOD, even the wicked
themselves, are full of God: Is it not (I say) an honorable change of such as
we were, to be made houses, yea more then houses, even holy houses,
tabernacles, and temples of the living God? 1. Cor. 3. 16. and 2. Cor. 6. 16.
verily touching this matter, this second Scripture before alleged, is the more
to be observed, because with the former point, of men to be houses and
tabernacles and temples for God himself, and of Gods dwelling among men, and
familiar walking or conuersing with them, the Apostle ioineth also another
ancient promise of God, viz. that be would be a father unto them, and that they
should be sons and daughters unto him. 2. Cor. 6. 18. Leuit. 26. 11. 12. For
by this conioining of these two together, the Apostle does most plainly teach
that the former honor of being Tabernacles and Temples for God, is proper
only to them that are the sons and daughters of God.

The dignity of the children of God in respect of this metaphor, is yet the
greater, because as the whole world in all the beauty of it, was at the first
made a palace for man to dwell in, so man himself in this second creation, is
made a palace for God to dwell in.

Touching the sixth former metaphor, is it not more then marvelous, that such
vile persons as we naturally are (even little better then limbs of the devil,
at least his children and bondslaues, as has been before showed) should have
so honorable and glorious an head as Christ Jesus is that sits at the right
hand of God in the heaven, and has the Angels (good and bad) in subjection
unto him? 1. Pet. 3. 22.

Besides all before spoken of the excellency of Christ (in speaking of him as
of one of the efficient causes of our regeneration) is he not most excellently
also described to be clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girded
about his pappes with a golden girdle? to have his head also and hairs white
as white wool and snow? and his eyes as a flame of fire? yea, to have his
feet like unto fine brass burning as in a furnace? and a voice as the sound
of many waters? yea, to have (further) in his right hand seven stars, a sharp
two edged sword going out of his mouth, and his face shining as the sun
shines in his strength? Revelation. 1. 13. etc.

Neither is the dignity of the children of God thus amplified in respect that
they have so excellent a head (excellent for power, for wisdom, for justice,
for meeknes, for goodness for all things that are excellent) but also because as
Christ has no other body then his Church, so the Church has no other head but
Christ Jesus: and as none does or can give life to other, either to quicken
them from the death of sin here, or to raise them at the latter day (when
before that, by the doctrine of the Papists themselves, the Pope shall be
suppressed) as none (I say) can thus give life to men but only Christ Jesus
(for who dares say that the Pope can raise up a man either from his sin, or
from the grave, especially when the Pope himself shall be dead?) so none is or
can be the head of the Church but only Christ. Since therefore Christ is not
only so excellent an head, but also the sole and only head of the children of
God, in this respect also it must be granted, that their state is so much the
more honorable.

Yea, this honor of the children of God by Christ Jesus his being their head,
is the more, because as he has not taken the nature of angels upon him, but
only the nature of man, so he is not the head of Angels, as he is of elect
men. For as it is a monstrous body that has two heads: so is it no less
monstrous for the body to be of one nature, and the head of another. And as
the Angels cannot be (neither ever are called) the members of Christ, so Christ
cannot be called the head of the Angels. All the members also of the body of
Christ, are said to grow to a perfect man in Christ, and every part and member
of the body of Christ is said to receive daily increase (as it were) by nerves,
etc. Ephesians 4. 13. 15. 16. Let no man here mistake me: As kings are called
heads, that is, chief governors of their people, so Christ (not only as GOD,
but also as God and man) is the head and chief governor (and that absolutely,
without any such limitation as kings have) of the Angels, as well as of all
other creatures. But in that special manner that he is head of men borne anew
unto God, he is not the head of Angels. Therefore in this respect also the
condition of Gods children is so much the more excellent.

Touching the seventh and last former metaphor, what heart of man can conceive
the depth, the height, the breadth and the length of this love of Christ, in
matching and ioining himself to us, and us to him? that he (I say) that was
the heir of all things, by whom the worlds were made, and who was the
brightness of the glory, and the engraven form of the person of God the father:
Hebrews. 1. 1. 2. and being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal to God. Philippians 2. 6. 7. that he (I say) should so cast his love
and liking upon us, as to take us to be his spouse and wife, and that way also
to make us the daughters (as it were in law, and by marriage) to God the
father? even us, that not only had no portion, and were every mothers child
of us beggars brattes, but that also were base horn creatures, and had an
Ammonite to our Father, and an Hittite to our mother: and that therefore (as
most base children are) were in such misery as a newborn child whose navel
is not cut, neither is washed with water to soften him, neither is salted with
salt (for the better hardening the navel and the whole skin; for the better
strengthening of all the inward parts, and for the better decocting and
consuming of all corrupt humors) neither was swadled with clouts, and whom
being borne in misery there was no eye to pity, or to show compassion. so that
he lay in the open field, to all contempt, and altogether polluted with blood,
Ezekiel. 16. 3. 4. 5. 6. yea, who were altogether deformed and misshapen, even
a crocked generation, having neither good face, nor good heart, nor good eye,
nor any member well proportioned: yea, being altogether also without wit and
understanding of heavenly things (as we have heard) even pure naturals (as we
speak) and no more able to conceive the things of God, and pertaining to our
own good, then very idiots. Is not this wonderful, that such an one as Christ
was and is, should so unequally (in many respects) match himself with such as
we were? and that by matching himself so with us, should make such a change
in us: of crooked to make us straight: of deformed to make us beautiful: of
beggarly to make us rich: of fools to make us wise: of profane to make us
holy: of earthly to make us heavenly: and of children of the devil, to make us
the children of God his father? What a preferment therefore is this? Were it
not a great advancement and a matter of exceeding honor for a mighty Prince to
take some vagabond woman, poor, naked, deformed, miserable, etc. and to marry
her to himself, and to put her presently into all costly and princely robes?
yea, it was an honor for Ab^ga^l though the wife of a rich but a miserable
yeoman (such as this time has too many like) and also a wise and a virtuous
woman, to be taken to wife unto David? was it not also an high preferment for
Ester a poor maiden of another nation, to be made wife and Queen to that
mighty Monarch and Emperor Ahashuerosh, that reigned over an hundred and seven
and twenty Provinces? How honorable then is it for us, (more poor, base,
miserable then any rogue) to be married to the natural and only son of God,
hei^e and Lord of all things?

Verily this match is so much greater preferment of us, then the former matches
were, either of Abigail with David, or of Ester with Ahashuerosh, because both
David and Ahashuerosh had many other wives besides those: but Christ Jesus has
so matched himself with us, that as he had no other before us, so he desires
no other besides us, but contenteth himself wholly with us, and takes as
great delight in us, as if we had been his equals when he first made choice of
us: and as though we had been as wise, rich, beautiful, virtuous, and every
way as glorious, as either he does make us (after his marying of us) in this
life; or as he will make us hereafter in the life to come.

To leave these metaphors and similitudes, whereby hitherto the communion of
the children of God is so described, and their dignity in such sort amplified,
let us further understand that our said communion, is the more admirable in it
self, and honorable to us, in as much as thereby we cannot but have communion
also with the Father: because Christ and the father are one: Ioh. 10. 30 And
the father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father: Ioh. 14. 10. 11. In
which last place our Savior prays, that as he and the father are one in
another, so also the children of God (whom God had given to Christ: Ioh. 6. 37.
and 17. 6.) might be one, (not only amongst themselves, but also) in them, that
is, in the father and in the Son. Therefore our Savior likewise says
before, If any man love me, he will keep my word: and my father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him: Ioh. 14. 23. Yea therefore
Christ came into the world, and was made one with us, that we might have
communion with the Father, and be made one with him: and as he was made one
with us to make us one with the father, so also he did effect that for which he
did come. Therefore the Apostle having set forth our miserable state in the
world by nature, viz. that amongst other things, we were without God in the
world: Ephesians. 2. 12. he does presently by way of opposition add our contrary
state in Christ, and by Christ, saying, But in Christ Jesus ye which once were
far of, are made nearer by the blood of Christ, etc. verse. 13.

Having that communion with the Father, and with the son, we have also the
like with the holy ghost: and therefore it is not only said that they that are
led by the spirit of God are the sons of God, but also that they that are the
sons of God, have received the spirit of God, whereby they ^rie Abba father:
Romans 8. 14, etc. and again: that because they are sons, God has sent forth
the spirit of his Son into their hearts, which cries Abba father. Therefore
also our Savior, Ioh. 14. (where he promises the communion of himself and of
his father, unto his disciples) promises also to send the holy ghost, which
should abide with them. Therefore also the holy ghost is said to be shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: Tit. 3. 5. Finally, as by the
son we have communion with the father, so the holy ghost is the bond of our
communion with the father and with the son. Through him (says Paul) we have
an entrance to the father by one spirit: Ephesians. 2. 18. and by one spirit we are
all baptized into one body, etc. 1. Cor. 12. 13.

Is not this then a great dignity? For this is one of the specialest promises
that God has made unto his people, namely, that he will set his tabernacle
among them, and that his soul shall not loath them, that also he will walk
among them, etc. Leuit. 26. 11. 12. So then they with whom God has such
communion, as to set his tabernacle among them, and dwell with them, may assure
themselves that God will never loath them, nor leave them: Yea, we do thereby
further see, that he promises not only his presence but also his gracious
presence, by his power to uphold them, by his grace to direct them, and by his
goodness to give them every good thing. For he is greater then all, Ioh. 10.
29. both in power and wisdom. Who therefore can destroy or hurt them, whom he
will preserve? In a strange country, and in places of danger, oh how great a
comfort is it to have some company? In such a place the truth of that is most
apparent that Two are better then one, because if they fall, the one will lift
up his fellow: Eccles. 4. 9. 10. But alas, what is all the company of man, in
respect of the society of God? They that have God so with them, may truly say,
If God be with us, who can be (or what skilleth it who be) against us? God is
light, and in him is no darkness: 1. Ioh. 1. 5. If therefore we have him
always with us, we shall be sure of light, whereby so to see our ways, that
we may not err. Yea God is the father of lights, from whom comes every good
and perfect gift: James 1. 17. Therefore they that have him their shepherd,
may assure themselves they shall want nothing, but that he will make them to
rest in green pastures, and lead them by the still waters of life, restoring
their souls and guiding them into the paths of righteousness: Psalm. 23. 1.
etc. Yea, they that have thus God their shepherd, shall be sure not only of
green pastures, and water, but also that he will give them that wine and milk,
and bread, etc. whereby their souls may live, and be made fat to eternal
life. Isai. 55. 1. 2.

What a privilege is this? It is a great prerogative of the children of God,
to be guarded by an Angel, as afterward we shall hear. But alas, small comfort
is there in the presence of an Angel if God himself be not with us. When the
Israelites had so offended God, and provoked his wrath against them by making a
molten calfe, that he denied to go himself with them unto the land which he
had promised them, and yet at the prayer of Moses was content to send an Angel
before them to cast out the Canaanites, the Amerites, the Hittites, etc. How (I
pray you) did they take this? It is said that when they heard this tidings,
they sorrowed, and no man put on his best raiment: Exodus 33. 1. etc. There is
therefore no comfort in the presence of any creature whatsoever, if God
himself be not graciously present, with the eyes of his favor to behold them
and their slate, with the ears of his grace to hear their cry: Psalm. 34. 15.
and with the right hand of his power, to support them. Psalm. 144. 7. and to
fill them with good things: Psalm. 104. 28. and 145 16. Therefore Moses himself
in the three and thirtith of Exodus before alleged, upon Gods denial of his
going in person with the Israelites, (offering notwithstanding to send an
Angel before them) Moses himself (I say) reasons the case with God in these
words. saying, Wherein shall it be known that I and thy people have found
favor in thy sight? Shall it not be when thou go with us? So I and thy
people shall have pre-eminence before all the people that are upon the earth:
verse. 16. As the former sorrowing of the people in the beginning of the Chapter
shows how heavy a thing it is to want Gods company, though we have the
company of Angels, so what can be more plainly spoken then these words of Moses
to show how great pre-eminence there is in that gracious presence of God whereof
now we speak?

This privilege is the more, because as all the points before handled, so this
is both common to all the children of God and also peculiar to them only. For
it is apropriated to them that are elected, called, instified, and which shall
be glorified: Romans 8. 31. and therefore before our calling (as we have heard)
we are said to be without God in the world: Ephesians. 2. 12. and it is before
observed, that the promise of Gods dwelling with men, and making them his
tabernacles and temple, is joined with another of making them also his sons,
and his daughters: 2. Cor. 6. 18. as noting that it is both common to them all,
and also proper to them only.

Therefore the wicked have no more part in this privilege then in the former.
As the children of God may say, that when they are alone they are not alone,
because God (even the fafather, son, and holy ghost) is always with them: so
whatsoever company else the wicked have, yet they may truly say they are alone;
because God (even the father, Son and holy Ghost) is absent from them.

As God is infinite and fills all places, so he cannot but be wheresoever the
wicked are. But cold is the comfort of this his presence only. For if their
eyes were opened to see him, they should see him no otherwise then David saw
the Angel of the Lord, between the earth and the heaven with his sword drawn
in his hand, and stretched out toward Jerusalem: 1. Chron. 21. 16. What to do
had the Angel of the Lord his hand so stretched out toward Jerusalem? even to
destroy it: 2. Sam. 24. 16.

Neither any otherwise should the wicked see the Lord to be present (if their
eyes were opened) then Balaams Ass saw also the same or another Angel of the
Lord stand in the way, and a sword drawn in his hand, at the sight whereof, the
Ass being stricken with fear flung the first time out of the way into the
field: and the second time dasnt her masters foot against the wall: and the
third time lay down under him, not daring to go in the way: Numb. 22. 23.

Thus (I say) and no otherwise, should the wicked see the Lord present with
them, not to do them any good, but to be revenged of them for all their
wickedness. Thereby they should be so filled and possessed with fear, that
they should be ready to fly (if it were possible) and to run away from his
presence. But whither should they fly from his presence? If they should ascend
into heaven, be is there: If they should go down into hell (or make their bed
in the grave) he is there: If they should take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, yet thither should his hand follow
them; and his right hand bold them from escaping. If they should say, the
darkness shall hide us, the night should be light round about them: Psalm. 139.
1. etc. Therefore if God he thus from them touching his grace and only present
in his wrath, power and justice against them, what (alas) shall it boot them
to have any of his creatures with them? Truly nothing at all: They were as good
be alone. If Solomon say, Woe unto him that is alone: for he falls, and there
is no: asecond to to help himvp: Eccles. 4. 10. how much more wocfull is the
state of the wicked, that are altogether destitute of the gracious presence of
God? For if he withdraw himself from them, who dares accompany them for any
good?

By these things we see, how great the prerogative of the children of God is by
their communion with God. But this is not all: For this communion with Christ
Jesus, (and so consequently with the other two persons in the deity) is the
more excellent, not only in respect of the excellency of the persons, with
whom our base nature is united; neither in other respects before spoken: but
also because being once made, it is indissoluble, and vnteparable. All the
unions before mentioned, whereunto this union metaphorically and by way of
similitude is resembled, may be dissolved: For the garment put on is also put
off: The most of our meat and drink (touching the matter thereof) is eiected
and cast out: The vine and the branches, as also any other tree and the boughs,
may be divided by the axe, or some other tool: So may the corner stone and the
rest of the building therewith coupled: The inhabitant or tenant is often times
turned out of his house; yea sometime the lawful owner is cast out of his own
freehold: The natural head and the natural body, yea the body and the soul
of man are for a time separated by death: Finally by the same means, there is
a separation betwixt the man and the wife. But nothing whatsoever can ever
dissolve the union betwixt the children of God and God himself, Father, Son,
and holy Ghost.

As the personal union betwixt the two natures in Christ, (the Godhead and the
manhood) could not be dissolved; even when the humanity it self (touching the
parts thereof) was by death for a time dissolved (the soul being in heaven
with the father, and the body lying in the grave) but the knot once knit did
continue in death it self, and shall continue for ever: so also is the union,
betwixt God and the children of God an everlasting union. As therefore the
misery of man, is in the separation of man from God (who is blessed for ever,
and blessedness it self) so the happiness of man is in his union and
communion with God, especially in the continuance thereof for ever.

As all the wicked and ungodly are most miserable by their being without God in
the world, (as before we have heard) even so long as they so continue, because
all that while they are as far from heaven, as earth; yea as hell it self,
and remain in darkness and in the power of satan, Acts 26. 18. (oh woeful
condition!) so all the children of God, having in their adoption this communion
with God, are happy and ten times happy, because the benefit and comfort
thereof has no end.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the benefits of the children of God by their fore said communion with
Christ and with the whole Deity, and first of the forgiveness of sins.

TO proceed a little further into the foresaid communion of the children of God
with Christ Jesus, and by Christ Jesus with the father and with the holy ghost:
let us somewhat more behold the excellency thereof, by such benefits as the
children of God do thereby enjoy: wherein all wicked and natural men (so
continuing) have no part or portion.

Here let us first consider the great benefit of forgiveness of sins. It is
indeed a principal point (as has been before observed) of that mercy of God
which was one of the principal motives of God to work the work of our
regeneration. And of that mercy of God I have spoken a little generally before:
Notwith standing this particular point thereof touching the forgiveness of
sins is a little more largely here to be handled, because this place (in some
respects) is fitter for that purpose then the former: the rather because it is
not only to be considered as a cause of regeneration, but also as an effect
and fruit of our foresaid communion with God.

Touching this benefit therefore, that it is by our communion with Christ
Jesus, it is manifest, because he is said to be the reconciliation for our
sins, and not only for our sins, but also for the sins of the whole
world: 1. Ioh. 2. 2. By reconciliation for our sins, and for the sins of
the whole world, the Apostle means, the sins both of all already
regenerated and newborn; and also of other the elect of God in the world,
remaining yet in their natural and unregenerate state. Paul also says that
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity: etc.
Tit. 2. 19. What is it to redeem us from all iniquity, but to purchase a free
and absolute pardon for us of all our sins?

Moreover he says, that in Christ we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace: Ephesians. 1. 7. Coloss. 1. 14.
In both which places let this be observed, Note.
that the Apostle interprets the redemption of the elect to be the
forgiveness of sins. Why shall we so observe this interpretation of the word
redemption? Because thereby the Apostle insinuates a twofold or double
redemption wrought by Jesus Christ: one proper only to the elect, consisting
in the forgiveness of sins, and other things depending thereupon: the other
common to all, as well to the reprobate as to the elect. But what is this so
common a redemption? viz. It is a release from the bondage and obedience of the
ancient ceremonial law: touching the going diverse times of the year to
Jerusalem, and performing there diverse rites and ceremonies in the worship of
God: namely the payment of tithes, and of first fruits: the bringing of diverse
oblations and sacrifices: as also touching diverse kinds of washings, and
clensing men of the leprosy, of pollution by handling the dead, by any issue,
etc. and concerning likewise abstinence from diverse kinds both of fish and
flesh, and many other the like things. The redemption (I say) of men from
obedience of these things is common to the reprobate and not peculiar to the
elect. For Christ Jesus has so nailed the whole law of ceremonies and
ordinances to his cross, that although Christ were taken down from the said
cross, that although Christ were taken down from the said cross, yet they
shall (as it were) so remain fast fixed thereunto, that they shall never come
down, or be in force with men by anv authoritv from God. This is plainly
taught, Ephesians. 2. 15. Coloss. 2. 14. The words are commonly known, thersore I
do no^ set them down.

As in the time of the law, before the coming of Christ, though the Jews were
bound to obedience of the ceremonial law, and did therefore sin, if they
did not observe the same: yet the Gentiles (not incorporated into the Jews)
were free from it, and did not offend either by eating any thing forbidden to
the Jew; or by intermitting any other rite of the said law: so now all that
law being by Christ disanulled, all are at liberty both the Jews as well as
the Gentiles: and therefore the Jews do no more offend now, by doing any thing
contrary to any point of the ceremonial law then the Gentiles did in former
time. Al men therefore whatsoever, as well the wicked as the godly are partaker
of this redemption and liberty: so that the wicked (of what nation soever) do
no more offend in eating of swines flesh, or of any other meat forbidden in
the law, then they do offend in eating of beef or mutton, or of any other
thing, that was always permitted by the law. The same is to be said of doing
any thing else contrary to any clause of the ceremonial law.

This is a great liberty and redemption. For certainly the observation of the
ceremonies of the law could not but be a great bondage in respect both of the
charge by first fruits, sacrifices and other oblations beside tithes: and also
of the pains in going so often every year to Jerusalem, in what place soever
of the land they did dwell. Besides, it could not but be somewhat tedious to
use so many washings and purgings: to be bound likewise to make fringes upon
garments; and not to wear a garment of linsie wolsie. The like may be said of
diverse other things; especially it could not but be very grievous to be
restrained from so many kinds of meats, as are now accounted dainty: viz from
the heron, from the redshank, from the lapwing (or as some other interpret the
word, from that dainty foul that is called a good wit) from the sea mewe, from
the hare, from the conie, from all kind of shel-fish, because no shel fish has
any scales or sins: and from diverse other the like things: to be (I say)
restrained from these things could not but be very grievous. To be therefore
enlarged in this behalf is to be acknowledged a great redemption, a great
liberty: notwithstanding, that which is proper to the elect, is much greater.
This is also twofold: one from the guilt and punishment of sin, other from the
spot and blemish, or servitude and bondage thereof. These may be better
distinguished in nature, then separated in time. For they do always concur
and go together: where there is the first, there is always the second: and
where is the second, there is also the former. As soon as any is discharged
from the guilt and punishment of sin, so soon is the same party purged of the
blot and blemish, and released of the bondage and servitude of sin. And where
any is purged of the blot and blemish and released of the servitude and bondage
of sin, there likewise is a discharge from the guilt and punishment of sin.
For that faith that lays hold of Christ without for the former, so lays
hold also of him within for the latter; that Christ dwelling in us by faith,
does both purge us of the spot and stain of sin, and also release us from
the slavery and thraldom of sin. Therefore in the place before alleged, it
is not only said that Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, but the other is also added, viz. that he might purge us,
etc. these two are likewise joined together, 1. Cor. 1 30. Where (as before
has been showed) the Apostle says that Christ is made unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. The former (viz. release from
the guilt and punishment of sin) is to be understood by the word
righteousness, the second by the two words following, sanctification and
redemption: or the word redemption there in the last place, may be taken as
comprehending the other two words before, righteousness and sanctification; as
if the Apostle should have said, Christ is made unto us righteousness, whereby
we are discharged from al our sins in the sight of God, and sanctification,
whereby we are released from the bondage of sin in our selves; and so he is
made unto us perfect redemption; both as touching the guilt and punishment of
our sins, and also as touching our redemption from the slavery thereof.
Zachary also joins both these together in words much like to those of Paul
unto Titus, saying that he has delivered us from the hands of all our enemies
that we might serve him without fear in all holiness and righteousness.
Luke 1. 74. Deliverance from our enemies does signify our release from the
punishment of sin, and to serve God without fear in holiness, etc does
import a freedom from the bondage of sin: both because the servant of sin
cannot be the servant of God: For no man can serve two Masters: (especially so
contrary one to other, as sin and God, yea as sin and holiness and
righteousness) Math. 6. 24 and also because the service of God is said to be
without fear. But in all bondage there is some fear. To shut up this point,
this I add further, that though our clensing from the blot of sin, and our
release from the slavery of sin, be but in part, and al together imperfect in
this life (according notwithstanding to that which before I have said in this
behalf) yet our release and discharge from the guilt and punishment of sin is
most complete and perfect.

Having thus noted, first that there is a double redemption, one common to all;
the other peculiar to the elect: Secondly that the redemption peculiar to the
elect is also double, one from the guilt, the other from the spot of sin; for
application let us understand that the Apostle expressly speaks in the
places before all eaged, Ephesians. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14. of the former, viz. of our
discharge from the guilt of sin expressed by this phrase of the forgiveness of
sins.

Moreover, touching this phrase of having redemption in Christ, it is not so to
be understood, as though we had only forgiveness of sins by Christ's dwelling in
our hearts by faith: for Christ neither can nor will dwell in us, till ous sins
be forgiven: so long as our sins are not forgiven we are Gods enemies, and
Christ neither can nor will dwell in the hearts of them that are Gods enemies:
and so forgiveness of sins must needs be in order before Christ take up our
hearts for his habitation. Again, Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith, is
rather an assurance of our foresaid redemption and justification (that is, of
the forgiveness of sins) then our said redemption and justification it self.
It is also to be observed, that he says not that we are redeemed by him, but
that we have redemption in him. For thereby he the better notes, that we are
not only redeemed by Christ, that is, that Christ has not only bought and
paid for the forgiveness of our sins, which one day we shall have, but that
all already borne again, already also are in possession of the said
redemption, and already have the forgiveness of sins; and that so our said
forgiveness of sins is the more certain unto us.

Last of al, this phrase, in him, is very significant, as nothing our
redemption and justification there spoken of, not only to be by Christ, but
also in Christ: nothing at all in us, but wholly without us, and altogether in
Christ; as the sins for which Christ was put to death in our behalf were
altogether without him, and in us, nothing at all in himself.

This redemption (the forgiveness of sins) is to be accounted as the
fountain of all other benefits following the same, and belongs only to the
children of God.

Touching the first, (that forgiveness of sins is the fountain of all other
benefits following the same, the Lord promising to make a covenant with his
people, for putting his laws into their inward parts, and writing them in
their hearts, and for himself to be their God, and them to be his people, he
adds this as the reason and fountain of all the former articles of his said
new covenant, that he would forgive their iniquity and remember their sins
no more, Ierem. 31. 33. 34. The Prophet David also provoking his own soul to
praise the Lord, and all that was within him to praise his holy name, and not
to forget his benefits, sets the forgiveness of all his sins in the first
place, before the healing of all his infirmittes, the redeeming his life from
the grave, and diverse other benefits following, Psalm. 103. 3. etc. thereby
noting the forgiveness of sins to be the first and the cause of all the other.

That this forgiveness of sins is proper only to the children of God, as it
does appear by the place of Jeremy before mentioned, where it is joined with
writing his laws in their hearts, and Gods being their God, and their being
his people, which to be all one with his being their Father, and their being
his children has been showed before, 2. Cor. 6. 18. and as the same is also
apparent by other scriptures before produced, wherein the forgiveness of sins is
joined with our purging or clensing from sin (a thing peculiar only to Gods
children) so the said point is further evident, because David also joins the
forgiveness of sins, with an heart without guile. Psalm. 32. 1. 2.

The mercy of God likewise (which chiefly consists in the f^rgiuenesse of
sins) is restrained in Psalm. 103. 11. 12. to them only that truly fear God.
The children of God do only fear God truly: therefore the children of God
have only interest in the forgiveness of sins, and in remoouing them as far
from them, as the East is from the West. Therefore also all these three, the
grace, faith, the title son, and the forgiveness of sins are joined all
together. When Jesus saw their faith (viz. the faith of them that brought the
palsy man, and the faith of the palsy man himself) he said unto him, Son
thy sins are forgiven: Mat. 9. 2. Mark. 2. 5. Yea, the same point is further
manifest by Ephe. 1. 7. before alleged, because these words, we have, must be
understood only of himself and other, whom before he had said to be elected
to the adoption of sons.

Naturally the children of God are as well the children of wrath as any other:
Ephesians. 2. 3. viz. before their actual adoption; yea, sometimes before their
said actual adoption and conversion they are greater sinners then other. Is
not this manifest by the example of Manasses, of Mary Magdalen, of Paul of the
these upon the Cross, of Onesimus that ran away from his master, and carried
also with him some of his goods, and that for some other such like thing
seems to have been committed to the prison where Paul was, and where Paul in
his bonds converted him? And this the Lord does, the more to magnify the
riches of his grace toward such, for the better encouragement of other to
seek for the like mercy: 1. Tim. 1. 16. as also to teach them that have such
experience of his mercy in forgiving them their so great sins both to love
him much, according to that much that is forgiven them: Luke 7. 47. and also to
love their brethren the more, and to be the more tender toward them, and the
more ready to forgive them wherein soever they shall trespass against them.
Mat. 18. 32. 33. Ephesians. 4. 32.

Having thus showed the forgiveness of sins to be only in Christ, and by
our communion with him, etc. as also to be the fountain of all other benefits,
and proper and peculiar only to the children of God, let us now also see the
greatness of this benefit.

This therefore is manifest, because David pronounces him blessed whose
wickedness is forgiven, whose sin is covered, and to whom the Lord imputes
not his iniquity: Psalm. 32. 1. 2. What can be more then to be blessed?

The same likewise appears by diverse comparisons of sin in the Scripture.
For it is compared to sickness, The whole need not the physician but the
sick: Mat. 9. 12. And the reasons of this comparison seem to be these. As
sickness takes away our stomachs from bodily meat, so does sin from the
food of our souls, and from the meat that abides to eternal life: Yea, it
makes such spiritual food to be much more loathsome unto us, then all or any
bodily meat is to any sick of any bodily disease.

As sickness takes away our taste and relish of all bodily nourishment, both
meat and drink, making that which sometime we thought very pleasant, and which
is so in it self, to be bitter and most unsavory: so sin makes the very
word of God in itself sweeter then honey, and the honey comb: Psalm. 19. 10. to
be as gall or wormwood unto us.

As sickness takes away the strength of the youngest and lustiest, and makes
them not able to go up and down the house: much less to bear any burdens,
or to defend themselves against their enemies, etc. so sin disableth a man
from going about the works of God and of his own salvation: from bearing any
crosses either from God, or from men: and from resisting the enemies that fight
against his soul.

As sickness takes away a man's knowledge and memory even of his best friends,
and makes him to speak idely with his tongue, and with his hand to reach and
to ketch he cannot tell at what, so by sin we are bereaved of all good
knowledge and memory: yea, and speak idly and wickedly: and do occupy our
hands and other members with matters altogether unprofitable, where there is no
fruit, and whereof (after recovery of health, and true knowledge) we are
ashamed. Romans 6. 21.

As sickness continued and not recovered causes death at the last: so sin
when it is finished (and as it were thoroughly ripened) brings forth death:
James 1. 15.

Sin is likewise compared to an heavy and intolerable burden, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden (viz. with your sins) and I will
refresh you: Mat. 11. 28. Therefore Cain complained that his sin was greater
then he could bear: Genes. 4. 13. And (alas) so heavy was the burden of sin
upon Judas, that to ease himself of that burden he did not only cast away,
or deliver again to the chief Priests and Elders, the thirty pieces of silver
which he had taken (as wages of unrighteousness) to betray the innocent blood
of Christ, but that also departing afterward (in most doleful sort) he went
(and most desperately) hanged himself Mat. 27. 3. The like fearful event of
the heavy burden of sin we do too often see by too many examples. We heard
also before that the very imputation only of our sins to Christ Jesus, the
son of God and God himself, made him not only exceedingly to fear, and in
his fear to offer up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears
unto God. Heb 5. 7. but also to sweat water and blood Luke 22. 44. and lastly
to cry out most bitterly upon the cross under the burden of our sins: My
God, my God why have thou forsaken me' Mat. 27. 46.

That some men feel not the sickness and weight of sin, it is because of
another comparison also of sin, viz. unto death itself; O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of death, Romans 7. 24. And you that
were dead in trespasses and sins, etc. Ephesians. 2. 1. As men therefore that are
dead, though they died with an hundred plague-sores about them not healed, or
having the weight of a great Church upon them, do feel nothing either of such
sores, or of such weight: even so is to be said of them that feel not either
the sickness or the heaviness of sin, namely, that it is, because they are
dead in their sin.

By these things we see, that all whose sins are forgiven, are rid and healed
of so many diseases, Psalm. 103. 3. and released of so many burdens as they have
sins: and finally that they are translated from death to life. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
Is not then the forgiveness of sins a singular benefit?

Moreover the greatness of this benefit does further appear by another
comparison of sin, viz. unto debt: Mat. 18. 24. etc. In which respect Christ
teaches us to pray, Forgive us our debts, Mat. 6. 12. Yea, he whose sin is
least, is more in Gods debt, then he is able any way to discharge. Therefore in
the parable of two debtors, he that owed but fifty pence is said to have been
as unable to pay as he that owed sieve hundred pence. Luke 7. 41. 42. Is it not
a great misery, yea a kind of hell tormenting a man, to be in greater debt then
he is able to fatissie? Indeed some men are so desperate, that they bid their
creditors take care how to come by that that is owing unto them, for they will
take no care to pay any man: therefore they borrow of every man, and pay
(almost) no man: so that it is half a wonder, what becomes of all the money
they do borrow. But though some be thus leaudly minded, yet most men have so
much civil honesty (at the least) by the light of nature, that they find it
very grievous and troublesome continually to their minds, to owe more the they
can pay. Al debt also above ability to pay is the more grecuous, the greater
and mightier the creditor is to whom the same is owing. How great then is the
debt of man unto God by sinnelyea by the least sin! The danger of the least
sin (much more of many and great sins) is the curse of God, and everlasting
condemnation of body and soul: even an infinite punishment according to the
infinite majesty of God that is by sin offended. Who the can express the
greatness of the benefit of forgiveness of sins? It is a great benefit to be
out of debt with men; so that a man may walk and go any where securely without
danger: much more then is the benefit of the discharge of all our debt with
God.

Last of al, sin against God is compared unto treason, and rebellion against
a prince: 1. Sam. 15. 23. Lamon. 3. 42. Dan. 5. 9. As therefore it is a great
benefit for a traitor and rebel to be pardoned by his Sovereign, so is it
not so much the more to be pardoned by God himself of all our treasons and
rebellions against him, by how much he is greater then all earthly princes?
Verily this is not only more then any tongue of man can express, but also then
any heart of man or wisdom of Angels can comprehend.

The same benefit of forgiveness of sins is yet the greater because to whom
God remitteth one sin, to him he remitteth all: and whose sins he does
once forgive, his sins he does forgive for ever: whom once he does acquit,
discharge and justify, them he will never condemn or call to account.

By all sins, I mean all the sins of Gods children both original and
actual; before baptism and after baptism; before conversion and after
conversion; of knowledge and of ignorance; and once or often: yea as well
deliberately as unadvisedly committed.

Therefore David in the place before used, Psalm. 32. 1. 2. speaks of sin
indefinitely, without exception of any: and in the other place praises God
expressly for forgiving al his sins. The Apostle says that Christ has not
redeemed us from sin, but from all iniquity: Tit. 2. 14. So likewise in the
other places before mentioned, the Apostles speak of sins indefinitely, etc.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14. not of sins before or after baptism, or
conversion, etc. If by Christ we have forgiveness only of original sin,
or of sins before baptism, and that we or some other must make satisfaction
for our actual sins, or for sins after baptism, (as the Papists teach)
then has Christ satisfied only for the less, and left the greater to us. For
who knows not actual sins to be greater then original? and sins after
baptism to be more (at least for most part) then sins before baptism. But
of the universality of the forgiveness of sins, I hope to speak more (to the
further comfort of such as are heavy laden with their sins,) in another
treatise.

The second point, that whose sins are once remitted, they are remitted for
ever, is as certain as the former: Because the covenant of the Lord is an
everlasting covenant: and his mercies are the sure mercies of David: Isa. 55.
3. As high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him. As far as the East is from the west, so far has he removed
our sins from us. Ps. 103. 11. 12. As therefore the heaven and the earth shall
never come together; and as the East and the West shall never meet: so the
pardon of sins once granted by the Lord to his children, shall never be
revoked and called back.

The same is more plainly testified in the prophecy of Jeremy, If the heavens
can be measured, or the foundations of the earth be searched on: beneath, then
will I cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the
Lord: Ier. 31. 37. The first of these things is impossible: to wit, the
measuring of the heavens, and searching of the bottom of the earth; therefore
also impossible is the second: viz. that the Lord should cast off his people
and children for their sins. Can a woman (says the Lord also) forget her
child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? (note that he uses
the singular number, to teach that he compares him not to a woman, that has
many children, but to a woman that has but one child, and that a son) Though
they should forget, yet will I not forget them. Bebold I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands; thy walls are ever before me, or in my sight: Isai.
44. 15. 16. Is this only spoken of the whole body of the Church? No: It is also
to be understood of every part and member thereof: especially of them that by
regeneration are indeed made the children of God, as here we speak; and for
their sakes only, and no otherwise of the body of the visible Church.

The same is yet further testified: Isai. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our
father. Though Abraham be ignorant of us and Israel know us not (that is,
though if these were living, they would perhaps renounce us and cast us off, as
having transgressed their precepts, and not walked in the steps of their faith)
yet thou O lord, ^^t our father, and our redeemer, thy name is for ever: that
is, hough our sins be great and many whereby we have pro^oked thee, and have
made our selves unworthy to be called thy ^hildren: Luke 15. 21. yet thou have
pardoned our transgressi^n, and so redeemed us, that thou will still continue
thy merry toward us.

The same did Samuel teach the Israelites, when they feared ^eath because of
their sin in asking a King, besides all their other sins. Fear not (says
he) The Lord will not forsake his people for ^^s great names sake, because it
has pleased him to make you his ^^ople: 1. Sam. 12. 72. If the Lord for his
names sake will not for^^ke his people: then for his names sake also the Lord
will not euoke any pardon of sins, once granted by him to his children
regenerated. What an happy state and condition therefore is this of the
children of God, so to have all their great and manifold iniquities pardoned,
that none of them shall ever be laid to their charge? as it is written Who
shall lay anything to the charge of Gods chosen? (whom before in the same
Chapter he had called Gods children) It is God that justifies. Romans 8. 9.
Therefore Job, being assured that God would so justify him and pardon all his
sins, triumphantly says, Who is he that will plead with me? Job 13. 19.

I might further amplify this benefit of forgiveness of sins, because the
Lord therein has passed over the Angels that have forsaken their standing,
and vouchsafed this grace only to his children adopted amongst men. But
because I have had the like argument before therefore it shall not now be
needful to repeat the same.

Thus much of this point, touching the forgiveness of sins proper only to
the children of God, and therefore also of their greater dignity thereby.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the dying more and more of the children of God unto sin, and of their
preservation from many great sins which the wicked do daily commit, and of
their living more and more to righteousness.

NExt to the forgiveness of sins, let us further consider, that as before we
heard concerning the matter wherein consists the being of the children of
God, they were restored from the death of sin to the life of righteousness:
so being thus altered and changed, they neither go backward, neither stand at a
stay, but do daily die more and more unto sin: and do daily likewise live
more and more unto righteousness. And thus to proceed from the forgiveness of
sins, to these things, is the method of the holy ghost in the scriptures. For
David does not only pray to be cleansed from secret faults, that is, to have
such sins pardoned unto him, and therefore much more to be pardoned of his
open sins, but also that he might be kept from presumptuous sins: Psalm.
19 12. 13. Our Savior also teaches to pray not only for forgiveness of
sins, but also not to be led into tentation, and to be delivered from
evil: Mat. 6. 12. 13. Therefore the Apostle Peter preaches repentance, and
forgiveness of sins together: Acts 2. 38 Touching this present point, as
before we heard the children of God by their incorporation into Christ in their
new birth, to be revived again, and made alive to God in true knowledge and
wisdom, and in true holiness and righteousness; so now let us understand,
that the longer the said children of God continue so incorporated into Christ,
the more sap and virtue they receive from him; and that therefore that which is
natural in them does more and more decay; and that that is of grace, and by the
new birth of the spirit, does more and more grow and increase.

So it is with plants grafted into any stock: the longer they continue in the
stock, the more they are incorporated therinto, and the more they thrive and
grow and bear fruit.

First therefore for dying more and more unto sin, or for the dying more and
more of sin in us, this phrase may seem somewhat harsh and strange: because in
natural things, that that is once dead indeed, cannot properly be said to die
any more. There cannot be a continual dying, or a dying by piecemeales, but
where there is a remnant of life.

To this I answer, first, that even in natural things, that may be said to be
killed, that receives such a deadly wound that from the day of receiving
thereof it never thriueth or ioyeth (as we speak) but pineth and wastes away
every day more and more till it perish. So both man, and also unreasonable
creatures upon some wounds given them by other creatures, or taken by their
own vntulines, do many times consume unto death it self. So many trees being
either blasted above, or canker-eaten in the midst, or having the strings of
their roots cut beneath, do from that day wither till they be altogether
dead; above, in the midst, and beneath.

Secondly, let us remember the comparison used before chap 8. of sins once
mortified, unto the carcases of men slain in war. As therefore carcases of
men so slain, must be removed, and buried, or else they will be very
infectious to them that live where such dead carcases lie: even so the dead
carcases of our sins mortified in us, must be more and more removed, and as it
were daily buried, that so they may not be infectious to the virtues that are
alive in us. And this remoouing or burying of the dead carcases of our sins
before mortified and slain by the sword of Gods spirit, accompanied with the
rest of the spiritual armor, is a kind of daily killing sin more and more.

Whereas likewise before in the said 8 chapter I compared the remnants of sin
in us to old rags or patches of an old coat upon a new, to the disgrace of
the said new coat; the casting and shaking off of such sins remaining, that so
they may not be disgraceful to the new man which we have put on in our
regeneration, is putting off more and more of the old man, and therefore also a
killing likewise or mortifying of sin more and more in us. For to put off the
old man, or to mortify and crucify sin (wherein consists the old man) do both
signify one thing.

To proceed therefore further in this point; as the children of God are
commanded thus to put off the old man daily, and thus to mortify and crucify
the same, and al earthly members thereof, Ephesians. 4, 22. Col. 3. 5. etc, so the
same commandments do imply a promise of a blessing, viz. of strength and grace
for performance of that which is commanded: especially such commandments,
being not only legal but also evangelical. The legal and the evangelical
commandments, teach one Note.
thing touching the eschewing of evil and doing of good. For even the grace of
God (that is, the gospel) which brings salvation to all men having appeared
(that is, in most bright and glorious manner broken forth through the clouds of
the ceremonies and of the law of ordinances wherewith before it was obscured)
does teach us (as it were little children) to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live godly, and righteously, and soberly in this present world,
Tit. 2. 11. 12. The same things the law also did teach. But there is a great
difference betwixt the teaching of these things by the law, and by the gospel.
For the law teaches only demostratiuely and imperatiuely, showing us what we
should do, and commanding us to do it: but the gospel teaches operatiuely and
effectiuely, giving grace to perform that which it teaches: and therefore as
the law, going no further then to show and command us what to do, is called
the letter that kills (as a man that requires much, and gives not wherewith
to do it, does as it were kill the heart of him, of whom he requires such
things) so the Gospel quickening and enabling a man to do that which it
requires, is therefore called a quickening spirit: 2. Cor. 36.

To return to the former point, the old man being thus daily mortified and
crucified in the children of God, they have thereby a further privilege for
their better preservation from presumptuous and reproachful sins: so that
either they fall not into them, or if they do, it is for some special good
intended by God permitting them so to fall, and in the end they are raised up
again, and made so much the stronger afterward, by how much the weaker they
showed themselves in their fall: and so much the more circumspect and fearful
of falling again in like manner by how much the more secure and fearlesse they
had been: and lastly so much the more zealous of, and forward unto every good
work, by how much the more grievously they had before fallen into evil. And
this is partly the meaning of the Apostle John, when he says that he that
abides in him (that is, in Christ) sins not: 1. Ioh. 3. 6. and again, that
he that is borne of God sins not: for his seed remains in him, neither can
be sin, because be is borne of God. verse. 9. For these speeches signify,
that they that are in Christ and regenerated, are not only so freed from sin,
that it does not reign and bear dominion in them generally as before their
regeneration and incorporation into Christ it did: but that also they make not
a trade of any one sin, but that they so watch over themselves, and are
watched over by the Lord, that they fall not into such reproachful and
disgraceful sins, as the natural and unregenerate men do daily commit.

This is more plentifully taught by the Apostle Paul: For it is the chief
argument of all the first fourteen verses of the sixth Chapter to the Romans.

It is also further evident by the example of Isaac: For though the Lord
before the birth of Jacob and Esau had expressly said that the elder should
serve the younger: Genes. 25. 23. And although Esau had most wickedly and
profanely sold his birthright unto Jacob, verse 33. and Heb. 12. 16. yet Isack
had fully purposed to have bestowed the blessing upon Esau. Had not this been a
matter of great reproach? For such a patriark so to have crossed the former word
of the Lord touching the blessing of Jacob? well, notwithstanding the purpose
of Isack. yet the Lord by the wisdom of Rebecca, crossed him, kept him from
that sin, and directed him to bestow the blessing according to his former
word. The most of the brethren of Joseph, having fully, and most unnaturally
and wickedly determined to have murdered him, for his dreams, and for his
accusing them to their father, were notwithstanding by the counsel of Reuben
kept from that fearful sin, and so they sold him by the advice of Judah:
which afterward turned not only to the great advancement of Joseph, according
to his former dreams, but also to the preservation of themselves, and of their
father, and of all their families in the time of famine: and to the
accomplishment of the former word of God, touching their soiourning in the land
of Egypt: Genes. 37. 8, etc. David having (through the relics of the old man
in him) both fully intended, and also earnestly protested, the utter
destruction of the house of Nabal (at least of Nabal himself, and all the
males appertaining unto him) by the gracious providence notwithstanding of God
in sending Abigail to counsel and persuade him to the contrary, was kept and
restrained from the execution of that cruel and bloody purpose: 1. Sam. 25.
32, etc.

By all these examples, as we see the special privilege of the children of God
in being kept from such heinous sins, so by the two former examples we see
also, that God turns such sins as wherinto the righteous of infirmity do
fall, to their great good.

The same point, viz. the preserving of the children of God from many great
sins, is also clear by daily experience of these things that before we
spoke of the sobriety of Gods children in prosperity and in adversity: as also
of that watchfulness which does always accompany and associate the said
sobriety.

For whereas the wicked in prosperity swell and rage, are proud and insolent;
contemning and despising all men, as if they would bear down all before them,
and so do fall into infinite outrages; the children of God looking to him that
gives prosperity, considering for what end they have more then other;
regarding the uncertainty of all that they have; and remembering before the
account that one day they shall make of the emploiment of all that they have
received, are kept from the former evils.

So, whereas the wicked in adversity do mutter and murmur against him that
sends the same; and particularly in the times of need and great penury, do
occupy their heads with many wicked imaginations, and put in practice many
unlawful shifts, of stealing, of borrowing without purpose of paying again:
of promising much and performing nothing: of deceiving, cosening, and such
like: the children of God, living even this life by their faith; and believing
the promises of God, as well for this life, as for the life to come; and
remembering the performance of them in all ages; and calling to mind the
experience that themselves have had of Gods providence, etc. do so commit their
ways unto him, and cast their care upon him, that they are kept from those
former scandalous evils. These things might be prosecuted more at large, but
the religious reader, by these instances may consider of other the like.

Touching the other point before named (the raising again of them that after
regeneration do fall to disgraceful sins) David also is a most worthy
example thereof. For how graciously he was raised after his foul adultery with
Bathsheba, and his most horrible murder of her husband Vriiah, it is manifest
by the confession of his sin to Nathan the Prophet: 2. Sam. 12. 13. and by
that doleful, and no less heavy then heavenly one and fifty Psalm, written
afterward by him in further testimony of his most serious and unsained
repentance.

When he was again afterward overtaken with numbering of the people (yea,
though Ioab cou^selled him very gravely to the contrary) how was he raised out
of the same, being admonished thereof by Nathan, and corrected with a great
pestilence amongst his people by the angel of the Lord? Yea, did he he
testify that his rising again by acknowledgement of his sin, and by praying
for the people that the hand of might be turned from them, upon himself and
his own house, saying, I have done wickedly: but these sheep what have they
done? Let thine hand I pray thee be against me and my fathers house: 2 Samuel 24.
17.

How did Hezekiah humble himself, and cause the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
humble themselves, when he saw wrath to come from the Lord upon him and
Jerusalem, because he had not rendered unto the Lord according to the reward (of
health miraculously bestowed upon him? 2. Chroni. 32. 25. 26.

How bitterly did Peter weep after his foul and shameful denying and
forswearing of his master? Yea how zealous was he from that time forward for
him? For being with other, and Christ being there unknown to his disciples, and
having bidden them to cast out their net on the right side of the ship, with
promise to find (for they had labored all night and taken nothing) and the
net (according to the former promise of Christ) having comprehended a great
multitude of fishes, whereby John discerned him to be Christ that had so spoken
unto them, Peter no sooner heard John say, It is the Lord, but presently he
girded his garment unto him, and leapt into the sea, and so came swimming unto
Christ: whereas all the rest stayed in the ship, and so at leisure brought it,
and came themselves therein unto the land: Ioh, 21. 1.

To these things let me here insert this one point more, viz. that whereas the
children of God regenerated do sometimes fall into greater sins, then the
common sort of eiuill men not regenerated (as David in the things before spoken
of, and Solomon in many things) this falls out by the special providence and
wisdom of God, the better to teach, what men are of themselves without God,
and being left unto themselves: as also to admonish such as think they stand,
to take heed lest they fall. 1. Cor. 10. 12. and to instruct all to finish
there salvation with (the more) fear and trembling. Phill. p. 2. 12. So by
their sins, they are made schoolemasters unto other. Is not this a singular
privilege, so to have the old man more and more mortified? so to be preserved
from great sins after regeneration? So to arise out of them, being by
frailty, and natural corruption fallen into them? and so by falling into them
to be made schoolemasters of such excellent things unto other? Verily, we
cannot but acknowledge it to be a great privilege, if we shall consider with
what greediness all the wicked and unregenerate commit sin, continue in
sin, and like wild horses do run on, and proceed from one sin to
another, without any restraint.

But to proceed yet further, as the childrenof God do daily more and more die
unto sin, and are preserved from notorious evils, wherein the wicked wallow
and welter themselves (like filthy swine in the mire, and will not be plucked
out) or if they fall into such evils, yet they rise again: As (I say) the
children of God do thus, so also having by the virtue of their regeneration
once brought forth the fruits of the spirit and of righteousness, they are
made more and more abundant in them.

As the Apostle has often exhorted the children of God so to do, viz. to
abound always in the works of the Lord: 1. Cor. 15. 58. to increase more and
more, etc. 1. These. 4. 1. to be rich in good works, etc. 1. Tim. 6. 18. to
consider one another to provoke to love, and to do good works: Heb. 10. 24. to
toyne virtue with faith; and with virtue knowledge: with knowledge temperance:
with temperance patience: with patience godliness: with godliness brotherly
kindness: with brotherly kindness love: and not only to have all these things,
but that also these things should abound in them: 2. Pet. 1. 6. 7. 8. And as
the Apostle prayed most earnestly to be with the Philippians, to this end that
their love might abound more and more in knowledge and judgment; and that to
these ends, first that touching their inward man their minds might be able to
judge things that differ, and their hearts might be pure (as the Sun: Cantic.
6. 9. that is, clear and sincere without mixture of hypocrisy) and touching
their outward man, both, without offense even till the coming of Christ, and
also filled with the fruits of righteousness: Philip. 1. 9. 10. 11. As (I say)
the Apostles have exhorted the children of God so to abound in all goodness
(as also whiles they lived prayed to be with them for the same end) so it is
not to be doubted, but that then they did, and now daily do so: For they are
the good ground into which the good seed of Gods word falling brings forth
fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold: Mat. 13.
23. or as Mark sets down the words in a contrary order, one thirty,
another sixty, and some an hundred: Mark 4. 20. The which change of order is
the more to be observed, that neither they that bring forth Note.
an hundred fold should despise them that bring forth but thirty fold:
neither they that bring bring forth but thirty should be discouraged, because
they come short of them that bring forth an hundred fold. For though Matthew
set the hundred fold in the first place; and the thirty fold in the last
place: yet Mark sets the thirty fold in the first place, and the hundred
f^ld in the last place.

Yea, to be thus more and more abundant in the fruits of the spirit and of
righteousness, is that which our Savior has promised To him that has shall
be given, and he shall have abundance: Mat. 13. 12. and 25. 29. and again, I
am the vine, and my father is the hus bandman: every branch that bears not
fruit in me, he takeeh away: and every one that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit: John. 15. 1. 2.

The same is likewise taught by the two parables, Mat. 13. 31. etc. wherein the
kingdom of heaven is compared first to a grain of mustard. seed, that being
the least of all seeds grows to a great tree: secondly to leven, which being
little (seasoneth or) sowreth an whole lump of dough.

The end also of the ministry of the gospel is not only that the Saints
might be gathered together, but also that they might grow up into him, (viz.
into Christ) which is the head, by whom every member receineth increase. Ephesians.
4, 12. 14. 15. The prophet likewise says that the righteous shall flourish
like a palm tree, and grow like the Cedars in Lebanon: and that they that are
planted in the house of God (that is, only the children of God; for without
are dogs: Reu. 22. 15.) shall flourish in the courts of God, and still bring
forth fruit in their age, and shall be fat and flourishing. Psalm. 92. 12. 13.

Finally, the angel of the church of Thyatira is commended by our Savior, to
have had more works at the lust, then at the first: Revel. 2. 19.

By all these arguments, who sees not that it is a most honorable thing, not
only to be so partaker of the death and resurrection of Christ as first I
said; as likewise of many other graces, the least whereof is more worth, then
all the pearls, and treasures, and riches of the earth; but also to have all
the said excellent graces every day more and more increased, in us; and to
abound in such dainty and pleasant fruits (as it were for Gods own diet) as
whereto the most excellent fruits of the garden of Eden, at the first planting
thereof by God himself, were nothing comparable? For such as the tree is, such
is the fruit: But the tree of these fruits being (as before we heard) Christ
Jesus himself, is better then all the trees in the first garden of Eden.
Therefore the fruits of this tree (so planted (as it were) in the garden of our
hearts) are like to the tree it self.

That all the children of God do not always thus thrive, prosper and bear
fruit, it is either because they do not seek it as they ought to do: or that
they do not use such means as they should: or that they are not alike
incorporated into Christ: or that they do not alike believe the promise of God
for the working and increasing of those things in them, as has been said they
would: or for some other such like cause.

To conclude this point, all the former things so said are yet the more,
because the children of God do not only bear such fruits, and that in great
abundance, every day more then before; but also that they do it with great
delight, and pleasure. For so the man that is blessed is described, viz. not
only not to walk in the counsel of the wicked, or not to stand in the way
of sinners, or not to sit in the seat of the scornful, but also to have
his delight in the law of the Lord: Psalm 1. 1. 2. What? In the reading of it
only? or only in the study of it, because it follows that he meditateth
therein day and night? Not so: but also in the practice and obedience of it.
This is manifest, first by the opposition of this branch to the former of
walking in the way of the wicked. Secondly by that which follows in verse 3.
viz. that he is like the tree planted by the rivers of waters, that brings
forth (not leaves but) her fruit in due season.

So The fear of the Lord, and great delight (not in the histories, nor in the
eloquent phrases and sentences of the Scripture, Note.
which being more excellent then all other histories and eloquence whatsoever,
may and will delight a carnal man, but) in the commandments of the Lord, are
joined together, as concurring in the man that is blessed: Psalm. 112. 1.

This is further evident by the example of David, who reioiced when they said
unto him, we will go to the house of the Lord. Psalm. 122. 1. If he rejoiced
to see other forward in going to the house of the Lord, did he not much more
rejoice to see them bring forth the fruit (and that plentifully) of their going
to the house of the Lord? And if he rejoiced to see other so to do, shall we
think that himself did not much more cheerfullie and gladly do the works of
God? yea, we see that he did. For how did he joy in the bringing home of the
Arc? Yea, is it not said that he danced with all his might before the Lord? 2.
Sam. 6. 14.

How glad also was he, and how did he rejoice and bless God when Abigail met
him, and persuaded him to change his mind, and to revoke his former vow
against Nabal? How (I say) did he then rejoice, and bless God saying; Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, that sent thee out this day to meet me: And
blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood. 1. Sam. 25. 32. If he so rejoiced for being kept from so
great a sin, we may well think that he much more rejoiced in an higher
degree of sanctification, viz. in bearing the fruits of godliness abundantly
every day more then other?

Such liberty have all the children of God, as that they are not only freed
from the bondage of sin, and do bring forth the fruits of the spirit and of
righteousness, but that also they do this with great delight and joy: O sweet
state! O singular privilege! O honorable condition!

The wicked indeed make great mirth. They laugh and shout in the midst of their
wickedness, that all the place where they are, rings of them. But (alas
miserable men) this is but painted joy: It is but like the cracking of thorns,
etc. But of this more afterward. And again, as touching joy in any good thing,
they are so far from it, that to hear any thing that way is a death unto them:
yea, when they are urged by christian authority to do any thing that good is,
they do it so against the hair, so murmuringly, so grudgingly, with such
grief, moiling, and fretting, that their said work is altogether abominable
in the sight of God. For if God loves a cheerful giver or doer of any thing:
2. Cor. 9. 7. then he must needs hate and abhor him that gives or does any
thing unwillingly, and grudgingly. Thus much for this matter.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the dignity of Gods children by the word as it is a rule of faith and life;
and a special part of our christian armor.

IN the next place let us consider the benefit of the children of God by the
word and Sacraments. The word indeed seems to be common to the wicked and to
Gods children. Notwithstanding it is effectual to salvation only in the
children of God. If our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle) it is hid to them
that perish: 2. Cor. 4. 3. As whatsoever evil we have, we have it by Adam: so
whatsoever good we have, we have it by Christ. Therefore by Christ we enjoy the
benefit of the word: which is likewise the more evident, because by Adam and in
Adam we were without the word: Ephesians. 2. 12. They therefore that have not
Christ, cannot claim any benefit by the word, or any interest into the word.

Now although the word be the means of dying more and more unto sin, as also
of growing more and more in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ: 2. Pet. 3. 18. yet because I have spoken of the word before, as of that
mighty instrument, whereby God begins our regeneration at the first, and
because that before spoken in that behalf may be understood of the word as a
means of the things handled in the last former Chapter, therefore I will not
so speak of it here: but in other considerations, viz. first as it is a
perfect rule of faith and manners, containing all things necessary to
salvation, either to be known and believed, or to be done and practiced.
Secondly, as it is a principal part of that christian armor, whereby the
children of God are to defend themselves against the enemies of their
salvation. Thirdly, as it is their speciallest consolation and comfort in any
affliction.

Concerning the word, as it is a rule of faith, and of life or manners, two
things are to be noted: first the perfection of it, secondly the perpetuity of
it.

The perfection thereof is expressly commended, and proved by diverse effects:
viz. the conversion of the soul, the giving wisdom to the simple etc. The
law of the Lord is perfect converting (or restoring) the soul, etc. Psalm. 19.
7. etc.

We are also forbidden either to add any thing thereunto, or to detract any
thing therefrom: Deuteronomy. 4. 2 ^^ 12. 32. Pro. 30. 6. Revel. 22. 18 19. It is said
to be the power of God to salvation: Romans 1. 16. to be able to save the soul:
James 1. 21. And lest these things should be mistaken, as spoken partly of the
word written, and partly of a word unwritten, delivered by tradition from hand
to hand (as the Papists urge) and that the word only written were not so
perfect or powerful, therefore the very Scriptures (that is, the word only
written) are said, to be able to make a man wise to salvation: and to make the
man of God perfect unto every good work: 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17. If the man of
God (that is, the minister of the word, so often times called for excellencies
sake) then every child of God else. For no child of God is bound to know, to
believe or practice more toward salvation, then the minister of God is bound
to teach. Yea, whatsoever is urged more for salvation, is abomination.

It is further said, that those things that are before written, are written
that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that
believing they might have life through his name: Ioh. 20. 31. God gives us
this faith and life by the scriptures, and let the Papists take any thing else
by their unwritten verities and traditions.

Paul repeateth this twice, If we, or an Angel from heaven should preach unto
you otherwise, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed:
Galat. 1. 8. 9. But Paul preached or said no other things, then those which the
Prophets and Moses did say should come: Acts. 26. 22. and he preached no other
Gospel then that which God had promised before by his Prophets in the holy
Scriptures: Romans 1. 1. 2.

So perfect is the word of God, that when the learned man in the world by
long study of any one sentence, has spoken all that he can, yet another may
come after, and add somewhat which the former never spoke nor understood
concerning that place.

It is like a bottomless well, that will never be drawn dry: yea, like the
sea it self, that will never be emptied. As the Prophet speaks of the
righteousness and judgments of God, Thy righteousness is like the mighty
mountains, and thy judgments like a great deep: Psalm. 36. 6. so may it be
said of the scriptures, for the height and depth of them.

The Apostle by exclamation speaks thus of the wisdom, knowledge, judgment,
and the way of God; O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Romans 11. 33. May not this be spoken of the word of God? Where is
that wisdom and knowledge of God? Where are those his judgments and ways
declared but in the word? All the writings of all men in the world are but
shallow in respect of the word of God. All the books in the world not handling
the word of God and doctrine thereof, do not contain so much and deep matter,
as is in one of the least canonical Epistles. An heathen man meeting with the
Gospel written by John, and reading but the first verse thereof, could say,
that that rude fellow (so rudely he termed the Apostle) had comprehended more
matter in that one sentence, then was in all the books of all Philosophers.
How much matter then is contained in that whole Gospel? Especially in all the
Scriptures? All other books whatsoever, are so much more excellent, the more
they agree with, and the nearer they come to the word of God contained in holy
scriptures. How excellent then is the said word of God it self?

When all the chief wise men of a kingdom furnished with the knowledge of all
former laws of the same kingdom, and well instructed likewise in the word of
God, do meet together to make new laws for that kingdom, yet after
consultation one with another, and after many days conferring their readings
and judgments one with another, the laws that they make will not be so
perfect, but that either something might have been added, or something might
have been left out. But the word of God is so absolute and complete, that as
nothing therein is superfluous, so nothing is wanting unto it. What a singular
priuledge then have the children of God, that have the benefit of this law?

To lay forth the perfection of Gods word yet a little more fully, and to make
the same somewhat more euideut: let us understand it to be so perfect for
matters of faith and knowledge unto salvation, that whatsoever is not agreeable
thereunto is to be held as erroneous.

Touching manners, life and conversation, it teaches all duties to God and
men; even to all sorts of men, superiors, inferiors, equals, friends, and foes:
and in every state and condition: viz. what to do for them or to them, in
sickness or health: in poverty or wealth: in liberty or in prison: being
joyful or mourning: dwelling far off or nigh unto us: being of the same nation
or of another: kinsfolk or strangers: friends or adversaries: within our
family, or without: widows or fatherless, or in any other state whatsoever.

As it directs us how to carry ourselves toward al of what condition soever,
and in what state soever they be, so it prescribes our behavior at all times,
and in all places: in the day and in the night, when we eat, when we drink,
when we labor, when we rest, when we walk, when we lie, when we sleep, in
the winter and in the summer, publicly and privately, at home and abroad: in
our secret chambers, and when we are with company in the time of peace, and in
the time of war.

It has rules likewise for our selves in respect of our selves, what to do in
prosperity, in adversity: when we are children, when we are men, and when we
are old: touching meat, drink, apparel, sleep, and the use of all other
things indifferent or not indifferent: for this life, and for the life to come.

Whereas also the laws of men, reach only to the outward man, to restrain the
same from evil, and to bind it to the performance of good: the laws of God
are given for the government not only of the outward man, but also of the
inward: not only of the body, but also of the soul, even of our mind,
understanding, memory, thoughts, and all affections.

There is likewise no member of the body but that in the word of God there is
direction for it: for the eye to see: for the ear to hear: for the nostrell
to smell etc. But of these things before in Chap. 11. where for further sight
of these things, I referred the learned reader to the Treatise of Otho
Casmannus in his anatomy of a spiritual man.

By these things thus pointed at touching the perfection of the word of God, we
may the better see the privilege of the children of God to be such by the
word of God, that they need never to be to seek further for direction in
anything concerning salvation then only to the word. This briefly shall suffice
for the perfection of the word of God.

Touching the perpetuity of the word, it is testified in many places of the
Scripture. The fear of the Lord (that is, the word which teaches and works
the fear of the Lord) is clean, and endures for ever. Psalm. 19. 9. and
again, O Lord thy word endures for ever in the heavens Psalm. 119. 89. Another
prophet says. The grass withers, and the flower fades: but the word of God
shall stand for ever Isai. 40. 8. Our Savior says, Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass. Mat. 24. 35. Luke 16. 17. Luk 21. 33.

This is manifest by experience. For* whereas the word of God has continually
had both more adversaries in number, as also greater for power, as some
Emperors; and for malice, as the heretics, especially the Papists, then all
other books whatsoever: the one sort of such enemies, seeking utterly to
extinguish the word; and the other endeavoring to corrupt the very text it
self: yet al other writings have been mangled and some books have utterly
perished: but the Lord has always preserved the Scriptures from destruction
on the one side, and from corruption on the other side. As the soldiers that
brake the bones of the two thieves that were crucified with our Savior, had no
power for all that to break any bones of our Savior himself: so they that
have either consumed or corrupted other books, have never had the power,
either to destroy, or corrupt the scripture touching the original text
thereof. The Lord has always most mightily preserved some copies both
inuiolate, and also undefiled. Yea the papists that at their pleasure have
mangled and clipped, defaced, and corrupted all the writings and books of the
ancient fathers, taking out of them what they have thought in them prejudicial
to their damnable heresies (as appears in Index expurgatorius; their dealing
in that behalf may be called Ignis expurgatorius) have notwithstanding never
had power to lay such violent hand, upon the original text of the Scripture.

This perpetuity of the Scripture is not only to be understood of the very
letter and word thereof* but also of the sense and meaning. Every sentence of
the scripture is not only the same in letters and words that was at the first;
but also in sense Note.
and meaning. No scripture, no sentence of scripture has any other meaning
now, then it had at the first giving thereof by inspiration from God.

As God himself is immutable, so likewise the will of God revealed in his word
is unchangeable. Therefore the word is one of the two immutable things, whereby
we may have strong consolation Heb. 6. 16. As no man may add any thing to the
words themselves, nor take ought from them: so no man may alter or change any
thing touching the sense and meaning of them. The letters and words of the
scriptures are but as the body thereof: the sense and meaning are as the life
and soul of it. If therefore no man may increase or diminish any thing of the
former, much less may any alter or change any thing in the latter. The Lord
that has forbidden the maiming of a man in any limme, has much more forbidden
the hurt of him in his life. The like is to be said of the word of God.

This then is a great difference, of the word of God from the laws of men. For
though the laws of men do remain the same touching the letter of them: yet
often times the sense and meaning of them is changed, as times and Judges are
changed. And therefore it is a common saying, that the law rests in pectore
Iudicis, in the Judges breast: and so one thing is law one year, and the
clean contrary is law another. But the word of God being no more variable in
sense then in words, but always is constant as God himself is always the
same, is so much the more excellent. Therefore also the dignity of the children
of God that have this word for their constant rule, both of their faith and of
their manners, is so much the greater. For if once they have the true sense of
any part of the word, they have it for ever.

I might here speak of a third perpetuity besides the former two of the
letter and of the sense: viz. touching the efficacy thereof in whomsoever it
takes root downward, to bring forth fruit upward. For in such it never
dies, but abides to the eternal life of them in whom it is so effectual and
powerful. For such are said to fulfill the word of God, and to abide for ever.
1. Ioh. 2. 17. Their souls in death it self live with God in heaven: and
though their bodies consume for a time, yet they perish not, but shall be
raised up again at the last day, and be made like unto the glorious body of
Christ (as afterward we shall hear) Phil 3. 21. and so God continues their
God as well in death as in life: in which respect it is said, that God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. Mark 12. 27. But because by many
occasions in many places of this treatise, I fall into mention of this point;
therefore here it shall be enough thus only to have named it. Thus much for
the perpetuity of Gods word, and so also for the first thing touching the word
in this place, viz. as it is a rule of faith and manners.

Now follows the second consideration of the word in this place, namely as it
is a part of the armor of God, whereby we are to defend our selves against the
enemies of our salvation. Touching this, it is called the sword of the Spirit:
Ephesians. 6. 17. yea we are to observe, that in that place it has not only a
single place, but a double in the christian armor there prescribed. For the
Apostle does not only generally bid them to take the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God, but also more particularly he does will them in verse 15.
that their feet should be shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.

Neither is the word of God one part, or two parts only of the spiritual armor
whereby we are to defend our selves against our spiritual enemies: but also (in
a manner) our whole christian armor; or at least the armory and storehouse out
of which all the other parts of Christian armor are to be had: yea, the
principal means also whereby they are to be obtained. For from whence, or by
what means are we to have the girdle of truth, the breast plate of righteousness,
the shoes of the gospel of peace, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation:
from whence (I say) or by what means are we to have all these, but from and by
the word of God? Therefore it seems that the Apostle did of special purpose
set Note.
that in the last place, as the means and fountain of all the rest.

By the word (as there the Apostle calls it the sword of the spirit) we are
to understand all sentences of Scripture touching doctrine, all commandments
of God negative against evil, and affirmative for that which is good: all
promises of blessings, and all threatenings of judgments, and all examples both
of such sins as are forbidden, with the execution of Gods judgments upon
such as have committed them: and also of all virtues, with the performance of
Gods promises unto the^.

We are also further to observe, that the word is called the sword of the
spirit, not only because the word was first given by inspiration of God: 2.
Tim. 3. 16. and holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost: 2. Pet. 1.
21. and the Prophets searched when and at what time the fore-witnessing spirit
of Christ in them, should declare the things that are now showed, etc. 1. Pet.
1. 11. but also because we know not how to use this sword, but by direction of
the spirit: neither has this sword any sharpnes for defense of our selves and
wounding of our adversaries, except it be accompanied (and as it were edged)
by the spirit.

This sword was so used by Steven, against his adversaries, that they were not
able to resist the wisdom and the spirit, by the which he spoke: Acts 6. 10.

By this sword Peter defended himself and other that spoke strange tongues,
against them that maliciously said, They were full of new wine: Acts 2. 14. 15.
etc.

By this sword Apollo mightily confuted the Jews publicly, showing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ: Acts 18. 28.

By this sword Jesus Christ himself, defended himself against the devil
himself, and at last put him to flight, repelling all his assaults with this
weapon, It is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. It is written,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, etc. It is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Mat. 4. 4. etc. Christ could
have repelled Satan by his secret power, but he did it rather by his Note.
word, to commend his word in like cases against all his assaults. He could
have put him to flight without any answer at the first: but he suffered him to
assault him diverse ways, and answered all by, It is written, to teach us
likewise by the same weapon to defend our selves, not against some, but against
all tentations.

This then is the privilege of all the children of God, that though they have
many and mighty adversaries, yet they have always armor sufficient,
sufficiently to defend themselves against them all. If at any time they receive
any hurt, it is either because they draw not forth this sword of the Spirit, or
because they do not rightly use it. Neither is this word only a sword to
defend them, but also a salve to cure them, if by neglect thereof at any time,
or by not using it rightly, they receive any wound. What was the cause of the
death (I mean of the spiritual death) of our first parents Adam and Eve?
Because they drew not out the sword of Gods word against the Serpent as they
should have done. Whereby were they cured and restored to life again? By the
voice of God calling and (as it were) crying after them, when they fled and hid
themselves from him.

What was the cause of the grievous wound that Peter received in the high
Priests hall, a thousand times greater then that which before he had given to
the high Priests servant in cutting off his ear? was it not because he had
forgotten the former word of Christ, admonishing him thereof? verily it was:
and therefore the remembrance of it afterward, was that whereby he was healed
of that wound: Mat. 26. 75. What was the cause why the angel of the Church of
Sardi, was so wounded, that though he had a name to be alive, yet he was dead,
that is, ready to die, and at the point of death? Even because he had let go
his hold of the sword of the spirit. Therefore for curing of his said wound, our
Savior bids him to remember how he had received and heard, and to hold
fast, etc. Revel. 3. 2. 3. the like may be said of all wounds of any other of
the children of God at any time.

Thus the children of God must use the word of God, viz. not as a thing to play
or sport with, or whereof to make jests Note.
for the mirth of other: but as a weapon, and as a sword to fight with: yea,
thus they will use it, that are indeed the children of God. If at any time
they be provoked by other, or by their own hearts, to distrust Gods
providence, they will defend themselves by many precepts for trusting in the
Lord: Psalm. 37. 3. and 62. 8. and for casting their care upon God: Psalm. 37. 5.
and 52. 22. and 1. Pet. 5. 6. and by such sentences of scripture as pronounce
him blessed that trusts in the Lord: Psalm. 40. 4. and 84. 5. and 12. by many
promises to them that so do, annexed expressly (for the most part) to the former
comma^dements: by the judgments of God upon such as have murmured against God:
Number. 11. 1. upon such as have doubted of Gods promises: as upon the noble man
of Samaria, that would not believe the Prophet, in the name of the Lord
prophesying of great plenty the next day: 2. Kings 7. 2. and 20. yea upon Moses
himself for his distrust: Number. 20. 12. and 27. 14. and Deuteronomy. 32. 50. 51. and
lastly, by the providence of God toward the widow of Zarepta and the Prophet
Elijah: 1 Kings 17. 6. and 8. etc. and toward a widdowe of one of the sons
of the prophets: 2. Kings. 4 1. etc. and toward many thousands that following
our Savior for food of their souls, were fed likewise abundantly and
miraculously with corporal food: Mark. 6. 36. and 8. 2. etc. If they be
provoked to security, they can draw out this sword, and plead, Blessed is the
man that fears always, etc. Pro. 28. 14. and that they are commanded to spend
the time of their welling here in fear: 1. Pet. 1. 17. and the judgment of
God threatened to them that were at ease in Zion, etc. Amos 6. 1. etc. and the
fearful fall of David by security: 2. Sam. 11. 2. etc.

If they be provoked to idolatry, they can draw out the second commandment,
and many other scriptures as commentaries upon the said commandment: so also
that that is written of the wrath of God against Israel, for their golden
Calfe: Exodus 32. and for their other idolatry: Judge. 10. and often else where.
The like is to be said of tentations against the third and fourth commandment.

When they are moved to pride, they can call to mind the manifold precepts and
sentences against it: Deuteronomy. 8. 14. Psalm. 75. 4. Pro. 6. 17. and 16. 5. James 4.
6. 1. Pet. 5. 5. so also the examples of Haman and Nebuchadnezer, with
Sancherib, and the judgments of God not only upon them, but also upon Vzzia
King of Judah for presuming to meddle with the Priests office, in offering of
sacrifice: 2. Chron. 26. 20. and upon David for numbering the people in a kind
of pride: 2. Sam. 24. and upon Hezekiah for having his heart lifted up after
the recovery of his health: 2. Chron. 32. 25. etc. Being tempted to dishonor of
parents, they can repel such tentations by the fifth commandment and by many
other Scriptures against the same sin: as also by Agars curse against the eye
that mocketh his father, and despises the instruction of his mother: viz. that
the ravens of the valley shall pluck it out, and that the young Eagles shall eat
it: Pro. 30. 17. as also they can remember the examples of Absalom, and of
Adonijah, and the judgments of God upon them.

Being enticed by Papists or other, to rebellion, treason, or lifting up their
hand against Princes and the Lords anointed, they can oppose the contrary
commandments for obedience and subjection in the Lord, of every soul to the
higher powers: Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13. and the fearful judgments of God
upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their accomplices: yea, the deposing also of
Abiathar, the high Priest from the priesthood by Solomon, because he had joined
with Adonija for preventing Solomon of the Crown, before he was King: 1. Kings
1. 7. and 2. 35.

If either their own hearts or any other persuade them to contempt of the
ministers of the Gospel, either for plain rebuking them for their sins, or
for any other causes, they can object that the Lord has commanded such to be
had in singular love for their works sake: 1. These. 5. 12. 13. that our Savior
has said, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises
me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me: Luk 10. 16. and that
It shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
judgment, then for that City (and consequently for that family, and for those
persons) that shall not receive such, nor hear their words: Mat. 10. 13. 14.
and that likewise the Lord did not only not prosper good king Asa after that he
had put Hanani the Seer into prison, for rebuking him for resting upon the king
of Aram, etc. 2. Chro. 16. 10. but that also he did send two bears out of the
forest that tare in pieces 42. of those wanton children that had reviled and
mocked the Prophet Elisha, and said unto him, Come up thou bald-head, Com up
thou baldhead. 2. King. 2. 23. 24. and that yet the least minister of the
gospel is greater then John Baptist, who notwithstanding was greater then any
Prophet: Mat. 11. 11.

Being moved to murder, or to any other cruelty, they can hold out the sixth
commandment, and Luke 6. 36. the commendation of mercy above sacrifice: Hose
6. 6. and that James says, there shall be judgment (or condemnation)
merciless, to him that shows no mercy: Iam. 2. 13. and the judgment of God
upon Cain for the murder of Abel: Genesis 4. and upon the Egyptia^s for their
cruelty toward the Israelites, and upon all Israel by a great famine toward
the latter end of the reign of David, for the cruelty of Saul against the
Gibeonites: 2. Sam. 21. 1. etc. and after that, upon Judah long after the death
of Manasses, as for other sins of Manasses, so also for the innocent blood
that he had shed: 2. Kings 24. 4.

Against temptations to adultery, fornication, and other uncleanness, they can
defend themselves by the 7. commandment, by many precepts of Solomon against
such sins: Pro. 5. 3. to the 15. Pro 6. 25 etc. 7. 22. and 22. 14. and 23. 26
etc. and 29. 3. and of Agur Pro. 30. 18. and 20. and by many rebukes thereof in
the Prophets: Iere. 5. 8. Hose 4 10. Amos 2. 7. Mica. 3. 5. and in the new
testament: Ephesians. 5. 3. Colos. 3. 5. Heb. 13. 4. So likewise by the example of a
chaste mind in Joseph: Genesis 39. 9. and in Job, Chap. 31. 1. and 9. and lastly by
the judgments of God, not only upon the Gibeonites for their horrible abusing
the Levites wife, but also first upon the Israelites for being so forward to
punish Note.
the Gibeonites, and yet not thinking upon the Leuit, both for having a
concubine, and also for having an harlot to his concubine, and seeking her up
again, as though she had been an honest and grave matrone, when she had most
whorishly and wickedly run away from him: Judge. 20. and by exclusion of such
out of the kingdom of heaven: 1. Cor. 6. 9. Ephe. 5. 5. Revel, 21. 8. and 22.
15.

The worldly allurements to theft, and covetousness, and to other unjust and
hard dealing with men concerning their goods, and prouocations to withhold
their own when necessity requires the bestowing of them upon other, they can
resist and overcome by the eight commandment, and by many other precepts to
the same purpose: and by Zech. 5. 2. 3. as also by the great oath of the Lord
by his own excellency, against them that swallowed up the poor, and that
thought so long for the end of every new month day and of the Sabbath, for
setting forth wheat, and making the Epha small: Amos 8 4 etc. and by the
judgments of God upon Achan, Nabal, Gehezi, Ahab, Judas Is^ariot, and other.

If any motions be to bear false witness, to ly, etc. they have at hand the
ninth commandment, with Exodus 23. 1. Leuit. 19. 11. Psalm. 5. (...). and 15 2.
and 52. 6. Pro. 6. 19. and 12. 18. and 22. and 19. 5. and 21. 18. and ^4. 28.
and 25. 18. and that our Savior says, The devil is a liar, and the father
thereof: Ioh. 8. 44. and the judgments of God upon Gehazi, as well for his
lying, as for his greedy covetousness: and that liars are reckoned up among
the fearful, and the unbelieving etc. which shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone: Revel. 21. 8. and that whosoever loves,
or makes lies shall be without with dogs, etc. Revel. 22. 15.

Against all concupiscence and first motions against our neighbor, they have
the tenth commandment, and that such concupiscence is the fountain of actual
sins which bring death: James 1. 14. 15. and the complaint of the Apostle
against the same, with earnest desire to be released and disburdened thereof:
Romans 7. 24. That that has been said of the privilege of the children of God
by the sword of the Spirit the word of God, for their defense against the
former tentations, may be said touching other tentations also unto other sins.

The like may be said concerning errors and heresies. Let us take a short view
of some of the popish heresies, whereunto so many Jesuits, and other Romish
croaking frogs, in every city, town, village, and (almost) family, do now so
busily persuade all states and degrees of men, women, and children, and whereof
great multitudes of every state, sex, and age, are as apprehensiue (because
they have not believed the truth of the Gospel thus long preached unto them,
but have had pleasure in unrighteousness: 2. These. 2. 12) as the Jews were
mad upon sacrificing to the host of heaven: Ierem. 7. 18. and as any children
are to see plays, goodly shows, and other such vanities.

Do such frogs therefore and Romish serpents persuade that none can know the
scriptures to be of God, but by the authority of the Church? Against this the
children of God may defend themselves by these arguments out of the word.
First, that the Church has no authority above the scriptures, and that the
scriptures take no authority from the Church: First, because the Church being a
company of men, therefore as Christ himself receives not the record of man
(though as good as John Baptist) John 5. 34. so neither does the Scripture.
Secondly, because the word being without error, and teaching that all men are
subject to error, it cannot therefore receive authority from them, much less
be subject unto them. Thirdly, because the Scripture is the testimony of God,
and the testimony of God is greater then the testimony of man: 1. John 5. 9.
Fourthly, because the Church having all her authority from the word (for how
shall the Church prove that she has any authority but by the word?) the word
cannot have any from the Church. Fiftlie, because the Church is none of the
witnesses reckoned: 1. Ioh. 5. 7. 8. Sixthly, because they that will not believe
the scriptures, will neither believe one raised from the dead: Luk 16. 31. nor
Christ himself if he were here to speak personally unto them: John 5. 47.
How then will they believe the Church, that will not believe the scriptures?

Secondly, the children of God have this to plead against the former heresy:
viz. that many other things do witness the scriptures to be of God: though
the Church should not only be silent in that behalf, but also utterly deny the
same. Namely first of all the spirit of God (whereby they are sealed, and cry
Abba father) which searches all things, even the deep things of God; so that
as no man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man which is in him;
so no man knows the things of God, but the spirit of God: 1. Cor. 2. 10. 11.
If no man know the things of God, but the spirit of God, how can any man know
the scriptures themselves but by the spirit of God? For where are the things of
God but in the Scripture? How also can any man not know the Scriptures to be of
God, that has the spirit of God?

Secondly, the children of God know the scriptures to be of God by the pure and
holy matter of the scriptures agreeable to the nature of God himself.

Thirdly, by the disagreement of the scriptures to the nature of man,
condemning whatsoever comes from the same, the children of God understand the
scriptures not to be of man, and therefore consequently of God.

Fourthly, by the excellent harmony of all the scripture, and by the perpetual
even thread of truth spunne thorowout them, without any knot of untruth, from
the beginning to the ending.

Fifthly, they know the same by the divine style and phrase of the scripture,
savoring altogether of God himself.

Sixthly, by the just accomplishment of all things foretold in the scripture,
and that in the manner and time therein also mentioned.

Seventhly by the mighty effects of the word at the preaching thereof in the
hearts both of the elect and also of some reprobates, it is the more evident to
come from the mighty God. In Josiah, 2. Kings 22. 11. in the people that heard
our Savior, Mat. 7. 28. even in the messengers of the Priests and Pharisees
sent to apprehend him: Ioh. 7. 46. in the great multitude that heard Peter
preach: Acts 2. 37. in Felix hearing Paul, Acts 24. 25. and in the daily
hearers of the word sincerely preached, either as a savor of life unto life: or
as the savor of death unto death: 2. Cor. 2. 16.

Eighthly by the perpetuity of the scriptures (before spoken of) in despite of
all the enemies thereof.

Ninthly by the old and new judgments of God upon all the contemners thereof:
and by the old and new mercies of God upon the professors of it.

If such Romish frogs and serpents before mentioned, urge the Apocrypha books
to be canonical and divine scripture, the children of God may draw out the
sword of the word against that error: Luke 1 70. and 16. 39: and 24. 27. where
it is evident that all the old Testament is written by Prophets, and that
therefore the Apocrypha books being no part of the new testament, are not also
any part of the old, as not having been written by any Prophets.

Secondly they may object against the former error, that the whole old
testament was given to the Jews: Psalm. 147. 19. Romans 3. 1. 2. and that
therefore the Apocrypha books are no part thereof, as the which were never
given to the Jews, because they were never written in the Jews language.

Thirdly they may wound the former error by the attribute, truth, often given
to the word of God: Psalm: 19. 10. and 119. 142. John 17. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 15.
Ephesians. 1. 13. Coloss 1. 5. James 1. 18. since that in every Apocrypha book,
there is some repugnance to the Scripture, and some of them do disagree with
themselves.

If any do demand why the new testament was not written in the Jews language,
as well as the old testament, the children of God may easily answer, the reason
to have been double: First because the time of the Jews casting off, and
cutting off from being a people for a time, being at hand, when the new
testament began to be written, there was no cause why it should be written in
their tongue. Secondly, the time being also come of translating the kingdom of
God from them to other nations, yea to all nations, there was the greater
reason, why the Scriptures of the new Testament should be written in that tongue
that was most common; especially that was the tongue of that nation, where the
Lord purposed first to plant his Church, after the reiection of the Jews. The
Greeks being that people, it was therefore most fit, that is should be written
in that tongue.

If any do further reply, that I take that for granted, which may well be
doubted of, viz. that the apocrypha books are no part of the new testament: I
do answer, that this cannot be so much as doubted, but to affirm it must be
held a great absurdity: for as much as there is no mention at all in any of
them of Christ manifested in the flesh, either conceived, or borne, or put to
death, etc.

Against the defect and insufficiency of the Scriptures pretended by the
Papists for the justifying and stablishing of their traditions, both all before
spoken of the perfection of the word may be opposed: and also our Saviors own
sentence against humane traditions, though not altogether repugnant to the
Scriptures, but rather having some affinity with them: Mat. 15. and Mark. 7.
To the imagined difficulty of the scriptures, the children of God may oppose:

First, that the word is the word of him that is light it self* 1. John 1. 5.

Secondly, that the law is said to give wisdom to the simple, and light to
the eyes: Psalm. 119. 7. and that the word is a lantern to our feet, and a
light unto our paths: Psalm. 119. 105. and Prou. 6. 23.

Thirdly, that wisdom says that all her words are plain to them that will
understand, and straight to them that would find knowledge: Pro. 8. 9. and,
that knowledge is easy to him that will understand. Pro. 14. 6. and:

Fourthly, that if the Scripture be sufficient, or profitable to teach, to
convince, to correct and to instruct in righteonsnesse: 2. Tim. 3. 16. then
they be not obscure, for no obscure writings are profitable for such ends.

The same place also last before mentioned, proves that the Scriptures ought
to be interpreted by themselves, and are sufficient for interpretation of
themselves, by the help of the Spirit whereby they were given. For if they be
able to make men wise to salvation: and if they be able to make the man of God
absolute to every good work: then are they sufficient for interpretation of
themselves, and for bringing of men to the understanding of them. For how shall
men be wise that understand not what the will of the Lord is? (as before we
heard) Ephesians. 5. 17. And how shall the man of God be absolute to every good
work, if he be not able to interpret the Scripture? Is not interpretation of
the Scripture one good work of the man of God? Yea, is it not the most
principal? what other work can be performed without it?

The doctrine of particular election of some unto salvation being denied by the
Papists, the children of God may defend it by the word of God.

First by the particular election of Iaakob, and of the Lady to whom John did
write his second Epistle.

Secondly by the words of Christ, I know whom I have chosen: John 13. 18.

Thirdly, by the like phrase of the Apostle: The Lord knows who are his: 2.
Tim. 2. 19.

Fourthly, by the phrase of writing names in heaven: Luke 10. 20 Election by
the free grace of God, without any respect of our works, may be defended by the
word of God, as before, upon other occasion, it has been showed.

That the election of God cannot be nullified, or frustrated, as the Papists
do teach, the children of God may justify against them by the word of God:
John 6. 37. Romans 8. 30. Mat. 24. 24. and by many other things alleged in this
treatise.

That there is but one Mediator, against the plurality of mediators
blasphemously taught by the Papists, is to be defended by the word of God: 1.
Tim. 2. 6. Romans 8, ^4. 1 John 2. 1.

Against justification by works wholly or in part maintained by the papists,
the children of God have the word of God: Rom 3 28 Gala. 3. 2. etc Philip. ^.
9. Secondly, that as Christ was condemned without any evil of his own, only by
impu^ation of our sin unto him; so we are justified without any righteousness
of our own, only by imputatio^ of his righteousness active and passive unto
us. Thirdly, that all our works being condemned in scripture as imperfect, are
therefore excluded from justification of us before God, who being himself most
perfect can accept of nothing, but that which is likewise fully perfect and
absolute like unto himself. Fourthly that all men owe more to God (as has
been before showed) then they are able to pay: yea, even he that owes least:
Luke 7. 41. 42. and that therefore no man is able by any works whatsoever, to
purchase any new benefits at the hands of God. Fifthly, that Christ having
satisfied for all our sins (as has been before proved) there are none left
to us to make satisfaction for.

Touching the Sacraments, whereas the papists proclaim matrimony to be one, we
defend our denial thereof. First, because God has instituted no Sacramental
sign for matrimony. Secondly, all Sacraments are proper to the church: but
marriage is as well for them that are without the church, as for them that are
within it. Thirdly, that whereas Sacraments are to be common to all sorts of
members of the church, the Papists themselves deny matrimony to belong to their
most holy order of Priesthood. Fourthly, that Sacraments are instituted for
confirmation of our faith in Christ: but that matrimony was instituted whiles
Adam was perfect, not believing in Christ before his fall, neither standing in
need of Christ.

The like we plead against their other supposed Sacraments besides baptism and
the supper of the Lord.

Touching baptism, whereas we deny against them baptism to take away original
sin, we defend our selves in this behalf by the word of God, viz. by the
example of David in his age acknowledging his original sin: Psalm. 51. 5. and
of Paul complaining of his like sin: Romans 7. 7. etc. and by the testimony
also of James: Chap. 1. 13. etc.

Whereas we further deny against them, baptism to be absolutely necessary to
salvation, we defend our selves in this behalf by the word. First, because
circumcision being the same in signification and use that baptism is, was
intermitted for 40. years in the wilderness. 2. Because the children of the
faithful as soon as they are born, and before baptism, are within the Covenant.
1. Cor. 7. 14.

Touching the supper of the Lord, whereas they take away the cup from the
people, we oppose: First the institution in both kinds. Secondly the words of
the Apostle according to the institution, mentioning the cup as well as the
bread: 1. Cor. 11. 25. etc. Thirdly the continual practice of the Apostles.

Their transubstantiation and feined changing of the essence of the elements in
the said supper we confute. First, by the delivering of them by Christ himself
to his disciples, he going afterward into the garden, and suffering upon the
cross: which he could not have done, if he had given himself to his disciples
before: and if they had eaten him before, especially he being then not
glorified. Secondly, by the end of the supper, viz. the remembrance of Christ.
Christ being present, what need of remembrance? Remembrance is of things
absent. Thirdly, the continuance of Christ in heaven til the end of the world:
Acts 3. 21. Fourthly, the nature of a Sacrament, requiring an external sign
indeed (and not only the accidents of a sign) as well as the thing signified.
Fifthly, that the fathers of the old testament did eat the same spiritual meat,
and drink the same spiritual drink that we do: 1. Cor. 10. 3. who could not
carnally eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood: he then not being made man.
Sixthly, the fruit of eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood: viz.
eternal life: Ioh. 6. 51. which cannot be said of all that receive that supper.
Lastly, that as there is no alteration of the sign in baptism, so there is no
cause of change in the signs of the supper of the Lord.

The Popish Mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead, we
lay on the ground (as David did great Goliath) by the sword of the spirit the
word of God. Tit. 2. 14. Heb. 9. 12. and 25. 1. Pet. 3. 18.

All prayer to saints we overthrow by the same sword. First, because in the day
of our trouble (when if ever we have need of other friends to solicit our
cause to God, then especially we have need of them, such trouble testifying God
to be displeased with us) because (I say) in the day of such trouble, we are
comanded to call upon God: Psa. 50. 15. and upon no other. Secondly because
from the beginning of the scriptures to the end, there is neither precept, nor
example, nor any sentence to warrant invocation of saints. Thirdly, because
this is derogatory and disgraceful to the only mediation of Christ before
spoken of: yea, it is blasphemous against the same. Fourthly, because although
it should be granted that the Saints departed do know our necessities, yet
they know not our hearts, whether when we pray for our selves, we pray in faith
and truth, or no.

All prayer for the dead we wound mortally by the same weapon, because the word
teaches us that they that die, and are translated out of this world, they die
either in the Lord, and so are blessed, and rest from their labor, and have
their reward with God in heaven: Reu. 14. 13. or else they die out of the Lord,
and so they go to that rich man of whom the Gospel makes mention, even to
the devil and his angels, where they are tormented for ever, and from whence
there is no more passage to heaven, then from heaven thither: Luke 16. 26. And
this twofold distinction of men dying either in Christ or out of Christ, either
in the state of salvation to go presently to God in heaven, or in the state of
damnation to be thrown immediately into hell, without any third sort either of
men here, or of state and place after this life, we gather from our Savior
himself saving, Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or the tree
evil and his fruit evil: Mat. 12. 33. So he makes only two sorts of men
here, all to be good or evil: therefore he excludes any middle sort: and so
consequently denies also all middle state or place after this life distinct
from heaven and hell. Secondly, we wound the former heresy of praying for the
dead, by the form of prayer prescribed by our Savior, wherein he teaches us
to pray only for them that may do the will of God upon earth, that have need
of daily bread for this life, and that are in danger of tentation and other
evil: al which things do belong only to the living in this world.

Worshipping of images, or of God in images, we do likewise wound unto death
by the same word: viz. by the second commandment, and by infinite other
Scriptures in the old testament, and by some also in the ^ew^ Acts 17 2^ etc.
1. Cor. 6. 9. and 10. 7. 14 1. Pet 4. 3. 1 John 5 21 Reu 21. 8. and 22. 15.
Secondly because we are forbidden the worship of the holy and glorious Angels:
Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 8. Much more therefore are we forbidden, the worship of
dead and helpless images. Thirdly, because there should be some resemblance
betwixt that that puts us in mind of another thing, and the thing it self
whereof it puts us in mind. But there is not so much similitude betwixt God
and images as there is (according to our common speech) betwixt an apple and an
oyster. For both these are the good creatures of God: they are both meat for
man: either of both are beyond the power of man to make. But there is no
agreement at all betwixt God and idols or images: What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness: and what communion has light with
darkness? etc. 2. Cor. 6. 14. etc. Images have mouths and speak not: eyes and
see not: ears and hear not: hands and handle not, feet and walk not (as
before we heard) Deuteronomy. 4. 28. Psalm. 15. 5. etc. But God has no eyes, and yet
sees all things; no ears, and yet hears all things; no mouth, and yet
speaks unto us by his word; no hands, and yet does, and rules all things: he
has no feet, and yet is every where. Last of all, for images to put us in mind
of God is derogatory to the Sacraments; especially to the supper of the Lord,
which Christ himself instituted chiefly in remembrance of him. That which I
have said of some of the chief heresies of Popery, I might show of the rest:
so likewise of other heresies. To deal in like manner with all, would be too
large for this place.

By these things but thus briefly written other may be understood. And thus we
see what an excellent privilege the children of God have by the word of God,
being such an armor of proof as we have heard it to be for defense of
themselves against all sins, both of practice, and also of judgment. Yea,
this privilege is the greater, because all the wicked and mere natural men
being without this word, are therefore in a woeful state, altogether unarmed,
naked, lying open to the enemy of their souls, yea, being indeed in his
posession, as before we have often heard. For although the Apostle do describe
other parts of the christian armor, yet none can have any of those other parts,
except he have the word: The word is the most principal of all the rest: as
being the means (as before has been showed) of all the rest. Thus much for
the second consideration of the word in this place: viz. as it is a special
part of our spiritual armor to defend our selves against the enemies of our
salvation.

CHAP. XX.
Of the word as it is given for consolation and comfort of the children of God
in their afflictions: and also of the Sacraments.

THe third consideration of the word before mentioned yet remaining, is, as it
is the speciallest consolation and comfort of the children of God in their
afflictions. This I have reserved for this last place, because it arises from
the two former. For if the word of God be so perfect (as before we heard) then
it must needs be a word of comfort. If also it be such a special part of our
christian armor for our defense (as before also we have seen it to be) then it
cannot but minister likewise great comfort unto us. For where a man has many
and mighty enemies, there cannot but be great fear: where there is great
fear, there cannot but be great heaviness also. Yea, what (almost) is fear
but the heaviness of heart, from the expectation of some evil? So far
therefore as the word does arm us against our enemies, whom we have most cause
to fear, so far it cannot but be a great comfort unto us.

This that I speak of the comfort of the children of God by the word of God,
David testifies, Psalm. 19. both saying that the statutes of the Lord are right
and rejoice the heart: verse 8. and also adding, that they are sweeter then the
honey and the honey comb: verse. 10. But we are there to observe, these
commendations to be placed after some other attributes and effects, for which
in the same Psalm he had before commended the word, viz. after the perfection
of it, and the conversion of the soul thereby: after the faithfulness or
surenesse of it, and the giving wisdom unto the simple, etc. Thereby the
Prophet gives us to understand, that the word of God does rejoice and comfort
the heart only of those, whom first it has inwardly converted or restored, and
whom first it has made wise unto salvation, etc. Therefore also he says
again, This is my comfort in my trouble, that thy promise (or thy word) does
quicken me: Psalm. 119. 50. that whereas by nature I am dead in sins and
trespasses, thy word has awakened me, and restored me to life, and so given me
much comfort: and again, This is my comfort, that I keep thy commandment,
verse 56. and again, Except thy laws had been my delight (or my comfort) I
had long sithence perished in mine afflictions: verse 92,

Paul also does not obscurely signify the word of God to be the word of
comfort, when he says, that whatsoever things are written before time, are
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
scriptures might have hope: Romans 15. 4. Do we not here plainly see true comfort
to be called the comfort of the scriptures? Another Apostle also sets down
the word for one of the two immutable things, whereby we might have strong
consolation, etc. Heb. 6. 18. But what shall I need to stand long upon this
point? For (as afterward in the uses of this dignity of Gods children we shall
hear) this whole treatise is as well for comfort as for instruction.

And how shall we know that God has so loved us, as to make us his children,
but by the word? How are we made the children of God, but by the word? How do
we understand any thing else, either before or after in this treatise
concerning the dignity of Gods children, but by the word?

Yea, and that all true comfort is to be had by the word, our Savior seems
to insinuate, because his disciples being in great fear partly by a great
tempest upon the sea, partly and more specially because seeing him come toward
them walking upon the sea, they imagined him to be a spirit, though our savior
by his bodily eyes seeing their trouble by the tempest, and by his divine
nature understanding their imagination of him, could secretly by his said
divine nature and power have taken all fear from them, and comforted them, yet
he did rather comfort them by his word and speech, Note.
saying unto them, Be of good comfort, it is I, be not afraid: Matthew. 14. 27.
Wherefore did he thus rather then otherwise, comfort them? Even the better to
sanctify and commend the word for the word of comfort for ever, to his
disciples, and to all other in any fear or heaviness, that so all might
always seek comfort, at no other fountain then at the word of God. By the
same means from time to time, has the Lord comforted his children, Abraham,
Isack, Jacob, David, Hezekiah, Paul and other in their afflictions, even by his
word, and by speaking unto them. When John also wept much because no man was
found worthy to open, to read, and to look on the book, which before he had
seen in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, etc. how was he
comforted? Not inwardly only by Gods spirit, but outwardly also by one of the
elders speaking unto him, and saying Weep not, behold that Lion, which is of
the tribe of Judah, that root of David, has obtained to open the book, and to
open the seven seals thereof: Revel. 5. 5. Here is a double argument to prove
the word of God to be the word of comfort. First, because John in his
heaviness is comforted by the speech of one of the elders unto him. Secondly,
in respect of the matter of the said speech. viz. that there was one found to
open the book and the seven seals thereof. For thereby the holy ghost
signifies that without opening of the book before showed to John, there was
nothing to have comforted him.

Whatsoever benefits therefore, whatsoever friends, whatsoever outward delights,
whatsoever learning or other thing men have, yet nothing will soundly comfort
them that are heavy hearted, or exercised with fears, but the word. The woman
in the Gospel healed of her bloody issue (for healing whereof she had spent
all that she had upon the physicians, and was nothing the better) does
sufficiently justify this. For when our Savior having so healed her for
nothing, even so perfectly healed her that she sensibly felt her self to be
healed; when (I say) our Savior having thus healed her, did but ask who had
touched him, because he had felt virtue to go from him, she had no more
comfort then before, but (for all the benefit Note.
of health so miraculously wrought in her) she was possessed with great fear
and trembling till she came to our Savior, and till he spoke unto her saying
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has saved thee: Luk 8. 47. 48. So then
the former benefit did not comfort her (though she had long desired it) yea, it
seems she had more fear then before, but the word that our savior spoke,
was it that took away the fear, and which did comfort her.

I might here also speak of Belshazar in what case he was: Dan. 5. having no
comfort in the word: but of him, and other like more afterward. In the mean
time, let us understand, that the word has comforts of all sorts, and for all
afflictions; of this life, and of the life to come; for body and for soul.

Is any of Gods children poor? he can comfort himself with the word, saying
Fear the Lord ye his Saints: for no good thing wants to them that fear him
etc. Psalm. 34. 9. So with those manifold comforts, Mat. 6. 25. etc. Luke 12.
32. etc. So also with the examples of Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. of Elija, of the
widow of Zarepta, and of the other widow of one of the sons of the Prophets
before mentioned: and with Gods mighty providence toward the Israelites in the
wilderness, in feeding them with Manna, and quails: and in giving them water
out of the rock.

Is any child of God in disgrace, or in base condition? he can comfort himself
with 1. Pet. 5. 5. and 6. and with the examples of Joseph, David, Ester and
Mordecai: whom the Lord raised up from the dust, and made to sit with Princes:
yea, and some of them to be Princes.

Is any of them in prison? He can comfort himself with the examples of Joseph,
Jeremiah, Peter and Paul, who were not only in prison, but whom also the Lord
most mightily delivered out of prison.

Has any many and great adversaries? He can consider, that If God be with him,
he need not fear who is against him: Romans 8. 29. and that The Lord is always
at hand: Philip. 4. 6. And how the Lord delivered Jacob from Esau, and from the
Sechemites: and David from many mighty enemies.

Is any sick and sick unto death? He can call to mind how Hezekiah being so,
and told also by the word of God that he should die, was upon his prayer,
miraculously restored to health, and had his life drawn out for fifteen years
more: 2. Chron. 32. 24. etc. He can also remember, that David's soul was
delivered from the grave: Psalm. 103. 4. and that Epaphroditus being sick and
near unto death, God had mercy on him: Phil. 2. 27.

Has any man lost all his goods in one day, yea children also, etc. He can
comfort himself with Psalm. 24. 1. and with the example of Job: who having lost
goods and children, did not only say, The Lord has given and the Lord has
taken: Blessed be the name of the Lord: Job. 1. 21. but who also had all, and
more then all restored unto him at the last: Job. 42. 10.

Is any man heavy laden with his sins? does he fear the wrath of God and
everlasting condemnation, and does he not find or feel any comfort? yea does
he feel the terrors of death? Oh how may he comfort himself with the doctrine
of Gods mercy: Psalm. 103. 9. etc. before handled: with the end of Christ's
coming to heal them that are sick, not the whole; to call sinners, not the
righteous to repentance: Mat. 9. 12. 13. to seek and to save that which was
lost: Luke 19. 10. that every one that believes in him, might not perish, but
have everlasting life? John 3. 6. with the words also of the Prophet, Ho, every
one that thirsts, etc. Isai. 5. 5. 1. with the words of our Savior, Come
unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you: Mat. 11. 28.
And lastly with the examples of such as have found comfort in such an heavy
condition, and against great and many sins: viz. of David, of Solomon, of
Manasses, of Peter, of Mary Magdalen, of Zacheus, of Paul, and of diverse other?

Seeing then the word of God has such excellent and such sweet comforts for
every malady, for every affliction, for every heaviness; who can sufficiently
express the dignity and prerogative of the children of God thereby? For they
only can receive comfort by it. The childrens bread does not belong to whelps:
Mat. 15. 26. Neither do the holy things of God belong to dogs: neither do such
pearls become swine: Mat. 7. 6.

All this hitherto said of the word is the more, both in respect of the writing
thereof, and also of the preaching thereof. In both these respects (I say) the
prerogative of the children of God by the word is the greater. For as touching
the writing thereof, howsoever the Papists would persuade that it was written
only by the voluntary accord of man, not by any express commandment of God
(...) and that therefore it were as well now if we had no word written at all,
but that all were delivered unto us only by tradition: yet it is certain, both
that God himself commanded the word from time to time to be written; and also
that it was so written to very great purpose, and for very great use of the
children of God.

That the word was written by Gods express commandment, many places do
testify: Ier. 30. 2. and 36. 2. Revel. 2. 1. etc.

The special purposes of so writing the word of God, are two: First, that the
Church might the less err touching the word: for if all should have been by
tradition, men might have devised what they would, and pretended a tradition,
and who almost could have controlled them? That therefore the Church might have
a certain rule both of faith, and also of manners, against which no exception
might be taken, it pleased God to command his word to be written, for the
better examining of all other writings and preachings thereby. Secondly, it was
so written, that all men might the better have the benefit thereof: as well
privately to read, as publikly to hear the same preached. The rather, because
sometimes by persecution; sometimes by sickness; sometimes by extremity of
weather; sometimes by imprisonment; sometimes by some other means they be kept
from the public ministry thereof. Touching the preaching of it, the Lord
took order also in that behalf, for the better instruction of all by sound
interpretation, and by wise application of it, according to persons, and times
and places. For the preaching of the word is the right dividing thereof, as
every one needs the same, in respect of age, of sex, of calling, of state
and condition any manner of way: 2. Tim. 2. 15. What a singular benefit is
this, that all men, poor as well as rich, base as well as honorable, may have
the word, and ought to have the word, as their several necessity requires?
And truly though a man know never so much, yea though a man be never so rich
in faith and godliness, yet the preaching of the word is necessary: partly to
increase his knowledge which is always imperfect: 1. Cor. 13. 9. and partly to
help his memory in those things he knows: yea to strengthen the same, and as
it were to stop the holes thereof for the time to come, that the things which
they shall hear may not at any time run out: Heb. 2. 1. and partly to
quicken him, both to obedience according to his knowledge: and also to make use
of the word for his comfort, for his humbling, for his strengthening that he may
not fall: for his raising if he shall fall, and many other ways. For alas,
what is the best and most godly man that is, but drousie and dull: needing both
to be awakened daily, and also (with the spur (as it were) of the word) to
be quickened: yea, what is the greatest measure of faith, of love, of zeal, of
meekness, of patience, and of any piety in any man here upon the earth, but as
a little fire (a coal or two) kindled under and in a great deal of
greenewood, which will easily be quenched and go out, without continual
puffing and blowing, for nourishing, maintaining, and increasing thereof?

Neither is the word of God in this manner only a great benefit for the
children of GOD in respect of the writing and preaching thereof, that so they
may both hear it and read it, but also because they may at all times both
confer thereof with other; and also privately meditate thereof by themselves:
yea this conference and meditation must go with hearing and reading. Otherwise
all hearing and reading will be to little purpose; yea whatsoever we learn
by hearing and reading, it will quickly vanish and come to nothing. As the two
disciples that were going to Emmaus, did talk and confer together of those
things that had fallen out at Jerusalem concerning Christ: Luk 24. 14. and as
the men of Berea, did not content themselves with hearing, but conferred
together of the things they had heard, and searched the Scriptures daily
whether those things (viz. which they had heard) were so or no: Acts 17. 11. so
may, and must, and will all the children of God do, touching the things they
hear. The like is to be said of meditation. Therefore, as Joshua is commanded
to meditate in the law of God day and night: Josh. 1. 8. and as it is commended
to be the continual exercise of the man that is blessed: Psalm 1. 2. to teach
that he is none of the blessed company, that does not so meditate on the law:
so it was practiced by David himself, who proves his exceeding love unto the
word of God (even such as whereof he was in a manner sick, and the which he
could not well express) by this argument saying: Oh how love I thy law! it is
my meditation continually: Psalm. 119. 97. This is such a work, as wherein the
children of God may even in the night as they ly in their bed, when they have
no light whereby they may read; in the way as they walk or ride; in their
sickness, lamenesse, and in imprisonment, when all other comforts do fail
them; yea, in their old age, and when their eie-sight is either dim and weak,
not able to endure reading, or none at all: and when they shall be deaf not
hearing any thing; or at the least, not able to endure the speech of any:
finally, when all other things will be loathsome unto them: Even then (I say)
may the children of God exercise themselves to their great comfort, and to a
sweet passing away of the time in meditation of the word. This is the more,
because the wicked not having this privilege do either spend their time in
eating, drinking, swilling, carding, dicing, dancing, chambering, wantonness,
and in all vanity: or else they find all things more tedious unto them then
they can bear.

Above all things, great is the benefit of the word for the former uses,
because it may be and must be locked up in the chest of our hearts: Job. 22.
22. Pro. 2. 2. and 10. and 3. 3. 4. so that when we fall into the hands of
thieves that rob us of al other things, yet that cannot be taken away from us:
yea, though men take away our lives, yet the benefit of the word shall continue
with us: For this is that good part that Mary did choose, which our Savior
says, should not be taken away from her: Luke 10. 42.

This especially is proper to the children of God. Many of the wicked hear the
word, read the word, confer of the word, and no doubt also but do often meditate
of the word (though sometimes rather for evil then for good, as al Papists and
heretics do study the word, the more to maintain their heresies contrary to
the word) but only the children of God do lay and lock it up in their hearts
to their everlasting good.

To conclude therefore this point; If it were one of the greatest preferments
of the Jews above the Gentiles before the coming of Christ, that the Lord
gave them his word, his statutes, and his judgments: Psalm. 147. 19. and that
to them were committed the Oracles of God: Romans 3. 2. viz. outwardly and
concerning the letter to be kept by them, whereas no other nation had the like
benefit: then how great is this privilege of the children of God above the
wicked, that they only have the keeping of his word in the closets and cofers
of their hearts to their everlasting good? Thus much of the dignity of Gods
children by the word of God.

It remains now to speak of the Sacraments, wherein I may and will be the
shorter, because they are only seals for confirmation of the word: and either
to strengthen our faith the more in the promises of God, or to quicken our
obedience the more unto the commandments of God. For as touching baptism, it
is instituted, first of all, the better to assure us of the forgiveness of our
sins by the blood of Christ, by that visible element of water which therein
is to be used. This Peter teaches when he exhorts them that by his sermon
were pricked in their hearts, to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins: Acts 2. 38. because as the water washes away the
filth of the body, so the blood of Christ cleanses us from all our sins: Romans
5. 9. Ephesians. 1. 7. Coloss. 1. 20. 1 John 1. 7. Revel. 1. 5. Secondly, baptism
was instituted as a Sacrament also of repentance and regeneration, because the
blood of Christ does not only wash us from the guilt of our sins, but also
from the spot and blemish of them, as we have heard before. And therefore Peter
says, that we were elect (or select, viz. in our calling) unto sanctification
of the spirit, through the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 1.
Pet. 1. 2. and again, that We were redeemed from our vain conversation
received by tradition of our fathers, by the precious blood of Christ, etc.
verse 18. 19. Another Apostle also says that the blood of Christ shall purge
our consciences from dead works to serve the living God: Heb. 9. 14. Therefore
(to apply these things unto baptism) the baptism of John is called the
baptism of repentance: Acts 19, 4. and John never baptized but he preached
repentance, Mat. 3. 8. Luke 3. 8. Therefore also baptism is said to teach us
to die unto sin, and to live unto righteousness: Romans 3. 4. Gal. 3. 27. Col.
2. 12. In the same respect Paul says, that Christ gave himself for the
Church, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, by the washing of water
through the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. In which words the Apostle at least alludeth
unto baptism, and again he seems to understand baptism by the washing of
the new birth: Tit. 3. 5. The Apostle also to the Hebrews, seems to allude to
baptism, when he says, that we are purged in our hearts from an evil
conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water: Hebr. 10. 22. Finally,
touching both the former ends of baptism, baptism is said to be the baptism
of repentance, and forgiunesse of sins, Mark. 1. 4.

As baptism so serves for confirmation of faith and instruction in
godliness: so does also the supper of the Lord. The bread that we eat, and
the wine that we drink in a religious manner according to Christ's
institution, does teach us, that as the bread and wine are incorporated into
our bodies, and made one with them: so Christ's his flesh and blood are
spiritually incorporated into us, and we into Christ through faith, whereby it
is said, (as we heard before) that Christ dwells in our hearts: Ephesians. 3.
17. In which respect, the cup of blessing, which the Minister in the
celebration of the Supper blesses (that is, which he prays God to bless to
that special and holy use) is said to be the communion of the blood of
Christ: and that the bread which he so blesses, is said to be the communion of
the body of Christ: 1. Cor. 10. 16.

And indeed the Supper of the Lord by the visible elements and the visible
actions therein commanded by Christ himself, putting us better in remembrance
of all that Christ has done for us, and better showing his death till he come,
1. Cor. 11. 24. 25. 26. then bare preaching would do (for so our eyes do see,
our hands do handle, our tongues do taste, and our stomaks by the virtue of
the bread and wine do feel that which in the word preached our ears do
hear) it cannot but be a marvelous and most comfortable confirmation of our
faith, both for everlasting salvation in the world to come, and also for all
things necessary for this life in this present world. For how can we doubt of
salvation, which Christ Jesus has so deerly purchased for us? and the price
whereof we see in so lively manner represented unto us by the bread and the
wine: by the breaking of the one, and the pouring out of the other? would he
give so much for us, and then leave us in the suds or in danger? Yea, do not
the bread and the wine, with the eating of the one, and drinking of the other
teach us, that Christ's flesh and blood are meat indeed and drink indeed, to
preserve us to that eternal life, which he by his death has purchased for us?
Ioh. 6. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. Has Christ paid so deerly for us, and does he
feed us so daintily, and with such costly diet (better then Angels food) and
will he lose us, and suffer us to perish, and to be taken out of his hands?
yea, since we, that eat his flesh, and drink his blood spiritually (not only in
the word, but also in the Sacrament) do dwell in Christ, and have Christ
dwelling in us (as Christ himself in the place before alleged does testify)
will he dispossess himself of his habitation? or having all power in heaven,
in earth, and every where else in his hands, can he violently by any other power
be thrust out of his house and home? yea, since (as we have heard) the supper of
the Lord does plainly teach us that we are flesh of his flesh, etc. can we
perish, and he not also perish?

Touching things necessary for this life, whiles we live in this world, the
supper of the Lord by putting us in such remembrance of Christ himself, does
also most comfortably assure us of them. For he that spared not his own son
but gave him for us all, how shall he not with him give us all other things
also? Romans 8. 32. And he that spared not his own life, and his own soul, but
gave them for us, and daily does give them unto us by faith, how shall he not
(being made the heir of all things: Heb. 1. 2. and having all things in his
power and at his disposition) how shall he not (I say) with himself give us
all things also? yea, this phrase, how shall he not, notes it to be impossible
not to give us all things. All things (I say) not only for the life to come,
but also for this. For the general, all things, comprehends both the
particular sorts of things. And if we may assure our selves the more of all
things for the life to come, how can we doubt of any thing for this life? Fear
not little flock (says our Savior speaking in this very argument) for it is
your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom: Luke 12. 32. Is it our fathers
pleasure for Jesus Christ's sake to give us a kingdom, and shall he stick at
giving us the trifles of this life? The supper of the Lord therefore assuring
us, that the Father has given us Christ, and that by Christ, and with Christ,
and for Christ's sake he will give us a kingdom, does likewise much more assure
us, that he will give us all other things, which in respect of Christ himself,
and of that kingdom, are but trifles.

As the supper of the Lord does thus make for confirmation of our faith, so
does it also for our instruction in godliness: and for our provocation to the
love of him that has so loved us. For did he so love us altogether void of
goodness, and therefore unworthy to be loved, and shall not we much more love
him, that is free from all evil, the fountain of all goodness, and most
worthy of our love? Verily though he had never so loved us, yet he was and is
worthy of our love, because of his perfect, and infinite goodness. How much
more then is he worthy of our love that has so loved us, and that in such
exceeding manner, that as David speaks of the love of Jonathan, Thy love to
me was wonderful, passing the love of women: 2. Sam. 1. 26. so every child of
God may much more say of the love of Christ, Thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women: yea of any mother toward her child, or of any woman
toward her husband: yea of any Virgin (or new married young woman) toward the
husband of her youth.

So likewise the supper of the Lord does serve to provoke us to the love one of
another. First by representing so unto us the love of Christ, as we have heard.
Secondly by teaching us that we are all of the same family; yea members of the
same body by sitting at the same table: by eating all of the same bread, and
drinking all of the same wine. For has Christ so high and excellent, and so
far above us, so loved us his servants, and shall not we love one another? Has
he so loved us, that never deserved any love at his hands, and who never can be
any ways beneficial unto him? and shall not we much more love one another,
that either are beholding one to another, or that may be beneficial one
toward another, if not any other way, yet at least by praying one for another?
Shall we also by sitting, by eating, and drinking together, in one house, even
in the house of the Lord, and at one table, even at the Table of the Lord,
testify ourselves to be servants to the same Lord, children of the same
Father, and members of the same body: and shall we not provoke one another
thereby, to the mutual love one of another?

I might apply to this purpose the exhortation of the Apostle in that behalf:
Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. and 1. Ioh 4 11. and other the like: But in a case so plain,
such labor may well be spared.

Let us only remember, that here by love toward God and men, we must not only
understand the affection of love, but all such duties and works of love, as
whereby we may the better declare our love to God, to Christ Jesus, and one to
another: and so show our selves the more thankful for his unspeakable and
incomprehensible love toward us: Heb. 6. 10. and 10. 24.

To conclude therefore this point, and this Chapter, by these things thus
written of the two Sacraments, who sees not the great prerogative of all the
children of God? If a man be weak and sick, not able to go without a staff,
and yet having no staff to go with, does not he a great pleasure unto him,
that shall give him a staff the better to stay him in his walking? Is it not
especially both a great help, and also a great grace if a Prince shall give a
staff to some poor man that is sick and weak? yea, not only one staff,
but two for each hand (as it were) one? and both (according to the magnificence
of a Prince) of beaten gold? All the children of God are sick: they are weak:
they cannot walk without staves: they are so poor that they have not a staff
of their own: neither can they buy one, neither can they make one. Christ
Jesus therefore the Prince of Princes of his Princely grace and magnificence,
has given two, for each hand one, both of beaten gold: yea, much more precious
then the finest gold: for such as the word is, such are the Sacraments.

These two golden staves (more precious then gold) has Christ Jesus given to
the children of God: first the one, and then as they grow better able to guide
two, another, to walk with in this slippery, and stumbling world: the better
to stay and support them. Great therefore, and very great is the dignity of the
children of God by the two Sacraments: as it were by two most precious staves
given unto them by Jesus Christ the Lord of heaven and earth. Thus much of the
word, and also of the Sacraments.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the prerogative of Gods children by their liberty and free access to the
throne of Gods grace to ask any thing, every one for himself, and also for
other: with much assurance of obtaining that which they ask.

THe next benefit of the children of God by their communion with Christ Jesus,
seems to be, that thereby they have boldness and liberty to come freely
without any interruption, let, or disturbance, to the throne of Gods grace,
there without doubting, even confidently, and in full assurance of speeding, to
ask what they will.

This the Apostle expressly testifies saying, In whom (that is in Christ) we
have boldness, and entrance with confidence (or full assurance) by faith in
him. Ephesians. 3. 12. To this another Apostle exhorts, Let us draw near with a
true heart, in assurance of faith: Heb. 10. 22. This assurance our Savior
himself also makes unto us, saying: Ask and ye shall have: seek and ye
shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto you: Matthew. 7. 7. Yea he
adds, that If we that are evil can give good things to our children, when
they ask us, much more shall our heavenly father give good things to us that
ask them: verse 11. so he makes God much more ready to give any good thing to
his children by grace, asking the same, then any earthly father is to give his
children by nature that which they do ask. Why? Because God our heavenly
Father is good, yea, infinite in all goodness: but all earthly fathers are
evil; even full of evil: yea, it is to be observed, that where Matthew says,
Much more shall your heavenly Father give good things: for good things Note.
Luke says, the holy ghost: Luke 11. 13. both to teach us what we are
specially to ask, viz. the holy ghost: and also to assure us, that the better
and greater things we do ask (the same being good in themselves and good for
us) the more we may make our reckoning of them, and the sooner we shall receive
them. The like assurance (even of all such good things) we have made us also by
our Savior in diverse other places, as in Mat. 21. 22. Ioh. 14. 13. 14. and 15.
17 In the which last place our Savior plainly teaches, that our assurance of
speeding in all our lawful requests, is by our communion with him. For If ye
abide in me (says he) and my words abide in you (note here how we may know our
selves to abide in Christ, viz. by the abiding of his words in us) ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you. Can we have greater promises? Can we have
better assurance? Verily we can have no greater promise then the promise of the
greatest; and that of whatsoever we shall ask: yet have we better assurance.
For Christ has not only promised whatsoever we shall ask, but he has also
purchased for us whatsoever he has promised, and that at the same price,
whereby he has purchased the favor of his Father for us. Yea, himself (I
mean Christ) has prayed for all things for us: especially for all things
belonging to the life to come: Ioh. 17. 9. etc. yea, he does sit for ever at
the right hand of God his father, and there makes continual and daily
intercession (by virtue of his former righteousness) for the performance of
all things before promised: Romans 8. 34. and whatsoever he asks at any time,
or has asked, therein he is heard by his Father: for so he says to his
father, I know thou hear me always: Ioh. 11. 42. So also Martha had
confessed before in the same Chapter, I know that whatsoever thou ask of
God, God will give it thee: verse 22. Both which testimonies are to be
understood of those things that Christ asked for other: not of any thing for
himself. This is an unspeakable prerogative. If we had the like preferment,
and the like liberty with the like assurance with some great and mighty monarke
of the earth, were it not a great honor? How much more honorable then is this,
to have this boldness and assurance with God himself? This is the more,
because we need not fear being troublesome in coming too often to God: For
the oftener we come in faith and with reverence, the more welcome and acceptable
we shall be unto him. For he has not only bid us to come, but to come again
and again: yea, to continue in prayer: Coloss. 4. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

Every benefit also obtained, is a pledge, and an encouragement for the asking
of another. If we be not weary of asking, God will never be weary of giving.

Yea, by Christ Jesus, and by our adoption in him to be the children of God, we
have assurance, not only of the things we ask, but also of other things: even
exceeding abundantly above all we ask, or think: Ephesians. 3. 20. according to
Gods own promise, to all the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and to their
buds with them: that before they should call he would answer: and whiles they
should speak he would hear: Isai. 65. 23. 24.

Solomon asked but wisdom: but God gave him not only a wise and an
understanding heart, above all that ever had been before him, or should be
after him: but he also gave him that which he had not asked, both riches and
honor, so that among the Kings, there was none like unto him all his days: 1.
Kings 3. 9. etc.

The poor man in the Gospel, asked only the throwing of the devil out of his
child: but Christ did not only throw him out, but forbid him to enter any more
into him: Mark. 9. 25.

God gave us all that we have at the first, before we asked any thing: and so
he gives daily more then we ask. For (alas) how poor, naked, and miserable
should we be, if God should give us no more then we do ask? yea, the truth
is, that the gift of an heart unto us, for the asking of any thing as we
should ask it, is more, then all (almost) that we do ask. Yea, it is a good
assurance unto us of any thing that we do ask. For an heart so to ask is the
work of the spirit: and the groans of such an heart are called the groans, or
the sighs, and requests of the spirit: Romans 8. 26. 27. Can God reject the
groans, the sighs, and requests of his own Spirit?

Neither have we boldness only to ask, and assurance to speed when we ask
by those things before spoken, but also by the mighty and glorious success
that the prayers of Gods children have always had with God.

For certainly a poor man that is the child of God, by his prayer of faith may
do more with God, then the greatest monarch in all the world that is none of
Gods regenerate children, can do with all his wealth, or with all the power he
can make.

So mighty were the prayers of Jacob, that it is said that he wrestled with
God, and would not leave wrestling till God had blessed him: and that blessing
of God was the change of his name Iaacob into Israel, with this gracious
answer, Because thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail with
men: Genesis 32. 24. etc. And that this was to be understood of Jacob in respect
of his prayers, it is the more manifest, because that history of his wrestling
and having power with God, as also of the gracious answer of God to his request
of a blessing, viz. that because he had had such power with God, he should
also prevail with men; because (I say) all this history is set down immediately
upon the earnest prayer that in the same Chapter verse 9. he had made to God to
be delivered from his brother Esau. And indeed as he had prayed to be delivered
from Esau, and as God upon that prayer had promised that he should prevail
with men: so although Esau came out against him like a lion with a great band
of men, yet the Lord made such a change of his heart, that at their meeting
Iaacob found him as calm, and as meek as a lamb, as we see in Chap. 33.

So mighty were the prayers of Moses, and such power had he with God by his
prayers, that so long as he held up his hands (viz. in praying) Israel
prevailed against the Amalekites; but when he let his hand down (that is, when
through weakness of body he could not continue the holding them up in prayer)
then Amaleck prevailed: Ezod. 17. 11 So his prayers were of greater force, then
all the host of Israel besides.

So mighty were the prayers of the said Moses afterward, and such power had
they with God, when he prayed for the Israelites having greatly provoked Gods
wrath by making them a golden calfe, that the Lord both (as it were) entreated
him to let him alone, that his wrath might wax hot against them, and also
promised, that if he would so let him alone (that is, if he would hold his
peace, and not solicit God with his prayers for the Israelites) he would make
of him a mighty people, Exodus 32. 10. etc. insinuating notwithstanding thereby,
that if he would for all that hold on in praying for them, and would not be
hired by the former great promise to hold his peace, then he could not proceed
in his wrath against them as they had deserved, but must needs yield to Moses
entreating mercy for them. What can be more powerful, then to overcome, and
(as it were) to withhold him that is of all power, from doing of that which
otherwise he would have done?

So mighty were the prayers of Joshua, and so did he prevail with God by them,
that (after an imperious and commanding manner) they made the Sun and the
Moon (whose course is swifter then the weauers shettle, or then the flight of
the swallow, or of the arrow) to stand still in the firmament, till he and the
rest of the Israelites had avenged themselves of their enemies: Josh. 10. 12.
13. So the very celestial bodies are (as it were) at the command of the
prayers of Gods children.

So mighty were the prayers of Elijah, that he praying earnestly that it might
not rain, it rained not on the earth (at least in that country) for three
years and six months: and that praying again for rain, the heavens gave
rain, and the earth gave forth her increase: James 5. 17. 18. out of 1. King.
17. 1. and 18. 42. etc. So the children of God by their prayers can make the
clouds to forbear rain, or to give rain, as shall make most to Gods glory.

So mighty were the prayers of Elisha, and such power had he with God by them,
that they obtained of God a son for the Shunamite that was barren, and
recovered life again for him when he was dead: 2. King 4 16. and 35. and that
also after that praying the Lord to smite the army of the Aramites with
blindness, they were smitten with such blindness, that albeit they could see
other things, yet they could not see (to discern) their way, but (as men
stone-blinde) were led by Elisha, till they were brought into the midst of
Samaria, and were there in the hands of their enemies: 2. Kings 6. 18. etc.

So mighty were the prayers of Hezekiah, and such power had they with God, that
whereas he was sick unto the death (that is, so sick that he was
unrecoverable either by strength of his own nature, or by the art and skill of
any Physician) and God also by his Prophet had told him he should die, and had
therefore also willed him to put his house in order (that is, to make his last
will and Testament) because he should die and not live, yet the Lord revoked
that his own word, and contrary (in some sort) thereunto, as also above the
strength of nature, and the art of man, did restore him to health and added
fifteen years unto his life: 2. Kings 20. 2. 3. etc.

So mighty were the prayers of Ester, Mordecai, and the rest of the Jews, and
such power had they with God by their prayers, that the Lord turned the wrath
of Ahashuerosh from them against Haman and other their enemies: albeit Haman
had before that so far prevailed with Ahashuerosh, that he had written his
letters, and sealed them with his ring, and sent them by his Posts into all
provinces, for the destruction of the said Mordecai and all the rest of the
Jews, young and old: Ester 3. 12. compared with 4. 16. and 17. and 7. 5. and 8.
1. etc. So the prayers of Gods children have had power with God, for children
for them that are barren: for life for them that are dead: for blindness upon
them that see: for health for them that are sick, even unto death, and past
all hope: and for the changing of the hearts of men, from extreme wrath to
exceeding love and favor.

So mighty were the prayers of the Church for Peter by Herod committed to
prison, and such power had they with God, that the Angel of the Lord came,
with great power and glory into the prison, and brake off Peter's chains,
opened the prison doors, brought him out and made the iron gate open of it own
accord, etc. Acts 12. 7. So the prayers of Gods children are stronger then any
iron. So mighty were the prayers of Paul and Silas in prison, that at midnight
suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundation of the prison was
shaken, and by and by all the doors opened, and every man's bonds were loosed,
etc. Act. 16. 25. 26. So though the earth be set upon her foundation that it
shall never move (viz. wholly out of her place) Psalm. 10 4. 5. yet we see it to
have been shaken by the prayers of Gods children.

Neither are the prayers of Gods children so effectual for other only of their
own sort, but also sometime for the wicked and reprobate. How did the Lord
hear Abraham for Abimelech king of Gerar? Genesis 20. 7. Moses praying often for
Pharao? and the Prophet praying for the restoring of the withered hand of
Jeroboam? 1. Kings 13. 6. Do not all these mighty effects of prayer (besides
many other the like both old and new) plainly testify in what grace and favor
the children of God are with God? Verily they do: for all the prayers before
mentioned (whereof we have heard those mighty effects) were not the prayers of
any wicked men, but only of the children of God. For indeed none can pray, so
by prayer to have power with God, but only Gods children. For how shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed: Romans 10. 14. This question, how
shall they, etc. notes it an impossible thing for them that have not faith to
call upon God. But such are all the wicked, (as before we have heard) therefore
none of the wicked can call upon God. Therefore all the commandments of God
for prayer, are only to the children of God, and to such as are godly.

When the Prophet had set down the commandment of God for calling upon God in
the day of trouble, with promise of deliverance, etc. Psalm. 50. 15. presently
by way of opposition he adds, But unto the wicked God said, What have thou to
do to declare mine ordinances, and to take my covenants in thy mouth, etc.
verse 16. He teaches hereby, first that the former commandment for calling
upon God in the day of trouble, was given only Note.
to the godly, because by way of opposition, God immediately speaks otherwise
to the wicked: Secondly, that if the wicked for all that will pray, yet the
Lord is so far from approving them in such prayers, that he reproves them
rather for using that his ordinance not belonging unto them, and for taking his
covenant in their mouth, without which all prayers are without grace, without
good success.

So the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah also reproves the Jews and all their
sacrifices, with their observation of new moons, and appointed feasts, and
with their prayers (all which notwithstanding he had commanded his people) the
Lord (I say) reproves all those things in the Jews for their wickedness, and
says, Who required this at your hands to tread in my courts? Isaiah 1. 12. and
therefore afterward he bids them (if they will have their such service
accepted of him) to wash and make clean themselves, to take away the evil of
their works from before his eyes: to cease to do evil: to learn to do
well: to seek judgment, etc. verse. 16. 17. So by the Prophet Jeremiah he
says to the Jews of that time: Will ye steal, murder, and swear falsely and
burn incense unto Baal, etc. and come and stand before me in this house,
whereupon my name is called, etc. Iere. 7. 9. etc? Does not the Lord thereby
teach us, that the wicked should not without repentance so much as once enter
into the house of prayer?

In the seventh of Matthew, and words of our Savior before alleged, If ye
that are evil can give good things to your children that ask them, how much
more shall your father in heaven give good things to them that ask them: and
in the preface to the form of prayer prescribed by our Savior; Our father
which art in heaven, Mat. 6. 9. does not our Savior teach us, that prayer
belongs only to the children of God, that may call God their father? does not
the Apostle likewise teach the same, when he says that We have received the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba father? Romans 8 15.

We may also observe that the Apostles do seldom command Note.
prayer but in the latter end of their Epistles, after they have taught God to
be the Father of them to whom they write, and them to behave themselves like
children toward God, as Rom 15. 30. Ephesians. 6. 18. Colos. 4. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
17. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Heb. 13. 18.

So also the Prophets do seldom exhort to prayer, but after their exhortations
to repentance, and to the honoring of God as a father: Hose 14. 2. Joel 2. 13.
and 17.

At the least the Prophets and Apostles do join seeking of God whiles he is
near, and calling upon him whiles he may be found, with exhortations for the
wicked to forsake his ways and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and to
return to the Lord, etc. Isa. 55. 6. 7. and drawing near to God with hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and bodies washed with pure water, etc.
Heb. 10. 22. and with cleansing of hands, and purging of hearts, James 4. 8. So
it is also said, Let every one that calls on the name of Christ depart from
iniquity, 2. Tim. 2. 19.

As all commandments for praying do thus belong only to the children of God,
so all commendations of prayer are only of the prayers of faith, and of the
righteous, James 5. 15. and 16. and of the Saints, Reu. 5. 8. Therefore also
the blind man whose eyes Christ had opened, says of the prayers both of
sinners, and also of the worshippers of God, We know that God hears not
sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God, and do his will, him hears
he: Ioh. 9. 31. The Prophet says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me: Psalm. 66. 18. Solomon says, The sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the righteous is
acceptable unto him: Prou. 15. 8. And again, The Lord is far off from the
wicked: but he hears the prayer of the righteous: verse. 29. And again, He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable: Pro. 28. 9.

As I have showed by diverse examples before how acceptable the prayers of Gods
children are unto him: so I might by diverse examples show how the Lord has
rejected the prayers of the wicked from time to time: not only of the Jews, as
before we heard at Isaiahs first prophesying, and in the days of Jeremiah, but
also afterward, as appears, Isa. 58. 3. etc. and 59. 1. and Ier. 14. 12. Eze.
14. 1. etc. and 20. 3. etc. and of the Israelites long before, Judge. 10. 10.
etc.

That sometimes God has heard the prayers of some wicked men, it is either
because some of his children have joined in such prayers, or because the things
granted by the Lord have as much concerned some of his children, as them that
have made such prayers: or that by hearing so the wicked, he may either break
their hearts, or make them the more inexcusable.

Furthermore, let us understand concerning prayer, that thereby the children of
God have not only a privilege, in that they may come themselves to make their
own prayers unto God: but also in that they are likewise partaker of the
prayers of one another. Every child of God through the world, is partaker of
all the common prayers of all the children of God living upon the earth
wheresoever dispersed. No man at any time in faith and truth prays according
to the form of prayer prescribed by our Savior, but that therein he
commends unto God, all the members of Christ living upon the earth: and that
may as well as any other, call God their Father which is in heaven. They that
are dead (as before we have heard) have no need of the prayers of the living;
neither any benefit by such prayers: yet the living have very great need of
the prayers one of another; and have also great benefit by such prayers:
Especially such as are specially and particularly by name so commended to God
by other, have the more special benefit by such remembrance. Yea not only
have the meanest of Gods children much benefit by the prayers of them that are
of the greatest faith, zeal, and godliness: but they that have the greatest
measure of faith, zeal, and godliness have help also and benefit, by the
prayers of the meanest and weakest. Therefore as all the Israelites fearing
death both for their own sins, and also for their asking a King, did
earnestly entreat Samuel to pray for them, lest (according to their fear) they
died 1. Sam 12. 19. So Paul himself does often very instantly crave the
prayers of all those to whom he did write, of poor and rich, of great and
small that did believe: as Romans 15. 30. Ephesians 6. 18. etc. and in other places
before alleged. Yea, he hoped for great comfort by their such prayers: Philip.
1. 19. Philem. 22. If it be a great benefit to have a good friend for
furtherance of our suits to mortal Princes, is it not much more for every
child of God to have all the rest of Gods children on earth (special favorites
with God) to be furtherances of their suits unto him? Verily though a man
despair of his own prayers, yet might he have exceeding comfort in the prayers
of all the rest of Gods children. This shall suffice to have spoken of the
prerogative of Gods children, both by their liberty and boldness for making
their own prayers to God: and also by that, that other, yea all other of Gods
children do remember them: even every one another, so often as they pray to God
themselves.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the communicating of many titles of Christ to the children of God.

TO proceed yet further into the benefits which the children of God have by
their communion with Christ, such is their prerogative thereby, that as they
are called the children of God by grace, as Christ himself is by nature, the
son and the only son of God: so likewise they have many other of his names
and titles communicated unto them in holy Scripture. For first of all, this
name Christ, is attributed to the whole body of the Church, whereof every true
child of God is a member: 1. Cor. 12. 12. And therefore Christ does profess
that whatsoever (good or evil) is done unto any that are ingrafted into him is
done unto himself: Matthew 25. 40. and 45. Acts 9. 4. In which respects as
such are called by the name of Christians Acts 11. ^6. so they may also every
one of them be called, petty Christ's, or little Christ's: because as the word
Christ signifies nothing else but anointed, and as Christ is said to be
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows: Psalm. 45. 7. so it is
said of every one of us that are his members, that the anointing which we have
received of him dwells in us: and that we need not that any man teach us, but
as the same anointing teaches us all things: 1. Ioh. 2. 27. And as the
precious ointment poured upon the head of Aaron, ran down upon his beard; and
so also upon other his inferior parts: Psalm. 133. 2. so the precious ointment
of Gods spirit powered upon Christ Jesus our head, has so descended upon us his
members, that of his fullness we have all received grace upon grace: Ioh. 1. 16.

Neither is this name only, Christ, thus communicated to the children of God,
but also the name Jesus touching the signification thereof. For what does it
signify but a Savior? So the Angel himself interprets it, Thou shall
(says he to Mary) call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins: Mat. 1. 21. Now it is not only said to Timothy (and in him to
all ministers of the word) that by taking heed to himself and to learning,
and by continuing therein, he should save himself and other: 1. Tim. 4. 16.
but it is also said of all other the children of God, that by prayer,
instruction, admonition, etc. shall convert a sinner from going astray out of
the way, that they shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins: James 5. 20. So likewise Jude writing to all sorts, not only Ministers
but other, exhorts them to have compassion on some, in putting difference,
and to save other with fear, pulling them out of the fire, etc. Jude. 22. 23.
Does not the Apostle by these words insinuate that they that shall so save
other (though it be with fear) may in that respect be called a Jesus or a
Savior instrumentally? The name Joshua in signification is all one with Jesus,
and therefore Joshua is called Jesus: Acts 7. 45. because by saving the
Israelites from their bodily enemies, he was a type of Christ Jesus that
should save his people from their spiritual enemies. If therefore Joshua were
so called in that typical respect: why may not they be so called, that are
the instruments of Christ Jesus, to save men from their sins, and so
consequently from everlasting damnation? Again, as Christ is called the first
fruits of the dead: 1. Cor. 15. 20. and as in a typical respect of Christ, all
the first borne of clean living creatures, and all the first fruits of other
things, were in the law, and by the law dedicated and consecrated unto God: so
the Jews in former times in respect of Gods special covenant with them: Ier.
2. 3. and much more now all whom God of his own will has begotten again with
the word of truth, are called by the name of the first fruits of God: James 1.
8. Reu. 14. 4. As Christ is called a King and a Priest: so likewise it is said,
that he has made us unto God Kings and Priests: Reu. 1. 6. and 5. 10.
wherewith the Apostle Peter accords, saying, that we are a roial Priesthood:
1. Pet. 2. 9. which is al one with that which the Lord says by Moses of the
Israelites (in that respect wherein before we heard the Jews to be called the
Lords first fruits) that if they would indeed hear his voice, and keep his
Covenant, etc. then they should be his chief treasure, and a kingdom of
Priests, etc. Exodus 19. 6.

And indeed (touching these two attributes) how can we but be Kings and
Priests, being incorporated into him, and made one with him, to whom most
properly and principally the said two attributes do belong?

More particularly (to begin first with the last) we are Priests, first in
offering up our bodies (that is, our whole selves) a living sacrifice unto God,
holy and acceptable, etc. Romans 12. 1. and that first by crucifying the old man,
and letting out the blood of our sins (which is the life of our said old man)
and then by seasoning our selves with the gracious word of God, as some
sacrifices were seasoned with salt, Leuit. 2. 13. and as the Apostle requires
our speech to be seasoned, Colos 4. 6.

Secondly, we are called Priests for our offering up to God the calves of our
lips, Hos. 14. 3. and the spiritual sacrifices, 1. Pet. 2. 5. both of Prayers,
Psalm. 141. 2. and of Praises, Psalm. 50. 14. and 23. as also of doing good and
distributing, Heb. 13. 16. and of other duties of righteousness, Psalm. 4. 5.

Thirdly, we are called Priests, not only in respect of the former
sacrifices, but also because if need require, we must be ready to give our
lives for Gods glory, and for the strengthening of the faith of other, which is
that which the Apostle means by being offered up upon the sacrifice and
service of the faith of Gods elect: Phil. 2. 17. According to which phrase also
the Apostle says again, that he was ready to be offered, 2. Tim. 4. 6.
whereby he means the violent death that afterward he was to suffer for the
credit of his doctrine, and the better sealing up the truth thereof in the
consciences of those that had either heard his preaching or read his writings.
So to die for the truth, is a sacrifice, not propitiatory and meritorious (as
the Papists blasphemously teach) but partly eucharisticall and of thanksgiving,
and partly for the confirming and strengthening of other in that truth which
they see other to be ready to seal with their blood, and much more to esteem
the same then they do their own lives.

Fourthly we are said by Christ to be made Priests, because as the Priests duty
of the law was not only to offer sacrifice, but also to teach the people the
difference between the holy and profane, etc. Ezekiel. 44. 23. in which respect it
is also said that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and that the
people should seek the law out of his mouth: Malac. 2. 7. so all the children
of God are (in these days especially of the Gospel: Joel 2. 28.) to abound
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, that they may be able to
discern things that differ: Phil. 1. 9. 10. and to have the word of Christ
dwelling more plentifully in them in all wisdom: Coloss. 3. 16. and so also
the better not only to try all things: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. even the spirits
whether they be of God or no: 1. Ioh. 4. 1. but also to exhort one another
daily whiles it is called to day, lest any (by neglect of this duty) be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin: Heb. 3. 13. and 10. 25. Coloss. 3. 16. 1.
These. 5. 11. Jude 20. And in this respect also, as Christ is called a Prophet,
so for that mutual duty of teaching, admonishing, exhorting, and edifying one
another (in the places last before alleged, commended to all the children of
God) they may all not unfitly be called by the name of Prophets. Especially
because, as notwithstanding teaching belonged (as we have heard) to the
Priests, yet Prophets were extraordinarily for the most part raised up, when
the priests began to neglect their duty in that behalf: so in these days the
ordinary ministers too much neglecting their duty of public teaching, the Lord
will have all men the more diligent in the private performance of those duties
before mentioned, and for that respect (in some sort) to perform the duty of
ancient prophets.

Notwithstanding even this prophetical duty I comprehend under the priesthood
of Gods children, as some learned of late times have also comprehended the
prophetical office of Christ, under his priesthood, as a part thereof.

To return therefore unto, or to dwell a little longer in the Priesthood which
the children of God have by the priesthood of Christ, the same is the more to
be considered, because of the generality thereof. In the time of the law, the
priesthood of the law was restrained. First to one sex, viz. only to the males.
Secondly to one age at which it should begin, and at which it should end
touching the necessary execution of their office, at least, of one part thereof
for the offering of sacrifices. Thirdly to one tribe, the tribe of Leui.
Fourthly to one family: the family of Kohath the son of Leui. Fifthly to one
house of that family, to the posterity of Amran the son of Kohath: Exodus 6.
18. and 20. Sixthly, to one of the sons of Amran: to Aaron and to his
posterity for ever: Exodus 28. 1. Leuit. 8. 1. Numb. 3. 10. and 18. 7.
Seventhly, touching some special offices of the priesthood, to one only place,
to certainetimes: yea, for the high priest to enter into the most holy place at
one time only of the year: Heb 9. 7. and for other to perform their duties by
course: Luke 1. 8. Eighthly, that priesthood had an end at the coming of Christ
in Christ himself. Thus we see within what limits the priesthood of the law
was ranged, and restrained. But this priesthood whereof now we speak, is
common to all the children of God, of all sexes, ages, and times: yea, it was
in the time of the law, though made more manifest in the time of the Gospel.
It may be performed in all places: and at all times: not only with company, but
by every one alone: yea it shall continue to the end of the world: yea as
touching the offering of the sacrifice of praise, it shall continue for ever,
after the general resurrection, in the heavens themselves.

Moreover the former priesthood of the law was both distinguished and also
separated from the civil magistracy: so that the King might not be Priest,
neither execute the Priests office. Therefore it is said that the heart of
Vzziah was lift up within him, when he entered into the temple of the Lord, to
burn incense upon the altar of incense. And that Azariah the Priest withstood
him, and told him that it pertained not unto him to burn incense to the Lord,
but to the Priests the sons of Aaron: and that therefore the Lord immediately
smot him with leprosy, etc. 2. Chron. 26. 16. etc. Neither also might the
Priest take upon him the office of the king, or of any civil magistrate
(except it were extraordinarily: 1. Sam. 4. 8.) because as those things that
God had coupled, no man might put a sunder: Mat. 19. 6. so those things that
God had separated, no man might join together. Yea, the rest of the Levites,
that had the charge of the tabernacle and of things pertaining thereunto, might
not meddle with the works of the priesthood: Number. 18. 3. except only
extraordinarily, and in the case of necessity, when there were noe priests enough
sanctified for the works of the Priesthood: 2. Chron. 29. 34. But touching this
priesthood now spoken of, kings may and must execute the office thereof as well
as subjects: yea Kings and Queens with all their royal posterity, are and must
be Priests in this manner. If they should disdain this name, they must also
renounce the title of the children of God, which is greater then the title of
earthly King or Queen, etc.

Thus we see the excellency of the priesthood of all the sons and daughters of
God by Christ Jesus.

Honorable was the priesthood of the law, yea so honorable that Iehoshebeth
daughter of king Iehoram, grand child of Iehoshaphat, sister of king Ahaziah,
and aunt of king Ioash, was wife to Iehoiada the Priest: 2. Chron. 22. 11. So
honorable also, that Vzziah king of Judah not contented with his kingly state
(as we have heard) did aspire to the priestly dignity. Would kings have married
their daughters to Priests? Would kings have bin ambitious for the priestly
dignity, if they had not thought very honorably of that calling? How honorable
then is the priesthood of the children of God by Jesus Christ?

As the children of God have Christ's name of Priest communicated unto them, and
are by Christ made Priests unto God: so are they kings likewise unto God: and
that even because they are sons or children of God. For as sometimes all the
sons of some Emperors (which have had their Empires by inheritance, not by
election) are borne kings, or at least have been left kings by their Fathers,
or have had such dukedomes as have had kingly power, and kingly dignities (the
title only of kings excepted) and as in some countries at this day, all the
sons of an Earl are Earls: so likewise all the sons and children of God the
Emperor of all the world, (being especially incorporated and ingrafted to the
proper and natural son of God, and made one with him) may in that respect
not unfitly be called kings.

But what is the kingly power, and what be the kingly dignities of the children
of God? Verily, their power by Jesus Christ and through faith in him is very
great: yea far greater then the power of any worldly king whatsoever. For of
what king in the world (as he is only a worldly King) can that be said, that
is said by him that is truth it self, of every one that has faith but as a
grain of mustard seed: viz. that nothing is impossible unto him? Matthew 17.
20. and again: All things are possible to him that believes: Mark. 9. 23.
What earthly King also (as he is only an earthly King) can say of himself, as
poor Paul said of himself by that Spirit, that cannot lie, I am able to do
all things by the help of Christ which strengthens me? Philip. 4. 13.

Secondly, such as the power of the children of God is, such also is their
heart and courage, namely altogether princely: yea much more then princely. For
who but the child of God can say, Though I should walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil? Psalm. 23. 4. and again, I will not
be afraid, though ten thousand beset me round about: Psalm 3. 6. and
again, Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be afraid:
Psalm. 27. 3. and again, I will not fear, what flesh can do unto me? Psalm
55. 4.

Thirdly, according to the former princely power and magnanimity of the
children of God, their effects are likewise princely and suitable to their said
power and magnanimity: For (to omit in this place those great mighty effects
of the prayers of Gods children before mentioned) whereas by nature they are
servants and bondmen to satan, to their own wicked lusts, and to every worldly
vanity, as well as any other: after that they are partaker of the spirit of
adoption, they are so armed also With weapons that are not carnal, but mighty
through God, that they cast down all the strong holds of sin in them: 2.
Corinthians 10. 4. which are stronger then all Castles and defenced Cities
whatsoever. Yea having put on all the spiritual armor Whereby they wrestle
not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and worldly
governors, Princes of darkness, etc. Ephesians. 6. 12. they overcome all these,
they reign over all, and through him that loved them, they are more then
conquerors: so that neither Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be ever able to separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus, to
deiect them from that excellent state, whereunto Christ Jesus has advanced
them: Romans 8. 37.

Therefore it is not only said, that by faith they overcome the world (that is,
the things of this visible world, that do any ways hinder their salvation) but
satan himself also is so by Christ Jesus subdued unto them; and (in a manner)
brought into such fear of them, that they do no sooner turn their face upon
him and resist him, but that presently he flies from them, and as it were
takes him to his heels, as not able to abide their countenance: James 4. 7. O
noble victory! O glorious conquest! All the great conquerors in the world (how
renoumed soever for their worldly victories) never got the like. Yea all kings
and Princes and other conquerors that are not in Christ Jesus, are as very
slaves to satan, to the world, and to all lusts of the flesh which fight
against their souls: 1. Pet. 2. 11. as ever was Samson to the Philistims, when
they put out both his eyes, and made him to grind in the mill: Judge. 16. 21. or
as Zedekiah was when he was taken by Nebuchadnezer, before whose eyes they
first slew all his sons, and then put out his own eyes also, and bound him
in chains, and so carried him to Babel: 2. Kings 25. 7. or finally as any
captive or slave now is, either in the Turks Galleys, or in subjection to the
Spaniard in the West Indies, or else where. Yea, for the most part, such great
champions and captains, and conquerors touching flesh and blood, are of all
other the most slaves, most cowards, and soonest overcome by every lust. But so
to overcome such lusts, and other enemies of salvation, is more then in a
carnal and outward manner with the arm of flesh to overcome the whole world:
yea, if there were many worlds; yet for a man to overcome himself, with satan
and the world, is more then to overcome them all. He that rules his own mind,
is better then he that wins a city: Pro. 16. 32. What is he then, that
overcomes himself, and the whole power of hell?

Moreover, even touching the arm of flesh and worldly enemies, greater is the
power often times and courage of the children of God in resisting and ouercomming
of them, then of all the wicked in the world. Yea, in this respect the children
of God have true fortitude and magnanimity beseeming Princes. For these
sentences before alleged of David's fearelesse heart, are not spoken in respect
of his spiritual enemies, but in respect of his outward adversaries. And what
victories are comparable to the victories of Joshua, Gedeon, Iephte, Samson,
Jonathan, David, and other such worthies mentioned in the scripture? All wicked
and mere natural men are void of the spirit of true fortitude, even for
withstanding and ouercomming bodily enemies: how then can they have true
fortitude it self?

The foresaid more then kingly power and courage of the children of God, is
apparent likewise by other effects wherein they seem most cowardly: even by all
the reproaches, contumelies, wrongs and indignities, which they put up patiently
at the hands of the wicked, as disdaining to resist them, as not being their
equals. As noble men disdain and scorn to contend with base persons, and such
as are much their inferiors; and as all men would think it and might think it
a disgrace unto them to fight with boys, though never so much abusing them: so
is the mind and courage of the children of God in respect of the wicked in the
world, who are indeed no better to be accounted of in comparison of them, then
as base and abject persons: much more may they be no more esteemed then boys
or children.

The suffering also the loss of all that they have in the world, and of the
world, and the submitting themselves to the most shameful death that is for
Christ's sake, that died the cursed death of the cross for them, what does it
declare but that they have that noble mind for the contemning of the world, and
all that is therein, that was in Christ Jesus himself, Who for the joy that
was set before him is said to have endured the Cross, and despised the shame*
Heb. 12. 2. What is more princely and kingly then this? If it be also accounted
fortitude for the common soldier to follow his captain, and to adventure any
danger (though it be with loss of life) wherein he has seen his Captain go
before him: shall we not account it fortitude likewise, for the children of
God to endanger and to lose their lives in such things, as wherein Christ Jesus
their chief Captain has gone before them*

To proceed yet further in the consideration of the Kingly dignity of Gods
children, let this be our fourth meditation in that behalf, that whereas by
nature through our foresaid bondage to sin and Satan, and to every wordly
vanity, we were also captives unto death it self, and prisoners of hell, and
in the state of condemnation, now being made the children of God and members of
Christ Jesus, God has given us such victory through our said Lord Jesus
Christ: Romans 7. ^5. that we may victoriously triumph over death, hell, and
condemnation, saying, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. 55. and again, Now there is
no condemnation to us that are in Christ Jesus: Romans 8. 1.

Fifthly, as Kings that have power and courage do protect and defend their
subjects from foreign powers, so also the children of God do valiantly
protect, and defend those that are committed to their charge, against all the
enemies of their salvation: except themselves do cowardly and slauishly run
unto them: or will not be released from that bondage wherein by nature they are.

Sixthly, as when God the father set Christ Jesus, his King upon Sion his holy
mountain (that is, over his Church) he gave him (upon his asking) the heathen
for his inheritance, and the ends of the earth for his possession, even, to
crush them with a scepter of iron, and to break them in pieces like a potters
vessel: Psalm. 2. 8. so also the children of God having Christ Jesus the heir
of all things: Heb. 1. 2. all other things likewise are said to be theirs: 1.
Cor. 3. 21. and they shall inherit all things: Reu. 21. 7. Yea Christ has
promised to give them (and will give them) power over nations, to rule them
with a rod of iron, and to break them in pieces like a potters vessel: Reu.
2. 26. 27.

Hereby therefore it is, that only the children of God having by Jesus Christ
recovered that right unto all the creaturs of God, which was lost by Adam, and
having likewise liberty now in the time of the gospel to use al those things
which for the time of the law were restrained (that such restraint of some
things might be to the Church then, and to the Church also in these days, a
testimony and a witness of the former loss of all things). Hereby (I say) it
is, that only the children of God have power with sobriety, and without
offense, according to their ability and beseeming their calling, and with
observation of some other rules in the word, to use all the creatures of God
freely to Gods glory, and to their comfort; not only for necessity, but also
for their honest delight: For unto the pure (only) are all (such) things pure:
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving (that is, unto all that are not
the children of God) nothing is pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled: Tit. 2. 15. But of this right of the children of God unto all things,
more afterward.

Moreover thereby also, howsoever the children of God are here for a time by
their enemies, and the enemies of Christ Jesus molested and vexed, yet the time
shall come, when all such enemies shall be fully subdued unto them, even as a
pot broken in pieces by the potter: yea, they shall be indeed broken in
pieces, by Christ Jesus the head of all the children of God: and that which is
done by him being their head, shall be accounted as done by them: yea, even as
the head does use the hands and other parts of the body for executing what it
self shall think good against all the adversaries thereof, and of the whole
body; so shall Christ Jesus use the members of his Church, not only by the
Ecclesiastical and spiritual power and censures thereof to correct them that
shall be of heathenish conditions and behavior amongst them, and to bind
their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, that is, by
excommunication, and such other like severe courses, to make such as were as
Kings and captains in all evil, to stoop, and bend, as if they were bound
with chains, and fetters of iron: Psalm 149. 7. 8. not only (I say) shall
Christ thus use the members of his Church, to bridle and subdue the wicked, but
also he shall use Christian Kings and Princes by little and little, even by
the sword to vanquish all the great enemies of the Church, till there be scarce
a man left, that shall profess himself an enemy thereof.

Especially Christ Jesus shall use such christian Kings and Princes, and some
other also to join with them (though perhaps in worldly respects, and in
desire of the spoil) in hatred of the whore of Babylon, even of Antichrist the
Pope, and of all that shall take his part (Princes as well as other) even to
make them desolate and naked, and (as it were) to eat their flesh, and to burn
them with fire: Revel. 17. 16.

Seventhly, touching other princely virtues, as kings are to be amiable and
courteous to the good, and austere and severe to the wicked, so the children of
God are endued with this kingly grace. A vile person is contemptible in their
eyes, but they honor them that fear the Lord: Psalm. 15 4. All their delight is
in the Saints, and in them that are excellent upon the earth: Psalm. 16. 3. but
they haunt not with vain persons, neither keep company with the dissemblers,
but hate the assembly of the wicked: Psalm. 26. 4. 5. Yea, they may call God
himself t^ witness, that such as hate him, they also do hate: and they do
earnestly contend with them that rise up against him: yea, that they hate them
with an unfeigned hatred, as if they were their own enemies. Psalm. 139. 21. 22.

Yea, though the children of God be advanced to kingly dignities in the earth,
as well as they are kings spiritually by Christ Jesus together with other, yet
their eyes will be to the faithful in their lands that they may dwell with
them: and such as walk in a perfect way shall serve them: but deceitful
persons shall not dwell in their houses; neither shall such as tell lies
remain in their sight. Yea betimes and wi^h all speed (for fear of further
dishonor to God by further infection of their people) they will destroy all the
wicked of their lands (as nigh as they can, not leaving one) and cut off all the
workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord: Psalm. 101. 6. 7. 8.

As their heavenly Father also (the King of Kings) is merciful, so are they
after a kingly manner. They do good to them that cannot recompense the same,
nor do the like to them, and from whom they look for nothing again: Luk 6.
34. etc. And although according to Gods laws for kings, their care is not so
much to gather much silver and gold, as to occupy themselves all the days of
their life in reading and meditating of the law of God, and to learn thereby
the fear of the Lord their God, etc. Deuteronomy. 1^. 17. 18. 19. and so likewise to
lay up treasure for themselves in heaven: Matthew. 6. 20. yet as the Lord does
therefore of his princely bounty cast outward things the more plentifully upon
them: Mat. 6. 33. making them (according to the necessity of their places and
callings) to lay up gold like dust, and the gold of Ophir as the flints of the
river: Job 22. 24. so they accordingly to the example of Solomon, who gave
silver in Jerusalem as stones, etc. 1. King. 10. 27. are merciful and lend:
they distribute (or disperse) and give to the poor, and their righteousness
does endure (that is, they are still, by the continual blessing of God upon
them, able to give) Psalm. 112. 5. and so being rich in good works, and ready to
communicate, they lay a sure fonudatien for themselves to eternal life: 1.
Tim. 6. 18. 19.

Eighthly, the children of God are said by Christ Jesus to be kings, because
howsoever here they are subject to the judgment of other, and are often judged
and condemned most unjustly and unrighteously at the pleasure of men; yet as
Christ Jesus himself is said to be the judge of the quick and the dead, so it
is also said, that at his coming to the last judgment, they shall judge the
world; yea the Angels: viz. the wicked Angels that were the authors of all the
unrighteous judgment, that by the world had been before given against them: 1.
Cor. 6. 3. Yea, this they shall do, not only because they being members of
Christ, and Christ being their head, therefore the sentence of Christ shall be
their sentence: but also because, as they have been before accused by the world
to the Judges of the world, so at that time (even at the great judgment day)
they shall be accusers of their wrongful accusers, and of their unrighteous
Judges to the most Just judge of all: who shall proceed to judgment and
sentence against their former accusers and Judges, according to their
accusation of them presented unto him. And lastly the judgment and sentence so
given by Christ Jesus himself, shall be ratified by all the saints, the
children of God.

Ninthly, finally all the children of God are by Christ Jesus said to be made
kings, because as they in kingly manner are richly and sumptuously apparrelled,
having put on Christ Jesus himself with his princely robe of righteousness,
and with the whole new man, being both glorious within by their faith, love,
hope, patience, humility, etc. and beautiful also outwardly by those fruits of
righteousness before spoken of: and as they fare roially every day, having the
dainty diet that has been before also mentioned; so also at the last they
shall as kings be crowned with crowns of gold: Revel. 4. 4. yea, with better
then gold, even with the crown of righteousness: 2. Tim. 4. 8. with the
crown of life: James 1. 12. with the crown of glory: 1. Pet. 5. 4 In respect
of this crown, belonging to the least of Gods children, all the crowns of all
the Princes in the world (yea, put in also the triple crown of the man of
sin, the Pope of Rome, though he be more fit to be reckoned among the sons
of fools, and of villains, and be not worthy to sit with the dogs of the
flocks of other Princes, much less is he worthy to be named among them) In
respect (I say) of this crown thus belonging to the poorest son and daughter
of God, all the crowns of all the Princes in the world, are no better then the
crown of thorns which the soldiers in derision put upon the head of Christ
Jesus: Mat. 27. 29. and the which Christ Jesus did patiently wear, the better
to purchase the foresaid crown of righteousness, life, and glory, for every
one of the children of God.

To conclude this point, because it is not decorum and fit for Princes that in
their minority are clothed and fed so roially, and afterward crowned so
gloriously, to stand, therefore also they shall have a throne far more stately,
then ever was the throne of Solomon, though it were made of yuory, and covered
with the best gold, having six steps, and the similitude of twelve lions upon
the said steps, so that there was not the like throne in any kingdom: 1. Kings
10. 18. etc. This throne is the throne of Christ Jesus himself; For so
himself says, that He will give unto them to sit with him in his throne, as
himself sits in the throne of his father: Reu. 3. 21.

By these things before spoken, especially by some of them it appears, what
great difference there is betwixt this kingly dignity of Gods children, and the
kingly dignity of all earthly Kings and Princes. For whereas all earthly kings
have their kingdoms without them; the children of God have theirs as well
within them as without them: Whereas earthly Kings have earthly jewels and
earthly apparel, and earthly crowns, made of earthen matter, such as come
from the earth; the children of God have their robes, their jewels, and their
crowns from heavenly places, and of an heavenly matter. Whereas earthly kings
are robed and decked with jewels, as also crowned by their subjects, that are
base in respect of themselves; the children of God are robed, decked and
crowned by him that is himself the Lord of Lords, the King of kings, the God
of Gods, and the King of glory.

Whereas earthly kingdoms are peculiar but to one of the kings children; and
that to a son, though there be but one; and none of the daughters, so long
as there are heirs male alive, have any part though they be many: the
children of GOD (both sons, and daughters) are partaker of this kingdom by
Christ Jesus, whereof now we treat.

Whereas earthly kingdoms are not enioied presently upon the birth of the
heirs unto them, but for the most part after the death of former Kings; this
kingdom the children of God enjoy, and are in actual possession of it, as
soon as they are begotten again, and newborn children to God, and they have
the present possession of their kingly dignity even here on eath: Reuelat.
5. 10. according to that before said in that behalf. Whereas earthly Kings
and kingdoms are all momentanie, and but for a time, both the children of God,
and also their kingdom, are everlasting and continue for ever, as he and his
kingdom be, in whom they are Kings, and from whom they receive their kingly
dignity.

Since therefore the children of God are such Kings, and have such kingdoms,
how great is their dignity in this behalf?

Amongst other great things, that the Lord promises unto Abraham in making his
covenant with him, this is one, that even Kings should proceed of him: Genes.
17. 6. The like promise is renewed to Iaakob afterward: Genes. 35. 11. And what
Kings were they, which God promises should come out of their loins? Surely
earthly Kings. For though Abraham were the Father of the faithful, yet that
promise is rather an earthly then an heavenly promise. If God himself then
promised this as a great matter to Abraham, and Iaakob, that Kings, even
earthly kings, should proceed of them, how great a thing is this that now we
speak of concerning all the children of God? viz. that not some of them (as
God is to be understood before to speak, not of all, but only of some of the
posterity of Abraham and Iaakob to be Kings) but all are Kings, and such Kings,
as before we have spoken of? Verily so great and glorious is this their kingly
dignity, that in respect thereof, all the kingly dignity of the world is of no
value. Yea, in respect of the kingdom of the children of God, all the
kingdoms of the world separated from it (though put together) are but as a
little molehill, or a filthy dunghill.

In that respect also much better is the condition of the poorest child of God
(though he be as poor as Lazarus that sat at the rich man's gate, desiring
only to be refreshed with the crumbs (or scraps) that should fall from his
table: Luke 16. 21.) then of the greatest potentate in the world, that is not
partaker of this kingly dignity. Yea, if the greatest Monarch in the world (not
being one of the children of God by regeneration) knew the kingly dignity of
them and his own woeful state, he would change states with them if he might:
and though he had a thousand kingdoms besides, he would give them all for the
one kingdom of the children of God, and give also to boot, whatsoever he had
besides, not to his shirt alone, but even to his skin. This shall suffice for
Christ's kingly title communicated to all the children of God: and for their
great and honorable condition thereby. To proceed to other titles of Christ
communicated to the children of God: as Christ is called the chief corner
stone: Psalm. 18. 22. Mark. 12. 10. Ephe. 20. so also the children of God
particularly and severally considered are called living stones: 1. Pet. 2. 5.
as also Pillars in the Temple of God: Revel. 3. 12. according to which phrase
also David prays that the daughters of Israel might be as the corner stones
graven (or carved) after the similitude of a palace: that is, fitted for the
making of a Palace: viz. for God himself to dwell in: Psalm. 144. 12. Jointly
also considered, they are called in the former place of Peter a Spiritual
house: yea, the Temple of God, even of the living God, wherein God dwells and
walks: 1. Cor. 3. 16. 2. Cor. 6. 16. and of the holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 6. 19.
and therefore also of Christ himself, who dwells by faith in their hearts:
Ephesians. 3. 17.

How great this honor is, has been showed before, Chap. 16. yea, that it is
the greater, because the wicked are habitations and houses of devils and of all
unclean spirits: Mat. 12. 44. Was it not a fearful judgment, and a most
dishonorable thing that the Lord threatens the countries of the Assyrians, and
of other enemies of the Church should be forsaken, and be left to the fowls of
the mountains, and to the beasts of the field, etc. Isai. 18. 6. and that
Babel it self the glory of kingdoms, the beauty and pride of the Chaldeans,
should be a lodging for Ziim, Ohim, and Iim, and that Ostriches should dwell
there, and Satyrs should dance there, and Dragons should dwell in the Palaces
thereof? Isai 13. 21. 22. and Jeremy 51. 37. How much more dishonorable then is
it, that men at the first created according to Gods image, should be
habitations for devils? Is this dishonorable, and shall it not then be
honorable for men being newborn the children of GOD, to be also the houses
and Temples of GOD? As Christ is called a graft growing out of the root of
David: Isai. 11. 1. and a righteous branch: Ierem. 25. 5. and 33 15. So all
that are incorporated into Christ, are called branches and grafts, etc. Romans
11. 17. etc.

As Christ is called the light of men, and the true light that lightneth every
man that comes into the world: John 1. 4. 5. 7. 8. 9. and the light of the
world: John 8. 12. and 9. 5. so it is said, first of the Apostles and other
Ministers of the Gospel, that they are the light of the world? Mat. 5. 14. and
secondly of all other the children of God, in respect of their holding forth
the word of life in their profession and practice or conversation, that they
shine as lights in the world: Philip. 2. 15.

As therefore it is a great honor for a subject to be dignified by a King with
some of the Kings own kingly titles: so is it much more honor for the children
of God to be dignified with so many titles of Christ Jesus. Thus much for the
titles of Christ communicated unto the children of God, and their great dignity
thereby.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the benefits of the children of God for this life: viz. of their immunity
from evil: and of good things of this life belonging unto them.

Having in the former Chapter, by occasion of the kingly dignity of Gods
children, briefly mentioned the right of the children of God unto all things of
this life, (viz. in the sixth respect, why they are called Kings) but that place
being not fit to handle the same any thing largely, it notwithstanding being a
matter of good importance, and worthy of further consideration, for the further
setting forth of the dignity of Gods children, I will now return thereunto,
and speak somewhat more plentifully thereof.

Concerning therefore this life, let us understand that the children of God
have a double prerogative above the wicked: First immunity from all afflictions
of this life, as they are evil and hurtful: Secondly right and interest into
all the blessings of this life, so far forth as they are any ways good for
them.

Touching the first of these thus it is written, who so dwells in the secret
of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty: Psalm. 91. 1.
Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: He will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be sure under
his feathers: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler: Thou shall not be
afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the arrow that flies by day. verse 3.
etc. For indeed that whole Psalm is specially occupied in the argument of the
safety of Gods children, as touching the evils of this life, and in declaring
the contrary dangers of the wicked. The like promise for the children of God,
is in Psalm 97. Ye that love the Lord hate evil: he preserves the souls
of his Saints: he will deliver them from the hand of the wicked: verse 10. The
whole 121. Psalm is also of this argument: For there the Prophet assures all
the children of God, that the Lord will not suffer their foot to slip: that he
will so keep them, that the Sun shall not smite them by day* nor the Moon
by night. Yea, he says, verse 7. that the Lord shall preserve them from all
evil etc. Yea, that he shall preserve their going out, and their coming in.
The same is likewise evident by the covenant that God makes with all
creatures, even the fiercest and cruellest, for his childrens sake. But of this
more afterward.

The Prophet Isaiah also says of the same point, But now thus says the Lord
that created thee, and he that formed thee O Israel: fear not, for I have
redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest
through the waters I will be with thee, and through the floods that they do
not ouerflow thee: When thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: Isai. 43. 1. 2. What means
the Lord by these words, but that his children should have no hurt by those
things, that do most devour and consume other? I might add many other
Scriptures to the same purpose, but these shall be sufficient.

Besides those and the like Scriptures and promises, the same is manifest by
great reason: For since all the afflictions of this life are part of the curse
and punishment that is due to our sins: and since Christ Jesus took upon him
and came into the world to suffer the whole curse of God, both of this life and
of the life to come, that we had deserved; and having accordingly indeed borne
our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, and was wounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our infirmities, and had the chastisement of our
peace upon him: Isai 53. 4. 5. and did himself bear our sins (that is the
full punishment of our sins) in his body on the tree: 1. Pet. 2. 24.
therefore it stands no more with the justice of God, to cast such afflictions
upon us (as punishments of our sins) then it agrees with the justice of man
to receive his debt of the surety, and yet after to require the same of the
principal debtor: or to punish him for not paying the same: yea, forasmuch as
the higher and greater any Judge is, the more it behooves him to do justice
and judgment, and since God is the Judge of all the world: Genes. 18. 25.
therefore if it agree not with the justice of man, to demand that debt of one
that is paid by another, much less does the like stand with the justice of
God.

The former point is likewise manifest by many examples. Noah and a few of his,
were kept in the great flood, that drowned all the world besides.

Lot with some of his were preserved in Sodom and Gomorra, whereall other
inhabitants of those cities were consumed by fire from heaven.

The widow of Sarephta with the Prophet Elija, was fed in that great dearth
and famine, when many other were in great extremity.

Jeremiah and Ebedmelech were well provided for, and had great liberty, when
the great nobles and Princes of Jerusalem, with many other of the common people
which before had rejected the word of the Lord, were either cruelly put to the
sword, or slauishly carried away captive.

Iehoshaphat was preserved from the Aramites (though in great danger of them)
when Ahab was wounded to death by them.

The red sea gave way to the Israelites, and stood upon heaps like a wall for
their safe passage through it, when Pharao and all his host were overwhelmed in
it.

Again, to some special sins, there are some special afflictions
belonging. To drunkenness belongs woe, sorrows, strife, murmuring (or much
talk) wounds without cause (or wounds without punishment) redness of eyes:
Pro. 23. 29. So likewise to it, and to all other intemperancy, there belong
many noisome diseases, as the dropsy, the gout, apoplexies and such like; yea,
not only diseases, but deformity also of body, blockishnesse of wit, and
dullness of understanding (of how sharp wit, and quick capacity soever they
were before) with hardness of heart like to brawne, so that having many
sorrows, yet they shall feel none. Adultery likewise and all incontinency is
accompanied with some foul diseases and many other evils. Boldness and
rashness is not without many great dangers. To those also, and to diverse other
sins belong poverty, great shame, disgrace, reproach, and contempt with men.
The like may be said of many other sins, as having many special calamities
atten^ing upon them. For as much then as before we have heard, that the
children of God are freed from such sins, it follows likewise that they are
the more safe from those evils, that they do specially meet with, that fall
into such sins.

Thus much briefly for the immunity of the children of God from the evils of
this life.

Touching the second sort of benefits for this life belonging to the children
of God, they are (as before I said) all the blessings of this life, far forth
as they are good for them, and may be accounted benefits, not only in their own
nature, but also to the children of God. These are, length of days, health,
peace, safety, liberty, riches, credit, honors, authority, friends, and such
like.

All these do belong only to the children of God: and that by a double right.
First by promise: Secondly by participation of Christ, and that communion with
him before handled: in whom all the promises of God belong unto men, and are
said to be yea and Amen, that is, begun and accomplished. 2. Cor. 1. 10.

Touching the right of those blessings by promise, the Apostle says that
godliness has the promise not only of the life that is to come, but also of
the life present: 1. Tim. 4. 8. If ye require where they are promised, look
these places specially: Leuit. 26. 3. to verse. 14. Deuteronomy. 28. 3. to verse also
14. Job. 11. 13. etc. and 22. 23. etc. Psalm. also 34. 9. it is said that
Nothing wants to them that fear God that the Lions do lack and suffer
hunger: but that they which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good.
Many sweet promises for this life, are likewise dispersed throughout Psalm. 37.
See also Deuteronomy. 32. 9. etc. Psalm. 81. 13. etc. Psalm. 112. 2. etc. Prou. 24. 4
and many other places. For indeed the scripture is very rich in these promises
for the children of God: but no where are the blessings of this life promised
to the wicked: yea, contrariwise in the former two first places: Leuit. 26. 14.
etc. and Deuteronomy. 28. 14. etc. there is a world of miseries and outward calamities
for this life threatened unto them. The scripture likewise is full of such
threatenings elsewhere. Eliphaz thus describes the state and portion of the
wicked: He wandreth (says he) to and fro for bread: and knows that the day
of darkness is prepared at hand (or rather, when he knows it to be prepared,
the day of darkness is at hand) affliction and anguish shall make him afraid:
they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to battle. For he has
stretched forth his hand against God, and made himself strong against the
Almighty. Therefore God shall run upon him; even upon his neck, and against
the most thick part of his shield, etc Though he dwell in desolate places
(such as worldly men affect, to avoid resort and expenses by resort) and in
houses which no man inhabiteth, but are become heaps (such also do miserable
men delight in, that no man may have any heart to come unto them) he shall not
be rich neither shall his substance continue: neither shall he prolong his
perfection thereof in the earth. He shall never depart out of darkness. The
flame shall dry up his branches: and he shall go away with the breath of his
mouth: Job 15. 23. etc. There are many other the like places, containing the
like threatenings: Job 18. 5. etc. 27. 13. etc. So then many evils of this life
are threatened to the wicked: no good thing is promised unto them as they are
wicked.

Indeed as Iehu (though a wicked man, and one that departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin: 2. Kings Note.
10. 31) as Iehu (I say) had in some things carried himself like to the
children of God, and had diligently executed that which was right in the Lords
eyes against the house of Ahab, the Lord promised him (in the place alleged
verse. 30.) that his sons to the fourth generation should sit upon his throne:
which we see to have been performed Chap. 15 8.

The like may be said of other wicked men touching the blessings of this life,
that the Lord suffers them to enjoy them, and to have the occupying of them
for a time, (as in some other respects afterward to be spoken of, so also) in
regard of some things done outwardly by them, whereby they do somewhat
resemble his children: that so they may have no cause to complain of him, as
of an hard Lord and master, but that all the world may see that he rewards
every man according to his work. 1. Pet. 1. 17. For as much then as God
threatens all evil to the wicked, and promises nothing that good is unto
them as they are wicked, therefore also it follows, that the promises of good
things do belong only to Gods children. And thus much for the first right of
the children of God unto the blessings of this life, viz. by promise.

Touching their second right by communion with Christ, for as much as he is the
only heir of all things: Heb. 1. 2. (as has been before noted) and that, as
he is not only God, but God and man (For every heir is heir to another, but
as Christ is Note.
God, all things are his own, and he has equal right with the Father unto
all things, so that properly in that respect he is no heir) therefore it
follows that none can have any interest to any thing, but only such as are in
Christ, and be members of his body. They that are Christ's, and whose Christ
himself is, may well claim and challenge all other things: yea, they may
assure themselves, that they shall have all other things. He that spared not
his own Son, but gave him for us all, how shall he not with him (that is,
it is not possible (as has been before observed) but that with him he should)
give us all other things also Romans 8. 32. Thus much briefly of the right that
the children of God have to all the blessings of this life: neither only of
their right, but also of their property in them. But yet I may not thus let
this matter pass, without further speech thereof, for the better satisfying of
all men touching the same.

To proceed therefore further therein, it may be demanded, and will (no doubt)
be demanded, that if this be by promise, and by participation of Christ, the
right and property of the children of God, why some of them, yea many of them,
are often times in great want and necessity. So was Bartimeus, that sat by the
high way begging: Mark. 10. 46. So was Lazarus, that lay at the rich man's gate:
etc. Luke 16. 20. So David himself, after that he was anointed to be king of
Israel, was in such necessity, that he came to Ahimelech the Priest, to crave
some relief for himself and his company: and was glad to take the show bread
of the Lord, because Ahimelech (though Priest) had then no other provision
ready: 1. Sam. 21. 3. Afterward also in the like necessity he sent for some
relief no Nabal: Chap. 25. 5. The like is the state of many other; yea of most
other the children of God. Their part often times is but small of these earthly
blessings: It may therefore (I say) be demanded, why this is so: or how this
stands with the righteousness of God to give so little to them, to whom he
has promised so much: yea, who likewise by communion with Christ, have right
to all. To this I answer, that it is to be remembered, which before I said, viz.
that these blessings of this life are not absolutely promised to the children
of God, but conditionally, if they may be good for them, and no hindrances of
them touching a better life: So only they are promised, and no otherwise: So
only they may be prayed for, and no otherwise: So only they may be looked for,
and no otherwise: If they be otherwise prayed for, or expected, our prayer and
expectation are wrong: and it skilleth not though we be not heard in our
prayer, and though our expectation be frustrated. Yea, it is better, we should
not be heard, and that our hope should be frustrated, then otherwise. The
wholsomest, the daintiest, and most exquisitly dressed meat that is, may be
hurtful to a sick and weak stomach: and though such a sick person do crave
such meat, or any other that is good in it self, but not good for one sick of
that disease, it is better not to give it, then to give it: and it is better
for such a sick person to want such meat, then to have it.

As knives likewise and swords are good in themselves: yea, the better the
sharper they be: and yet not for children, or some other that know not how to
use them: yea the sharper and better, the more dangerous for such persons: so
is it touching the blessings of God for this life in respect of some of the
children of God, to whom in respect either of some sickness and weakness, or
of want of knowledge and discretion how to use them, they may be more dangerous
many ways then profitable any ways. Yea the very best of Gods children may
sometime take hurt by many blessings of this life.

David himself in his prosperity said he should never be moved: Psalm. 30. 6.

As soon as the holy ghost had recorded the great riches, power and
magnificence of Solomon: 1. Kings 10. in the beginning of the next Chapter he
adioineth that he loved strange women: and that his said strange wives turned
his heart after strange Gods, etc.

When Iehoshaphat had riches and honey, then he joined himself in affinity
with Ahab: 2. Chron. 18.

No sooner was Hezekiah recovered of his sickness unto death, but presently
his heart was lift up within him. 2. Chron. 32. 25.

Moreover, as children may more easily hurt or break a glass, then be any
thing the better if they have it (although they take no hurt themselves
thereby) so some of the children of God, by their childishness in the grace
and knowledge of God. may abuse the blessings of this life, albeit themselves
perhaps take no apparent hurt by them.

Again, as it is not meet that every natural child of man, should have the
like quantity of meat, or meat of the same sort, or garments of the same
measure, or of the same stuff, Note.
or of the same color, because there is difference of age, of strength and of
stature: so is it with the children of God touching the blessings of this life.
A little is as sufficient for some, as a great deal for other some: A little
is as much for a mean man, as a great deal for a king or a noble man.

If the Lord also give a contented mind with a little, this is greater riches
to one of Gods children, then a great deal with discontent, and a mind still
greedy of more, to the wicked. Therefore godliness is said to be great gain
if a man be content with that he has, or rather with a contented mind, to note
an effect of godliness, that it works a contented mind: or an adiunct of
godliness, that it is accompanied with a contented mind: 1. Tim. 6. 6. But why
is a little with a contented mind so great riches? Not only because whatsoever
they have, they have right thereunto (as before has been said;) and because
that that they have is pure unto them, as themselves are pure: Tit. 1. 15. but
also because they have it with the favor of God. He that finds a wife,
finds a good thing, and receives favor of the Lord: Pro. 18. 20. That which
is said of finding a wife, may be said of all other blessings of this life to
the children of God: They come from the favor of the Lord; and are accompanied
with the favor of the Lord. Whether therefore they be few or many, small or
great, the godly may have great comfort in them. Hence it is said that A small
thing to the just man is better then great riches to the wicked and mighty:
Psalm. 37. 16. Many the like sentences there are in the Proverbs, as Chap. 15.
16. 17. and 16. 8. and 19. 8.

As a little gift from a man with love and good will, is more then a great
deal by constraint of law, or of fear, or with grudging and murmuring, so
certainly is it, touching the blessings of God for this life bestowed upon the
godly, with the favor of God. Therefore we do often see, that a godly man
that has but small wealth fares more merrily, and lives more at hearts ease,
quietly and comfortably; yea, and that he spends more upon good uses, then
many wicked men, that have ten times, yea twenty times as much as they, and yet
less charge also then they. As God gives them all that they have to enjoy: 1.
Tim. 6. 17. so they do enjoy it to the comfort of themselves, of their wives
and children, of their other friends, and of the other Saints of God, standing
in need of comfort from them. And this mind thus to use the blessings of this
life, is much more then the blessings themselves. Since therefore God does give
a greater grace pertaining to the life to come unto his children, to whom he
gives but a little for this life; which greater grace for the life to come is
much more worth then all the abundance which they have not for this life, God
cannot be said to be unfaithful touching his promise, as not performing the
same, neither can he be charged with any wrong done unto the children of God,
in giving the^ so little for this life, because he acco^panieth that little with
so rich grace otherwise. He that promises much of one kind, that is of small
value, and gives not the same, but a little of an other kind of far greate^
worth then much of the meaner kind, does he any wrong? He that promises his
son twenty or thirty sheep, and gives but ten, with five or six good kine
or oxen, of more price then 40. sheep, does he his son any wrong? or has such
a son, any cause to complain of his Father?

The former grace of a contented mind is the more, because many a wicked man
that has great abundance, and no child or kinsman to inherit it, is never
content: his eye is never satisfied with riches, neither is there any end of
his travel: but his heart is always troubled with cares and thoughts of the
world: scarce taking any quiet nights rest, or eating his meat quietly: but
always eating the bread of sorrow: Psalm. 127. 2. Yea, thinking still that
himself eats too much, and still crying out with the Horsleeches two
daughters, Gine, Give, and never saying, It is enough: and being of the nature
of the grave, and barren womb, that are nener satisfied: Prou. 30. 15. 16. As
such men are never quiet or satisfied in their minds, so in their bodies they
are ever toiling and moiling, raking, scraping, and grubbing in the earth, and
about earthly matters, and for earthly and earthen goods (himself being more
earthly and earthen then they) as if they had nothing at all: and as if when
they have gotten that which they desire, either they should never lose that, or
that should never lose them. Such men having much in possession, have nothing
in use: having all they are as poor as he that has nothing. Of such men
speaks Solomon: Eccle. 4. 8. and 5. 9. and 6. 2.

But as it is demanded and now answered, why the godly have often times so
small a portion of these earthly blessings since they have right unto all, so it
may likewise be demanded why the wicked have so much, that have no right to any
thing To which that may serve for part of an answer that was said last before,
that although they have much in possession, yet they have nothing in use, etc.
as also that before said, that sometimes the wicked have these outward
blessings for some outward service, wherein they resemble the children of God.
But for further answer, to both the former comparatiue demands, touching the
small portion of the godly, and the great portion of the wicked in these
blessings of this life: we must understand another reason to be this, that the
Lord casts these mercies of this life, and disperseth and scatters them all
abroad, as a man or woman does sometime throw down amongst their children and
servants a lap full, or basketfull of crabs, or some other base fruit: where he
that is strongest, and whose mind does most affect such base things, gets
the greatest part, and they that are weak and whose stomachs care not for such
raw stuff, get nothing at all, or very little. So (I say) the wicked being
strong in body, and minding altogether earthly things, by scambling, and
struggling, and scraping get much earthly muck: whereas the godly being for the
most part of small power, and little minding such base things, but having their
hearts set upon better, even upon things that are above, where Christ Jesus
sits at the right hand of God. Colos. 3. 1. and being also in that respect
often times very shiftlesse for things of this life, they get but a little, and
are content with a little, so that they have enough for present necessity, and
so that they grow rich in heavenly blessings.

Again, the great blessings of God for this life, bestowed upon the wicked,
are but as great pasture knee deep for oxen fatted for the slaughter.
Furthermore, all the right of the blessings of this life, being only in the
children of God (especially in respect of God, and from God) whatsoever the
wicked do possess, yet are they never the richer thereby. Nay, their state is
the worse: not only because thereby they are (as I said) fatted and made the
fitter for Gods judgments, but also because in the end they shall give
account, as usurpers of that which was not theirs. In the mean time they are
no better then bankrupts, that have great shops, use great dealings, and make
many returns, bearing great shows, building goodly houses, furnishing them
richly, keeping great hospitality, maintaining themselves and theirs in costly
apparel, in all companies spending with the best, etc. but all of other men's
goods, nothing of their own. These may flourish and bluster for a time, and
oftentimes so do, as well as the wealthiest: but when it is once known that
they are worth nothing, but that they owe ten times more then all that they
have will discharge; every man then comes upon them thick and three fold:
action follows action: one arrest after another: and execution upon
execution. And then (alas) what are they the better for all their former
shows, and flourishing bravery? yea, are they not in ten times more miserable
condition, then the poor man, that was not worth so much in all the world, as
they sometimes spent vainly in one week? For such a man sits still, is
quiet, and without interruption follows his calling, when those gallant
fellows are either in prison, or lurking here and there, full of fear, and
not daring to show their faces, and when all that they had, is seized to
satisfy their creditors.

So is it with the wicked. Whatsoever they possess; howsoever they swagger,
and ruffle it out with their wealth, and other prosperity, bearing all down
before them: yet when God shall call them to account, then they shall find that
they had no interest unto any thing they possessed: because they were without
God, and without Christ in the world: and therefore that having much they had
nothing. And then shall it be ten times worse with them, then if they had had
never a groat: yea, then shall they wish that they had had nothing, because
they shall be forced to give an heavy reckoning of that which without any
interest they inioied, and used, (or rather abused) at their pleasure as if it
had been their own: yea then shall they find to their great woe, that the
poorest, and sickest, and most despicable child of God, which lived always in
thraldom, bondage, and all other outward misery, was (even in the greatest
extremity of that his misery) in far more happy state and condition then the
greatest, the richest, and the mightiest noble man or King in all the world
was, that was none of Gods children.

Moreover, as before we heard, that the children of God have that which they
have (whether little or much) with the favor of God, so whatsoever the wicked
have, it is with the displeasure of God. As it is said of Saul, that God gave
Israel a King in his anger: Hose. 13. 11. so it may be said of all the
prosperity of the wicked, that God does give it them in his anger. And how can
it be otherwise, since they will not Kiss his son, whom he has commanded
them (yea all Kings and Judges of the earth) to kiss under pain of his anger,
and heavy displeasure? Psalm. 2. 12. If any man also take any thing from a man,
especially from a Prince, will not he from whom it is taken be angry? will not
a king especially be most highly displeased with such rapine? especially when
he has promised it, and appointed it for his children? The earth is the Lords,
and all that therein is: Psalm. 24. 1. All the beasts of the forest are his,
the beasts of a thousand mountains, etc. Psalm. 50. 10. The silver is mine, and
the gold is mine says the Lord of hosts: Hag. 2. 9. The Lord has given all
these things to his son, and in him to them that are his children by him: how
then can he not be angry with them that seize upon them, not being his adopted
children in Christ his only natural son? yea, that being his enemies, do
notwithstanding as boldly take them into their possession, and use them as
freely, as if they were his children, and so had interest unto them? Does not
the Lord straightly forbid theft of man against man: and has he not been
angry, and is he not daily angry with them, that commit any theft against man?
will he not then much more be offended with theft against himself, and
against his son Christ Jesus? That which is but theft against man, is
sacrilege against God and Christ Jesus.

Again, though the wicked be in never so great prosperity, yet all is most
uncertain; and in a moment, either all is taken from them, or they be taken
from all.

That which is said of riches, that they take themselves to their wings and as
an Eagle do fly into the heaven: Pro. 23. 5 (that is, they are quickly out of
sight and out of reach) as also oftentimes, that they be uncertain: 1. Tim. 6.
17. may likewise be said of all prosperity, especially in the possession of the
wicked. The same further is manifest, as by diverse other testimonies, so
especially by that which before was alleged out of Job 15. 29. etc.

Touching the taking away of the wicked from their wealth and other prosperity,
does not our Savior teach it by the parable of the rich man, that (like many
rich men in these days) was altogether careful for enlarging his barnes, to
keep the great abundance of corn that his land had brought forth, and to eat
and drink, and take his pleasure for many years (as thinking he had enough,
and that he should live long) never thinking of any thankfulness to God,
neither taking any care, how to employ, and bestow it well to Gods glory, and
the comfort of other that were in want? Does not (I say) our Savior by this
parable teach, that the wicked are often times taken away from their wealth and
other prosperity, in as much as when the said rich man was occupied in those
former thoughts of enlarging his barnes, and taking his ease, etc. our Savior
tells us that it was presently said unto him by the Lord, O fool this night
will they fetch away thy soul from thee: and then whose shall all those things
be, which thou have provided? Luk 12 20.

To the same purpose Zophar says, The reioicing of the wicked is short: and
the joy of the hypocrite is but a moment. Though his excellency mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like
his dung: and they which have seen him, shall say where is he? He shall fly
away as a dream: and they shall not find him: and shall pass away as a vision
of the night. So that the eye which had seen him, shall see him no more: and
his place shall see him no more: Job 20. 5. David testifies the very same: I
have seen (says he) the wicked strong and spreading himself like a Bay
tree: yet he passed away, and lo he was gone: and I sought him, but he could
not be found: Psalm. 37. 35. 36.

Does any man require examples of these two points? For the first, let him
consider his own experience of many daily that are left great portions, and
yet living wickedly, come to extreme beggary. For the second, that many of the
wicked, having great states are themselves taken from all; how soon were
Nabal, 1. Samuel 25. 38. Ahab, 1. Kings 22. 37. Saneherib, 2. Kings 19. 37.
Nebuchadnezer, Dan. 4. 28. and Herod, Acts 12. 23. how soon (I say) were all
these taken from all their wealth, from all their honor, from all their worldly
prosperity?

Touching both the former points jointly, how soon did Haman and Belshazzer
lose both riches and honors, withal their other earthly prosperity, and life
it self?

Neither only is the prosperity of the wicked taken from them, or they from it,
but sometime also themselves are so burdened therewith, that howsouer they got
it with great pain, and yet perhaps also with some pleasure, yet they are
never well till they be disburdened of it again. It is with them as it is with
drunkards, and gluttons, who drink largely, and eat greedily: but having over
much charged their stomachs, they are sick and very sick till they have
vngorged themselves. Let no man be offended with this similitude, as thinking
the same too rude and homely for so divine an argument, as now I am occupied
in. It is the same that Zophar uses in the same case, and whereby he does most
elegantly and excellently set forth the condition of the wicked in this
behalf. For thus he writes, He has devoured substance, and he shall vomit
it: for God shall draw it out of his belly: Job 20. 15. and again, he shall
restore the labor (that is, that which he got with much labor) and shall
devour no more, etc. verse. 18. and again, Surely he shall feel no quietness
in his body (as it is with drunkards and gluttons, that being more then
cropfull, are also cropsick, and tormented in their bodies till they have
emptied themselves) neither shall he reserve of that which he desired. There
shall none of his meat be left. Therefore none shall hope for his goods. When
he shall be filled with abundance, he shall be in pain, etc. verse. 20. 21. 22.

This is somewhat manifest by the example of Achan, who (contrary to the
commandment of God) having taken a goodly Babylonish garment, two hundred
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight (in the sacking
of Jericho) was forced himself to bring all forth, and so he with all his
family, were burnt with fire: Josh. 7. 20.

It is more manifest by the example of Judas, who having greedily taken thirthy
pieces of silver for the betraying of his Lord and Master, made as much have to
be rid of it, as ever he did to get it: and he came unsent for and brought it
with his own hands to the Priests, and threw it down, etc. and then went and
hanged himself, etc. Mat. 27. 5. 2.

If the wicked do not thus with their wealth, and other prosperity (for there
is the same reason of all their prosperity, that there is of their wealth) yet
they meet with such other calamities, that they were better to be in adversity
with the children of God, then in their prosperity, to inoy the pleasures of
sin for a season. For what gained Gehezi by the two talents of silver, and
the two changes of garments, which by lying and falsehood he got of Naaman the
Syrian? Did not the leprosy of Naaman cleave unto him, and to his seed for
ever? 2. Kings 5. 27. Whether then had he been better to have been without the
wealth, or without Naamans leprosy? If it were so with him, (that perhaps was
not altogether to be accounted wicked, though in that particular he were very
faulty) what is to be thought of them, that cannot be denied to be wicked?

Last of all, the wicked in gathering the blessings of this life together, are
sometimes the instruments of God for the future good of his children: that they
may enjoy that with ease, which the wicked have scraped and raked together with
much pain. So says Solomon, The riches of the sinner is laid up for the just:
Pro. 13. 22. So also says Job, Though he should heap up silver as the dust,
and prepare raiment as the clay; he may prepare it, but the just shall put it
on: and the innocent shall divide his silver: Job 27. 16.

Hereof Haman is a most pregnant example. For was not his house given to
virtuous Queen Ester? was not the ring which himself did wear (even when he
came with the King to the royal banquet of Ester) given to godly Mordecai,
whom Haman had hated with a perfect hatred? Ester 8. 1. 2.

Truly this is a great prerogative of the children of God, that the wicked and
their enemies that scorned and contemned them, should be their servants to
gather riches for them.

Thus we see, that although the blessings of this life, belong only to the
godly, yet sometimes the wicked get a share; but with so small comfort, that
they were a great deal better be without it. This shall be sufficient for the
reason, both why and how the children of God having only right to all the
blessings of this life: yet sometimes are in want, and often times have but a
small portion of them: as also why and how the wicked having no interest at al
unto them, yet for a time have them in great abundance.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Showing why the children of God do sometimes meet with the afflictions of this
life, threatened against, and most properly belonging to the wicked, and how
beneficial such afflictions are unto them, and that all things work to their
good.

IT remains now to show further, why as the wicked do thus often partake of
the blessings of this life, promised, due, and proper only to the godly: so
sometime the godly meet also with afflictions threatened to the wicked, and
most properly and rightly belonging unto them: and that without any impeachment
of their dignity; and of the privileges, and prerogatives pertaining to them.

Touching this therefore, the first reason why it so falls out, is like to
that which before we heard of the wicked. For as the wicked sometimes doing the
outward works of the children of God, do therefore receive the outward rewards
of the children of God, that (as I said) they may have nothing wherewith to
blame the justice of God (albeit, where there is any sin, there never can be
any merit or desert before God) so the children of God, when they behave
themselves as the wicked, do sometimes taste of the judgments of the wicked in
this life, that they may the better be freed from them, and from the fear of
them in the life to come.

This is manifest by the manifold afflictions that befell David after his sin
both with Bathsheba, and against her husband Vrija, and also in numbering the
people. Notwithstanding as the Lord does give the wicked his blessings of this
life, rather in wrath then in favor, (as has been before said) so he does
afflict his children, not in wrath but in love, to make them the more partaker
of his holiness, that they may the better live: Heb 12. 5. 6. 7. Reu. 3. 19.
and to teach them his law; that they may have the more rest in the dates of
evil, whiles the pit is dug for the wicked: Psalm. 92. 12. Such use did
David make of his afflictions, both after the former sins, and also at other
times, as himself testifies saying, It is good ^or me that I have been
afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes: P^al. 119. 71. And this kind of
affliction is called the trial of our faith, much more precious then gold that
perishes, though it be tried in the fire: 1. Pet. 1. 7. Because as fire
purges the gold from dross, and as soap makes the linen clean, so this
affliction is a mean to purge us of our corruption. As plowing also of the
ground kills the weeds, and makes the ground the fitter to bring forth
corn: as harrowing likewise breaks the hard clods, and so furthereth the
former work of the plough: whereby the ground so ploughed and harrowed may be
the more fruitful: so afflictions seem to kill the weeds of sin remaining in
the children of God, and to mollify the hard clods of their hearts, that they
may bear the more fruits of righteousness. Is it any harm to be so
afflicted? no more then for gold to be tried in the fire: then for foul linen
to be washed with soap: then for ground to be ploughed and harrowed. Therefore
the man whom the Lord does so correct and chastise is pronounced blessed: Psalm.
94. 12. before alleged, and Job 5. 17. Therefore also the Apostle James
wills them to whom he did write to account it exceeding joy, when they did
fall into many temptations or afflictions: James 1. 2. yea he makes that the
first precept or exhortation of all the Epistle, that it might be the more
regarded.

To show more particularly how by afflictions we are taught the law of God, and
purged of such corruptions as do still remain in the best, let us understand
that the said best of Gods children, being ready by prosperity to be puffed up,
(as before we heard by the examples of David, Solomon, and Hezekiah) therefore
afflictions serve for the repressing of such pride, and to make us the more
humble.

David did no sooner hear the afflictions threatened which afterward were
inflicted upon him, but presently he humbled himself saying, I have sinned
against the Lord: 2. Sam. 12. 13. and in further testimony of that his
humiliation, he did afterward write the whole most doleful and heavenly one
and fifty Psalm.

When also the Angel of the Lord for his numbering the people smote Israel with
the plague, how did he and the elders of Israel humble themselves again? 2.
Sam. 24. 17. and 1. Chro. 21. 16. as before has been showed in Chap. 18.

The like has been before said of Hezekiah out of 2. Chron. 32. 26.

Secondly the children of God by experiences of afflictions in themselves are
taught the more to pity other in the like affliction. Yea, this was one end of
our chastisement upon Christ himself: Heb. 2. 17. 18.

Thirdly, because by much and long prosperity the children of God are ready to
be glued to this world, too highly to regard the glory of it, and too little to
respect the world and life to come, therefore sometimes they are afflicted, the
more to weane their hearts from the world, and by the bitter fruits thereof to
make them the more weary thereof, and the more earnestly desirous of being
dissolved, and being with Christ: Philip. 1. 23.

Fourthly, by afflictions they are taught to be the more thankful for the
contrary blessings, when they shall enjoy them: as by poverty to be the more
thankful for wealth: by sickness to be the more thankful for health: by
trouble to be the more thankful for peace, etc.

Fifthly, by afflictions, especially by those that come unto them by the hatred
of the world against them, they have the better assurance, both that themselves
are not of the world, but of God, For if they were of the world, the world
would love them: Ioh. 15. 19. and also of their future similitude to Christ in
glory: Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 12. whereof we shall speak more afterward. And
the same is it that the Apostle teaches the Philippians, bidding them in
nothing to fear their adversaries. Why so? Because (says he) this is to them
a token of perdition: but to you of salvation. Philip. 1. 28. So he shows by
an argument taken from comparison of equals, that even as to be an adversary to
the children of God, and to persecute them, is a token and manifest testimony,
to such so long as they continue such, that they shall perish: so to be hated
of them, and persecuted by them, is a great assurance of salvation. Only this
is the difference, that they that by hatred and persecution of the children of
God have a great sign of perdition, may for all that, by faith working
repentance, be saved, but they that once by any good testimony be assured of
salvation, shall never perish.

Sixthly, by suffering a little smart of the fruit of sin here, they do the
better learn, both what all is that they have deserved in the life to come,
and also what Christ has suffered for them, in bearing the whole punishment of
all their sins: and therefore how they ought to love him in that behalf, and
how thankful they ought to be to God for their deliverance from everlasting
torments: in respect whereof, these light and momentany afflictions of this
life, are but as fillips, and fleabites: and consequently also they learn how
they are to pity them that are going toward the place of such torments; and
how in pity they are to labor their reclaiming and converting.

These are the principal particular points of the law of God, which the
children of God do learn by the afflictions of this life: the least whereof
is more worth then all outward prosperity: and all which might be much more
enlarged: but finding this treatise to arise to a far greater volume then at
the first I made account of, I am thereby forced in many things to write the
more briefly. By this that I have thus briefly set down in that behalf, it
may sufficiently appear, that the exchange sometimes of momentany afflictions
for temporary blessings, is no detriment to the children of God, but rather an
exceeding gain and benefit.

If it be objected, that some of Gods children are subject also to
extraordinary deaths: as Eli brake his neck falling backward^ 1. Sam. 4. 18.
The Prophet that had done contrary to the word of God was killed by a lion: 1.
Kings 13. 24. Noble Josiah died of the wound that he had taken by the sword of
the uncircumcised Egyptians: 2. King. 23. 29. and that for going somewhat
obstinately (as it seems) against Pharo Neco: 2. Chron. 35. 2. Many of the
Corinthians are said to have slept (that is, to have died somewhat
extraordinarily, and by an untimely death) for abuse and disorder in the supper
of the Lord: 1. Cor. 11. 30. If (I say) this be objected, and so confirmed by
these former and other the like examples, and upon those grounds, it be further
demanded, how such things can be for the good of the children of God, and for
the learning any thing out of the word of God, since the dead praise not God,
neither is there any remembrance of God in death: Psalm. 6. 5. and 30. 9. To
this I answer briefly, that although after death there be no learning any thing
(except only either of torments to the wicked, or of joy and happiness to the
godly, and that by sense and feeling, as the rich man and Lazarus did: Luke 16.
23.) yet in such sickness unto death, there may be before death, and (no doubt)
is repentance in all the children of God, of such particular sins, as whereby
they see they have procured such particular chastisements upon themselves: and
so by judging of themselves for the said sins, they have the better assurance,
that they shall not be judged of the Lord. Therefore the Apostle says in the
place before alleged, (after mention of sickness and death) when we are
judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world: 1. Cor. 11. 32. which is all one with the general end of afflictions
before mentioned, viz. that we may live: Heb. 12. 9.

Again (both further to amplify that answer to the former objection, and also
now to show some other uses of the afflictions of Gods children in respect of
other) they are so afflicted (especially for particular sins) that other as
well as themselves (living after their said untimely death) seeing how he whom
they call father judges every man (as well his own children as other)
according to their work (in this world) without respect of persons, may
afterward pass the time of their dwelling here in the more fear: 1. Pet. 1.
17. and make an end of their salvation with the more trembling: Philip. 2. 12.

Secondly, in respect of other they are afflicted, and laden with affliction,
for the manifestation of their faith, patience, and other graces, to such as
did before doubt thereof, as thinking all that they did in the worship of God
to be in hypocrisy; and rather because God had so compassed and walled them
about with his mercies, then in a simple, and a pure love toward God himself.
Is not this evident by the answer of satan unto God, when God had asked him if
he had not considered Job and all his uprightness, etc. Does Job (says satan)
fear God for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about all that
he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the land. But stretch out now thine hand, and touch
all that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face? Job 1. 8.
9. 10. Does not satan in these words plainly accuse Job to have done all that
he had done, only in hypocrisy, etc? Therefore the Lord gave him leave to try
Job, and to exercise him with many afflictions one after another, and one in
the neck of another, for the confutation of that slanderous accusation of Job
by satan, and for declaration of his integrity to all the world. Yea, (by this
occasion to insert here another benefit by afflictions to the children of God
concerning themselves) as by wrestling a man sometimes knows his own strength
better then before he did; so oftentimes by afflictions, a man better knows
his own faith, and other graces of God in himself, for his further comfort
then before he did.

Thirdly, in respect of other, sometimes the children of God are so afflicted,
that the works of God may be showed on them. Our Savior being asked by his
disciples of the man that was borne blind, whether he or his parents had
sinned, that he was borne blind, answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor
his parents, but that the work of God might be showed on him: Ioh. 9. 2. 3.

So it seems that Lazarus was therefore sick, and died of his sickness,
(sooner then by the course of nature he should have died) not for any special
sin of his own, but for the better manifestation of the glory of God, by
his miraculous raising again, after burial, and after death and burial
diverse days. So our Savior says to his disciples before he was dead, This
sickness is not unto death (viz. to lie or continue in death till the general
resurrection) but for the glory of God, that the son of God might be
glorified thereby: Ioh. 11. 4. So he said after he was dead and buried, unto
Martha, who objected, that he had been dead four days: Said I not unto thee,
that if thou did believe, thou should see the glory of God? verse. 40.

Fourthly, the godly are sometimes taken away by an extraordinary kind of
death, not only to teach other the more to take heed of all such sins as
for which they are so taken away: but also to admonish men not always to judge
other by their end, except their life have also been wicked, but rather to hope
well of them, if their former life have been godly, albeit their end be
somewhat uncomfortable.

Finally (to make an end of my answer to the former objection touching the
afflictions of the children of God, since all afflictions are threatened only to
the wicked, as all blessings are promised only to the godly) though the
troubles of the righteous be great, yet the Lord delivers him out of all. Yea
(though they continue long, yet) the Lord keeps all his bones, not one of
them shall be broken: whereas the afflictions of the wicked shall slaie them:
and they that hate the righteous shall perish: Psalm. 34. 19. 20. 21. Therefore
Solomon admonishes the wicked not to lay wait at the house of the righteous,
because though the just man fall seven times, yet he rises again; (that is,
though he have many afflictions, and be now up, now presently down, yet at the
last the Lord delivers him out of all) but the wicked do fall into
mischief, or do perish, and be utterly (at the last) overthrown in their
misery: Pro. 24. 15. 16. Yea, though they cry, yet there shall be none to
save: yea, though they cry unto the Lord, yet he shall not answer them. Psalm.
18. 41.

Of both these, viz. of the deliverance of the children of God out of their
troubles, and of the perishing of the wicked in theirs, we have mentioned
diverse examples before, not needful now to be repeated.

Though also the Lord do suffer the afflictions of his children to continue,
yet in the end he will most graciously deliver them by death: and translate
them to himself, where they shall rest from their labor: and where they shall
reap the fruit of all their works: Revel. 14 13. of the which rest and other
reward of their works, all the afflictions of this life are not to be
accounted worthy: Rom 8. 18. Yea, in respect of which most excellent and
eternal weight of glory, all affliction here is but exceeding light and
momentany: 2. Cor. 4. 17. But of this more afterward.

In the mean time the Lord will either mitigate the said afflictions of his
children, or show his power in their weakness, not laying more upon them, then
he gives strength to bear, neither suffering them to be tempted above their
strength: 1. Cor. 10. 13. The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of
tentation: and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment under punishment,
or to be punished: 2. Pet. 2. 9.

Are not these things singular privileges? Are they not excellent dignities? To
have the right of all the blessings of this life? and to have the very
afflictions of this life made so many ways beneficial? so that the children
of God may not only say that light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart: Psalm. 97. 11. but also that unto the righteous arises light
in darkness it self: Psalm. 112. 4.

But is this all that may be said touching the blessings of this life, and the
afflictions thereof in respect of the children of God? No: we may further add
both of such blessings, and of such afflictions, and also of all other things,
that we that are the children of God, do not uncertainly hope, but fully and
most certainly know that all things work together for the good of them that
love God. Romans 8. 28. What all things? yea all things: youth as well as age:
weakness as well as strength: trouble as well as peace: sickness as well as
health: poverty as well as wealth: the single state as well as the married:
disgrace as well as credit: contempt as well as honor: low degree as well as
high imprisonment as well as walking at large: bondage as well as freedom:
losses as well as gain: barrenness of the body as well as fruitfulness: a
troublesome wife as well as a comfortable wife: wicked and rebellious children
as well as good and dutiful: death of father, mother, brother, sister,
husband, wife, children, and other friends, as well as the life and long
continuance of them: traveling abroad as well as keeping at home: banishment
as well as abiding in our own country: the hatred and displeasure of men, even
of the mighty men of the world, as well as their love and friendship: dangers
as well as safety: foul or cold weather, as well as fair and hot weather: to
conclude, death as well as life: and any one thing else, as well as another.

All this is so to be understood, that we may admire the wisdom of God in
turning all things to good to them that love Note.
him: and that we acknowledge the state and condition of such to be the more
honorable and happy: not that therefore we make choice of one thing as well as
of another: but that we direct our choice according to his revealed will: and
yet to be content with whatsoever the Lord shall do, and to possess our
souls in patience, as knowing that howsoever things fall out a while, yet at
the last the end will be good for us.

But this being a matter of good moment, it shall not be lost labor to insist
somewhat more upon it, and to make it more plain, that all men may the better
see, that all things work indeed to the good of them that love God; that is,
of his children, because we have heard before, that they only do love him, and
that all the wicked are often said, to be enemies and haters of him.

This therefore is manifest; first, because God is with all them, that love him,
as has been before declared. If God be with them, who can be against them?
Romans 8. 31. or, what skilleth it, who or what is against them? They may then
say as Elisha said, 2. Kings 6. 16. and as Hezekiah did 2. Chron. 32. 7. They
that be with us, are more then they that be against us. God is greater then
all: Ioh. 10. 29. viz. not only in power but also in wisdom and goodness: as
before also has been showed. Whatsoever he will in heaven or in earth that he
does: Psalm. 135. 6. He will not that any thing shall hurt us: therefore nothing
can hurt us. He will every thing shall do us good; therefore every thing shall
do us good. The providence of the Lord is so over all, that neither a sparrow
lights upon the house top, nor an hair falls from our head without his
said providence: Mat. 10. 29. 30. If we that are evil be ready to do any good
that is in our power to our children, shall not God much more be willing to do
any good to his children? Mat. 7. 11. If then God will do his children good,
who can hurt? For who can resist his will? His counsel shall stand, and he
will do whatsoever he will. Isai. 46. 10.

Again, if any thing will hurt us, is it not to be feared from our enemies?
yet our most deadly enemies, can God restrain from doing us any hurt: yea, he
can force them to do us good? If satan himself, even with a great army (an
whole legion of his angels) could not enter into the heard of the faithless
Gadarens swine, without leave from Christ; shall we think that he can do any
hurt to them (either touching their persons, or touching their goods) that
believing in Christ are members of his body, without leave from him? It is
manifest that he cannot, by the history of Job: yea, by that history it is
evident, that albeit satan's malice be unchangeable, so that he cannot but in
affection be an enemy to all the children of God; yet by the wise and gracious
providence of God, he works the good of Gods children, and in that respect
his malice may be said to be turned into friendship. For was not Job so much
the more blessed in the end (even in his outward state) by how much the more
satan had (as it were) cursed him before? The like may be truly said of all
other enemies of flesh. For all such enemies are but satan's soldiers: which
do nothing but by his appointment: and therefore that which they are by Gods
providence forced to do for Gods children, may be said to be done by satan
himself.

The same is also manifest by the curses of satan's eldest son, against us here
in England. For as all the while we had the Popes blessing we fared the worse
in soul and in body, for this life and for the life to come; so have we not
seen by experience, that the more he has cursed us, the more God has blessed
us with peace, with honor in the eyes of all nations, with increase of people,
and abundance of all blessings? Touching such enemies therefore of flesh, God
can either make them friends to his children: Pro. 16. 7. (yea, though they
continue still vassals unto satan) as he did Esau unto Iaakob, and the
Egyptians to the Israelites for the lending unto them their jewels, etc. or he
can confound them, as he did the Egyptians afterward, returning again to their
former hatred against the Israelites. And as he did Sanaherib and his army, or
he can so restrain them, that though their hatred with all the practices thereof
do continue, yet all shall be in vain, touching any hurt to the children of
God, and in the end for their good.

The more maliciously that the Egyptians pursued the Israelites being departed
out of Egypt, the more glorious deliverance did the Lord give to the
Israelites. The persecution of David by Saul made the more to David's
advancement. All that satan did by Haman against Mordecai and the rest of the
Jews, wrought together for the further good of Mordecai, and the other Jews.
For thereby they had a greater liberty, and a greater hand against all their
enemies, then ever before they had.

Yea, when satan also gets some of the children of God to be his
instruments, and factors (as it were) to work some mischief against some of
the better children of God, God does no more favor this proceeding, then if it
were altogether by satan himself, and by such as do belong unto him: yea,
though such things be begun by some of the children of God themselves, and
afterward seconded by some other altogether wicked, yet this shall not procure
the hurt of those better children of God, but rather the further good both of
them, and also of those whom satan draws to practice mischief against them
whom he especially hates. Is not all this manifest by the history of Joseph?
For did not satan first provoke Joseph's brethren against him? even to sell him
out of the country to certain Ishmaelite merchants? Did not these second the
former practice of Joseph's brethren by selling him further off, namely to
Potiphar in Egypt? Was not all that seconded again by Potiphars wife; first
most wickedly tempting Joseph to adultery? and secondly (when that way she
could do nothing) by false accusing him to her husband of a rape offered by him
unto her? was not that also seconded by the unjust dealing of Potiphar, in
committing Joseph to the kings prison, without any examination of the complaint
of his wife? When Joseph had lien long there, and at last interpreted the
dreams of Pharaohs butler and baker, might not all the former hard dealing
against him seem to be yet furthered by the butlers long forgetfulness of him?
yet al these things wrought together at the last, both for the great
advancement of Joseph, according to his former dreams (the cause of all the
former hatred of his brethren against him) and also for the good of his
brethren themselves, and of all their houses. So we see that God that fetches
light out of darkness, can make the sins of his children sometime to work for
their outward good: not to encourage any to sin, but to comfort all belonging
unto him, against too much fear of the judgments deserved by sin, and to
show the exceeding privilege of his children in this behalf.

Thus much of the working together of the practices of satan and of his
instruments for the good of the children of God: whereby the said children of
God may the better assure themselves, that much more will other creatures work
for their good.

I shall not need to speak any thing in this behalf of the Angels in heaven.
For no man will make any question of their working together for the good of
Gods children: even for their good in this life, and of this life (which is the
point now principally in hand) since they pitch their tents round about them to
preserve them from dangers, and do otherwise attend upon them for their good,
both alive and dead: as afterward we shall hear.

Touching unreasonable creatures, we read how the rich man's dog in the Gospel
came and licked the sores of poor Lazarus: Luke 16. 21. Balaams Asses mouth
was opened to reprove Balaam for going to curse the Israelites: Numb. 22. 28.

The greedy ravens that are ready to take meat from men, brought bread and
flesh to Elija morning and evening: 1. Ki^ 7. 6.

Th Lord did so bind the fierce and roaring lions to the peace toward Daniel,
that he being thrown into their den amongst them, continuing there an whole
night, and the dens mouth being covered with a great stone, none of them did
him any hurt: Dan 6. 22. And yet the same lions caught Daniels accusers with
their wives and children (being by the commandment of the king cast into their
den) and brake all their bones in pieces, ere they came at the ground of the
den: verse. 24.

That lion also that had commission from God, to kill the Prophet that had
behaved himself unlike a child, in transgressing the word of God, by virtue of
the same commission was not only restrained from doing any hurt to the dead
body of the said Prophet, or to his Ass whereon he rode, but also attended
thereupon, that no other wild beast might tear in pieces either the said dead
body of the Prophet, or his Ass, but that the said dead body might be kept
safe to be buried. When also the other Prophet that had deceived that Prophet
came to fetch the said body to bury the same, the lion suffered him quietly to
take it, to lay it on his Ass, and to carry it away: 1. Kings 13. 24.

The caterpillars, grasshoppers, flies, lice and frogs were sent to plague the
Egyptians for the good of the Israelites, and to procure their more speedy
deliverance out of the land of Egypt.

Touching senseless creatures: when God commanded the fire not to hurt
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, it did not so much as burn any hair of their
head, or scorch their garments, neither was there any smell of fire about them:
Dan. 3. 27. yet so hot was the furnace made, that the flame that came out of
the mouth thereof, devoured those men that brought forth Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, verse 22. not being put into the fire, but only coming near it,
to cast in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

The fire that came down from heaven, and consumed the two captains and their
fifties sent to fetch Elija, did not sease upon the third captain and his
fifty, that by humbling himself to Elija, and craving his favor, showed
himself to be one of the children of God: 2. Kings 1. 14.

The fire that consumed Sodom and Gomorrha had no power over Lot, and them that
went out with him.

Though the air be never so dangerously infected, yet such as dwell in the
secret of the most high, and abide in the shdow of the Almighty (that is, the
children of God that trust in him) God will preserve from the noisome
pestilence, that kills in the darkness, and from the plague that destroieth
at noone day: so that although a thousand fall on their left side, and ten
thousand on their right hand, yet it shall not come near them. Psalm. 91. 1, 3,
5, 6, 7. Yet this and other things touching outward preseruations must still be
remembered to be with condition, if it shall be good for them to live, and not
better by death to be delivered from evils to come, Isai. 57. 1.

Did not the liquid waters of the red sea, and of Jordan (contrary to their
nature) stand upon heaps, and become like a wall for the good of the
Israelites? Did not the hard rock (a part of the earth) give water likewise
unto them?

This that I have spoken of these creatures, is to be understood of all other:
because God has promised to make such a league with all creatures for his
children, that the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard with the
kidde, and the calfe with the lion, and the sucking child shall play upon the
hole of the aspe: and the weined child shall put his hand upon the cockatrice
hole, and that nons shall hurt or destroy in all the mountains of his
holiness, etc. Isai. 11. 6. etc. and 65. 25.

The like almost is that his promise of such a covenant with his people, that
he will cause the evil beasts to cease out of their land, that so they may
dwell safely (even) in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, Ezekiel. 34. 25.
that is, in the places of greatest danger. If the Lord have made such a
covenant for his children with all creatures, what creature dare to transgress
it?

When Abimelech king of Gerar commanded all his people that none should hurt
Izaak nor his wife, did not Izaak then live in the more peace, so that he
sowed in the land, etc. which before he had not done? Genesis 26. 11. Was the word
of an heathen king to his heathen people (that were worse than unreasonable
creatures) of that authority? and shall not the word of God be as authentical
with all his creatures?

The very covenant of God with his children, binds all other creatures to the
peace and good behavior toward them. If once it be known that a king have
made a league with another people, betwixt whom and his people, there was
before hostility and open wars, do not all such a kings subjects lay down
all their weapons of war, and frame themselves to live in peace, with the
other with whom they before had had mortal war? Is the league of a mortal
king of that force with his subjects for their former enemies, and shall not
the league of the immortal God with his children be of much greater force to
bind all his creatures to the good behavior toward his said children, albeit
by their sin they have brought the rest of the creatures to be subject to
vanity? Romans 8. 20 21. Verily no king is of that sovereignty over his subjects
(either by right, or by tyranny and violence) that God is over all his
creatures. Is not every creature to God as the pot to the potter? Romans 9. 21.

This that has been spoken of the working together of all things to the good
of them that love God, is the greater privilege for such as do so love God,
and who by such love do the better show themselves to be the children of God,
because it follows on the contrary, that all things work together to the
hurt of them that do not love God: and so do show themselves not to be the
children of God. This point is so plain by the contrary point before largely
handled, that it shall not need any further confirmation. Thus much for the
benefits concerning this present life, belonging to the children of God.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the benefits of the children of God in the life to come, and first of their
freedom from condemnation.

HItherto we have heard of the benefits of the children of God in this life,
both for this life, and also for the life to come. Now it follows to speak
of those which they shall enjoy in the life to come. These are two. First that
they are freed from everlasting condemnation: secondly, that they are heirs
yea heirs annexed with Christ. Both these follow upon those things before
spoken, concerning the dignity of Gods children. And first concerning the
former, it follows upon that which has been said of Gods love in making us
his children. For how does it stand with any reason or justice, that such as
God loves, and has made his children shall be condemned? Again, if by faith
we are saved (as has been showed) how can we be condemned? The like may be
said hereof, in respect of our incorporation into Christ. For the Apostle
says, that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: Rom 8.
1. so also in respect of other points of that matter wherein we showed the
being of the children of God to consist; therefore in the former place, they
that are in Christ Jesus are described immediately in this manner, according to
those things before spoken of the matter (as it were) of Gods children, viz
that they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. So John says, of
them that love the brethren (one principal point of the said matter of the
children of God) Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, if
we love the brethren. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.

The same is also manifest, by the end of Christ's coming before spoken of.
For therefore did he come into the world, that whosoever does believe in him
should not perish, etc. Ioh. 3. 16. and that he might deliver all them which
for fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage: Heb. 2. 15.

This also follows from the forgiveness of sins before likewise handled.
For sins being that whereby we deserve condemnation, it must needs follow,
that they being taken away, condemnation is also taken away. Being discharged
of the offense, we cannot but be released of the punishment. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? It is Christ which is dead, etc. Romans 8. 33. 34. So these three are
joined together: No man to accuse where God justifies: no condemnation to them
for whom Christ died: The Papists indeed do boldly affirm, that the fault
remitted, the punishment is often retained. But as this is contrary to the
former, and to diverse other scriptures, so in common reason it is foolish,
absurd, and gross. For what a thing is this to say, that a man has his
treason pardoned, but yet he shall be hanged, drawn and quartered? Were not a
man as good have no pardon of his treason as have such a pardon? If the Papists
have no better pardon of their sins (as indeed they shall not, without great
repentance, and renouncing of their damnable errors) they shall be in a woeful
case. Touching the truth of this point, that the children of God are freed from
condemnation, I shall not need to say any more.

Neither shall I need largely to prove, that this freedom from condemnation
is only proper to the children of God: since they only are elect to salvation,
they only are beloved of God, they only believe in Christ, and by faith are
made his members, they only may say, they have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear, they only walk according to the spirit, they only have
forgiveness of sins, etc.

The chief thing that I do here propound to my self to show is, how great a
benefit and privilege this is. That we may therefore see this, let us
consider a little (as we may) what condemnation is.

Briefly, and in one word, Condemnation is the whole curse of God in the world
to come, first upon the soul only, till the day of judgment, then upon soul
and body after the resurrection, for ever and ever.

But let us yet see the degrees of it more particularly.

The first degree therefore is, the angry, wrathful, and fearful countenance,
rebuke and sentence of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Judge of all the world,
against them, that are before appointed, or ordained to condemnation: viz.
against all the ungodly, which before had turned the grace of God into
wantonness, and denied God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4.
when they shall be all gathered before him. For then shall the Lord Jesus
Christ, that great Judge of all the world, speak unto such in this manner;
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels, Matthew 25. 32. and 41.

The wrath of a King (says Solomon) is like the roaring of a lion, he that
provoke him to anger sins against his own soul, Pro. 19. 12. and 20. 2.
Is the wrath of a mortal king (whose breath is in his nostrels) so fearful?
How fearful (alas) then is the wrath of the immortal King of Kings, that
sets up and casts down? 1. Sam. 2. 8. and by whom all Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice? etc. Pro. 8. 15.

The rebuke of a King is the more heavy, the more public it is. How heavy then
shall that rebuke of the King of kings be, which shall be given in the presence
of all the world; not only before all men, but also before all the Angels, both
good and bad?

The second degree of condemnation is in the former sentence, viz. the
separation from the gracious and comfortable presence of God: For our Savior
says, depart from me ye cursed, etc. When he says depart from me, he means
the banishment of them, not only from himself the second person in the Deity,
but also from the father and holy ghost. For as they that have communion with
Christ have also communion with the Father and the holy ghost (as before has
been showed:) so they that are deprived of Christ's company, are likewise
deprived of the company of the Father, and of the holy Ghost.

To be without God in this world (as we have heard before) is one principal
point of our misery by nature before our calling. Yet there they that are so
without God, have often times many friends and great friends, which for a while
seem much to allay their misery, and as it were to still them like little
children, in their absence from God. If it be such a thing to be here without
God, where we have many other friends with whom a little to while away the
time, what alas (will it be to be without God in the world to come, where we
shall have no friends at all with whom to pass away the time, or by whom to
have any comfort?

Amongst men, when subjects begin to be suspected of treason, or otherwise to
be in disgrace with their soueraigns, this is no small degree to further
punishment afterward, viz. to be banished from the court of such princes, or to
be commanded to keep out of their presence. After that Absalom for the murder
of his brother Amnon, had fled from David (as fearing his displeasure) and had
bin absent (as a banished man) for three years together, and yet after that,
was so reconciled to his father, that he might return into the kingdom, but
notwithstanding was commanded to go to his own house and not to see the kings
face: 2. Sam. 14. 24. in which state he continued for two years more; how did
Absalom take this? Truly, as bad as he was, yet he took it so heavily, that he
neglected no means (usual with carnal men) for the recovering again of the
Kings favor, that he might see the Kings face as he had done. And therefore
when he had sent diverse times for Ioab, to entreat him to be a mediator for him
to the King his father in that behalf (as he had before for bringing him
again into the kingdom) and that yet Ioab would not come at him, then he
caused his men to set Ioabs corn on fire: upon which occasion Ioab came to
him, and then Absalom used him for recovery of David's favor, that he might see
his face: verse. 29. Does not all this argue, that Absalom (though a wicked man)
took it as a great punishment so to be banished from his Princes court, and
from his fathers house? Yea, it is a great punishment for any child to be
banished from his Fathers house, though his father be far inferior to a Prince.
Was it not much for Hagar with her son Ishmael to be thrown out of the house
of Abraham, and to be sent into the wide world, they could not tell whither: to
shift for themselves, they knew not where nor how? Genes. 21. 14. How great a
thing this was, their misery afterward does declare. For as the prodigal son
said, How many hired servants at my Fathers house, have bread enough, and I die
for hunger? Luk 15. 17. (to note, that in the house and presence of God, there
is plenty enough for the meanest person therein; but out of the Note.
house of God, there is all want and extreme misery) so whereas Hagar and
Ishmael had sufficient of all things in Abraham's house (which then was the
house and Church of God) being cast out of the same, they were in a short time
ready to die for want of water: Genesis 21. 15.

If then it be so great a matter for a subject to be banished from his
Prince-Court and presence; and for a child to be thrust out of his earthly
fathers house, to see his face no more: oh how great a thing is it, to be
excluded from the Court of God, and from the most comfortable light of his
countenance in heaven! It is an heavy thing, to be banished from the house and
presence of God, as he reuealeth himself in his word, upon the earth. Before
the law it was the greatest punishment (almost) that could be in this world:
Gen 3. 23. and 4. 14. and 17. 14. and even upon the giving of the law: Exodus
12. 15. 19. and after the giving of the law: Exodus 30. 33. and 38. as also in
the time of the Gospel: 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 1. Cor. 5 3. etc. 1. Tim 1. 20. In
which two last places, the heaviness of this thing (I mean to be shut out
from or thrown out of the house and presence of God here upon the earth) is
much aggrauated by this phrase, of delivering over, or giving up to satan: For
do we not thereby plainly see, that they that are so cut off from the house,
and shut out of the presence of God, are immediately in the hands of satan
himself, and so do continue whiles they continue in that separation from God
and from his house?

For this cause, David by the tyranny of Saul and by the malice of his other
enemies, being banished out of the land, and forced to be absent from the
tabernacle of God, took nothing so grievously as that. He never lamenteth his
absence from his country, from his friends, from his other commodities which
before he had enioied at home: but often times does he most heavily bewail the
other. It is the whole argument of the 84. Psalm: wherein he lamenteth his
misery in that behalf, by consideration of the beauty of Gods tabernacles; by
laying forth his vehement desire thereunto: by preferring the condition of the
sparrowes and swallows before his own: (because they might sing and build
their nests nearer to Gods altar, then he could come) and by laying forth the
happiness of them, that had daily access thereunto, though it were with much
labor, much charge, and much weariness. So it is a good part of the 143.
Psalm, where he professes that his soul did as much thirst after the Lord
(meaning his presence by his word and Sacraments, and other means in his
tabernacle) as thirsty lands did in summer gape (as it w^^e) for showers of
rain: verse 6.

In the two and forty Psalm he uses he same metaphor of thirsting, but with
comparison of himself therein, unto the Harrs desire of water, being chased
with hounds in summer: verse 1. etc. yea, he professes in the next verse, that
in regard of the reproaches of the wicked which vpbraided him with his
banishment from the tabernacle, as though he had trusted in God in vain, and
therefore in scornful manner had said unto him, where is thy God? (as the
Jews did the like to Christ: Mat. 27. 43) he professes (I say) that in regard
of these reproaches his heart was so filled with sorrow, that his tears had
been his meat day and night; yea so abundant and vehement was his grief in that
behalf, that he found his soul even to melt and (as it were) to swoone within
him: in which respect he was feign to comfort the same (as it were) with aqua
composita, and to say thereunto twice in that Psalm: Why art thou cast down my
soul? why art thou so disquieted within me?

Is it so heavy a matter, to be separated here from Gods presence in his house
and Church upon the earth? How heavy then will it be, to be separated from his
presence and dwelling place in the heavens, and from all communion with the
triumphant Church in the heavenly places? Did David find such sorrow, such
grief, such woe, and such pangs in his soul by his absence from Gods earthly
tabernacle? Alas then, what shall be the woe, the gripes of grief, and the
howling of those, that shall be or are already separated from heaven it self in
the world to come? Thus much for the second degree of condemnation, whereby the
better appears how great the privilege of Gods children is, in their freedom
and discharge from the same.

The third degree of condemnation is, that the wicked are not banished only
from the comfortable presence of God, but also from al other good company; yea,
from every thing that is good.

A subject that is banished from the court, and presence of his Prince, and a
son that is banished from the house and presence of his loving Father, may
notwithstanding have some comfort, either at home in his own house, or in any
other place whither he is banished, or within which he is co^fined: either by
some other good company; or by the use of some other commodities; for the
better upholding and supporting of himself. But if besides banishment from his
Princes Court and presence, or from his fathers house and countenance, a man be
also deprived of all other good company, and of all other comforts, how woeful
is his state and condition? What then is to be said of the condemnation of the
wicked in this behalf? in that (I say) they shall not only be cast out from
the presence of God, but also be bereaved of alother good company and comfort.

The fourth degree of condemnation is, that besides the three former, they
shall be awarded the company of the devil, and his Angels. So our Savior
says, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
and his angels. In this description of everlasting fire from the persons to
whom the same belongs, or for whom it is prepared, and who also were first
thrown into it, (namely the devil and his angels) we see who shall be the
companions of those that shall be thrown out from the presence of God.

How fearful this is, let it be considered, by the fearfulness that is in the
best and stoutest hearted men, at the apparition even of blessed spirits. For
to omit how Mary feared when the Angel appeared unto her with the ioyfullest
salutation that ever before she had heard: To omit (I say) her fear, because
she was but a woman: To omit also the fear of the shepherds when the Angel
of the Lord came upon them, etc. and brought them glad tidings that should be
to all people, viz. that unto them was that day borne a Savior, etc. Luke 2.
8. etc. To omit (I say) this also, because they being but simple, poor, and
plain men might (perhaps) be afraid without a cause (and yet who oftentimes of
better courage then such?) How did Cornelius, a valiant man, a man of courage,
a Captain of a band called the Italian band, a devout man also (or a religious
man) and one that feared God, how did he fear, when an Angel came to him, as
he was privately humbled before God in prayer and fasting (oh how few such, or
other great persons in these days are so exercised in their private closets!)
and when the said Angel called him by his name, Cornelius? Acts 10. 3. 4.

Neither only is the apparition of spirits indeed thus fearful to flesh and
blood, even to the stouest: but also the very suspicion and imagination of a
spirit is very fearful: not to one alone, but to many together.

When all the disciples saw our Savior come walking upon the sea, in the night
toward their ship, how were they troubled; how cried they out for fear, saying
(according to their imagination) It is a spirit? Mat. 14. 26. After that also,
how were the said disciples abashed and afraid (when in the mean time by the
company and sermons, and works of our Savior they should have gathered more
strength) supposing only they had seen a spirit. Luke 24. 37. because Christ
came unto them, and stood in the midst of them, all the doors of the house
(where they were) being fast shut? Was the apparition of a blessed spirit from
heaven, sent with most comfortable message so fearful to them before
mentioned? Was the bare supposition and imagination of a spirit, so fearful
to all the disciples, not once but twice? Alas then, how fearful shall it
be to the wicked in the end to have the company of no other, but of all
unclean spirits, even of all the devils in hell!

David cries out, as bewailing his condition, that in the time of his exile he
was not only banished from the Courts of God, and from the tabernacles of God,
and from those ioifull assemblies that sometimes he had had in those places,
but was also forced to dwell for a time with the wicked: Woe is to me (says
he) that I remain in Meshech and dwell in the tents of Kedar^ My soul has
too long dwell with him that hates peace: Psalm. 120. 5. 6. Indeed the company
of the wicked here is the porch or portall of hell: and the wicked are called
devils, Ioh. 6. 70. yet they are but young devils and little devils, in respect
of the devils in hell, and some of them are sometimes by the mercy of God made
Saints. If therefore David thought it so woeful, and if it be indeed so woeful
to be but in the porch or portall of hell, and to dwell but a little, and as it
were to lodge a night or two by the way in our pilgrimage here, and our
journey toward heaven, in an Inn with young and little devils; how woeful may
the wicked think it will be to dwell always withal the great and master
devils in hell it self* Truly how lightly soever they account it now, because
they do but slightly think of it, yet one serious thought of it would make
their hair stand upright on their heads. If it do not, the less fear they
find by hearing and thinking of it here, the more shall their fear be when
they shall see this foul company, and none but them.

The fifth degree of condemnation is, that besides all hitherto said of this
argument, they shall be thrown into a place of utter darkness, Matthew. 8. 12.
and 22. 13. and 25. 30. And indeed how can it be otherwise? For since God is
light, and in him dwells no darkness, 1. Ioh. 1. 5. and seeing he dwells
in the light that none can attain unto, 1. Tim. 6. 16. and seeing Christ Jesus
also is the Sun of righteousness, and the light of the world, (as before we
have heard) therefore it cannot be, but that such as are shut out from the
presence of God, and of Christ, are also in extreme darkness. As also the
wicked do here love darkness more then light, Ioh. 3. 19. so it is meet they
should afterward be committed to a place of darkness. Therefore also when the
wicked are here converted, they are said to be turned from darkness to light,
Act. 26. 18. and to be called out of darkness into his marvelous light, 1.
Pet. 2. 9.

How fearful in this behalf the condemnation of the wicked shall be, may
appear if we shall consider both that which I have before written in Chap. 10.
of the spiritual darkness and blindness of the wicked in this world, as also
that which we daily see of outward darkness here, and of the uncomfortable
condition of such as are either blind, and so live continually in darkness,
or that are cast into prisons and dungeons, where they are deprived of all
light.

The sixth degree of condemnation is, that besides all the former points, the
wicked shall have most exquisite, yea unspeakable torments, yea such as no
heart of man can conceive. These are expressed by the names of such things in
this world as are to flesh and blood most fearful.

For in those places before alleged, Matthew 8. 12. and 22. 13. and 25. 30. the
place of condemnation is not only called a place of utter darkness, but a
place also where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

It is also called by the name of death, Romans 6. 23. yea also of the second
death, Revel. 2. 11. And this second death is ten thousand times worse then
the first death, I mean then the separation only of the soul and the body:
yea it were better ten thousand times that the soul and the body of the wicked
should die and utterly perish and come to nothing, (as the life and body of
beasts do) then that they should be tormented as they shall be.

Therefore it is called by the name both of the second death, and also of fire,
even of the lake that burns with fire and brimstone: Reu. 19. 20. and 20. 10.

It is likewise called a worm and a fire, Marc. 9. 44. etc. where in verse 43.
the word hell and sire are joined together.

How intolerable also the pains and torment of hell be, it appears by that
of the rich man's soul in hell, Luke 16. 23. 24. where it is said, that he
being (touching his soul) in hell, and seeing Lazarus a far off in Abraham's
bosom (mark this word afar off, against the Papists, that will have
Abraham's bosom to be near unto hell, and a part of hell it self) he cried
out to Abraham, that Lazarus (to whom before he had denied all comfort, and to
whom his dogs had showed more mercy then himself) he cried (I say) that
Lazarus might be sent to dip the top of his finger in water for the cooling of
his tongue. Why so? Because (said he) I am tormented in this flame. Such then
were his pains and torments, that if he might have had but a little ease for
one member, he would have accounted it an exceeding favor. Such also shall be
the torments of all other the wicked that shall be condemned. And although the
torments of condemnation be thus described by these fearful things in this
life: yet the truth is, that no fearful thing in this world, can sufficiently
express the torments of the wicked in the world to come. The most exquisite
torments that ever have been devised by any merciless, cruel, and savage
tyrants for the bodies of men, hanging, burning, either all at once or by
piece-meales, renting in pieces with wild horses, pinching the flesh off with
hot irons, boiling in lead, sawing, broiling upon gridyrons, and such like, all
these (I say) are but sports, pastimes, delights and pleasures, in respect of
the torments to come in an other world.

All these degrees of condemnation hitherto spoken of, are the more, because
the said condemnation so described shall be everlasting, without end, without
any mitigation: that is signified by the worm that dies not, and by the fire
that never goes out: Mark. 9. 44. etc. as also by the answer before spoken of,
of Abraham to the rich man tormented in hell: therefore also we heard it before
called everlasting fire, and everlasting pain: Mat. 25. 46. and everlasting
perdition, 2. These. 1. 9.

Yea, so far is the condemnation of the wicked from all end and mitigation,
that when all other things shall have a kind of end, and when the souls of the
wicked shall be joined to their bodies in the day of judgment, then likewise
shall their torments be increased.

This much amplifieth all the former. It is much to have the frowning
countenance, and wrathful sentence of God: to be banished from his gracious
presence, and to be deprived of all good company, and of all other good things:
to be made a companion of devils: and to be cast into the place of utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and there to be tormented
with a worm gnawing, and a fire burning: all these things (I say) are very
much, though they should be but for a time: but never to have God to look
cheerfully upon them, or to speak comfortably unto them: to be banished from
his gracious presence for ever: never to have any good company, nor any other
comfortable thing: to be always companion with the devils, and to be thrown
into the place of darkness, from whence there is no hope of any redemption:
and to be tormented unspeakably for ever, without any mitigation: to have a
worm always gnawing within, and never dying, and a fire ever burning without,
and never consuming or wasting: alas, alas, what ear does not tingle to hear,
what heart does not quake and ache, tremble and shiuer to think upon it? Yea,
who quaketh not, who in every member and joint trembles not to consider of it,
though himself be assured of freedom and discharge from it? How then shall
they quake, quiver, and tremble, that shall indeed be so condemned? All
misery and punishments here are somewhat mitigated to him that suffers them,
by hope of an end at the last, if not before, yet at least, in the hour of
death.

The hardest apprentiship that ever was, with the most cruel and merciles
master, after the longest time served had some comfort by thinking the time
thereof to come, to be shorter than that that was past. The like may besaid of
any other bondage: But in the condemnation of the wicked, the longest time is
always behind. A beginning there is, but no ending. An hundred years past a
thousand follow: and so million after million. O doleful, o woeful, o fearful
condition!

When Saul heard of the loss of this life the day following, not by the spirit
of truth, but by the father of lies satan himself, not transformed into an
Angel of light, but only appearing in the habit of a Prophet, He fell
straightway all along upon the earth, and was sore afraid because of those
words, so that there was no strength in him, neither could any body (almost)
comfort him: 1. Sam. 28. 17. Belshazzars countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him (at the sight of the hand writing upon the wall, writing
indeed his present overthrow, yet not to his understanding, till Daniel did
read and interpret the said writing) that the ioints of his loins were loosed,
and his knees smote one against the other: Dan. 5. 6. His bones (as we say) did
rattle in his skin, because from the guiltiness of his conscience, he feared
the worst, though as yet he knew nothing. How then (think we) was he perplexed
when the sentence of God therein contained, was executed upon him? Felix
trembled to hear Paul but dispute (or preach) of righteousness, temperance,
and the judgment to come: Acts 24 25. Alas then, how do al those tremble and
gnash their teeth, that do already feel the execution of the sentence of
condemnation in their souls? And how shall they, and all other the wicked,
quake and tremble in the day of judgment, when they shall receive the full
sentence of condemnation against their souls and bodies for ever and ever,
without reuocation, without mitigation?

The more fearful that thus it appears and is manifest shall be the
condemnation of the wicked that die in their sins; the greater privilege,
prerogative and dignity it shall be to the children of God to be freed and
discharged from the same. I might have illustrated all before spoken of
condemnation, especially of the extreme punishment of the wicked, with the
perpetuity thereof, by the extremity of diverse bodily pains here in this life;
even in some one member, and but for a time: as of extreme toothache: of the
strangullion: of the stone in the bladder, or in the kidneys: of the gout; of
the colic: and such like. For if these things but in one part of the body,
and but for a time be so intolerable, what (alas) shall we think of the
everlasting torments of every member of the body and soul, and the whole man
for ever and ever? But it shall be sufficient, thus only to have pointed at
these things. Thus much for the first benefit of the children of God in the
life to come, viz. for their freedom from condemnation.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the inheritance of the children of God, in the life to come.

THe second benefit of the children of God in the life to come, is, that they
shall be all heirs, and have a great inheritance. So says the Apostle If we
be children, we are also heirs; even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ: Romans 8. 17. and again, If thou be a son, thou art also an heir of
God through Christ: Galat. 4. 7. So Peter ioineth together the work of our
regeneration, and the hope of an inheritance: 1. Pet. 1. 4.

Touching this inheritance, as before we noted certain degrees of that
condemnation from which we heard the children of God to be freed, the better
to set forth their dignity in that their deliverance; so let us now also
observe certain circumstances pertaining to this inheritance; for the better
illustration of the dignity of the children of God, in respect of the said
inheritance.

Although therefore we did not before note the placing of the reprobate at the
left hand of Christ, as any degree of their condemnation, because it is not
always a dishonor to be placed at the left hand of Princes (in which respect
James and John desired to be placed the one at the right hand, the other at the
left hand of Christ) yet to be placed at the right hand of Christ Jesus, when
he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, may well be accounted for a
principal honor of them that shall be so placed.

So great an honor is it to be placed at the right hand of mortal Princes, that
by a metaphor taken from the same, the whole exaltation, and glorification of
Christ Jesus is often described and expressed by sitting at the right hand of
his Father. Is it not then a great honor for all the elect, at the day of
judgment to be placed at the right hand of Jesus Christ, when he shall come
in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels?

The second circumstance of the inheritance of Gods children, is contrary to
the first degree before mentioned, of the condemnation of the wicked: viz. that
Christ Jesus shall grace them with a most amiable countenance, and most
graciously speak unto them; Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. The favor of a
King is like the dew upon the grass, Prou. 19. 12. How great then is the
favor of God? David opposes the light of Gods countenance to all worldly
prosperity desired by the greatest sort of men, and professes that he had, or
should have more joy of heart thereby, than the men of the world have in the
day of their harvest, and when their corn and wine do increase, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

Both these circumstances are the more, because Christ himself shall so place
them at his right hand, and so speak unto them publicly, in the presence of
his Father, and before all men, and angels good and bad; even before all their
adversaries. The more publicly, and in the greater company that the Lord
Cromwell did grace his old benefactor Francis Frescobald, the Italian merchant,
first in the open street in London, dismounting from his horse, embracing him
most familiarly, speaking most kindly unto him, and inuiting him the same day
to dinner, before all the Lords, and other attendants upon him: and afterward,
at his coming to dine with him, embracing him again, and speaking also most
kindly as before, and declaring to the Lord Admiral and other nobles with him,
what the said Frescobald had done for him, and at dinner placing him next to
himself: The more publicly (I say) and before the more company that the said
Lord Cromwell did so grace that poor decayed merchant, the greater honor it
was to the said merchant to be so graced. How great then shall the honor of
all Gods children be, to be placed at the right hand of Jesus Christ, and to
be so graciously spoken unto by Jesus Christ himself, in the presence of all
the world, before all kings and princes, as well as before all other the meaner
sort of men: as likewise before his own Father: before all his holy angels:
and before the devils themselves, the whole army of hell?

The third circumstance concerning the inheritance of the children of God, is,
that they shall have a more near communion with God, and with Christ Jesus
himself, than ever before they had: viz. not only spiritual, but also local,
being there where himself is in all glory and majesty. This is signified by
the words of our Savior before alleged, Come ye blessed of my father, etc.
The same is likewise plain by the prayer of our Savior for all Gods children,
Father I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I
am, that they may behold my glory, etc. Ioh. 17. 24.

It is a great honor for a subject, to be employed in any service of his
prince; but it is much more, to be always near unto him, in his chamber of
Presence, and in his Privy chamber. Who therefore can express the honor of
Gods children, to be in heaven it self, Gods Privy chamber, and always to
behold his glory and excellency? But of this further communion of Gods children
with God and Christ Jesus, and so consequently also with the holy angels, more
shall be spoken afterward.

In the mean time, this shall suffice to have been spoken of these
circumstances, of the inheritance of Gods children.

Now to speak more largely of the said inheritance it self, and so to come
even to the more ample declaration of their foresaid communion with God, let us
understand, the said inheritance, to be the greater honor because it is called
the inheritance of God: and men thereby, in the two first places before
alleged, are called the heirs of God. The greater that any man is in the
world, the greater thing it is to be heir unto him; how great a thing then is
it to be the heir of God?

Herein the children of God differ from the children of men, and of great men
in the world; even from the sons of the mighty* as they are called, Psalm.
29. 1. For there is no man so great or mighty, but that having many children,
there is but one amongst them all accounted the heir. But the children of God,
though they be many even as the stars of heaven, and the sand by the
seashore: Genesis 15. 5. and 22. 17. yet they are all heirs.

Yea, whereas great men, having both sons and daughters divide their
inheritance (for the most part) only amongst their sons: (though also of
many sons they make but one heir) and do but give portions of money to their
daughters: here the daughters of God shall be heirs as well as the sons of
God. The reason of this community of inheritance of all the children of God, is
from the like communion betwixt Christ himself and them. The children of men
are all and every one children in themselves; they are not children by the
eldest, or by the heir: but the children of God are not children in
themselves, but only in Christ (as before has been showed) in whom all are
one, both male and female: Galat. 3. 28.

There is yet another difference, viz. that whereas the children of men do
inherit only when their parents die, by whom their inheritance comes unto
them (sometimes the Father, sometimes the mother) all the children of God do
inherit, their father (God himself) living with them for ever.

Again, whereas sometimes the children of men may indeed be all said to be
heirs; yet the inheritances of them are distinguished one from another, the
eldest having his inheritance by himself, and every one of the other having
his several inheritance: the eldest being sometimes heir to all the freeland:
and the youngest to all the copy hold, etc. But the children of God are all
heirs of one and the same inheritance: yea, they are heirs (as I said)
annexed with Christ Jesus, the only son of God by nature: Even by him are
they heirs (through adoption in him) of the same inheritance whereof he is
heir: in which respect their inheritance is called the kingdom of Christ and
of God: Ephesians. 5. 5. Neither can it be otherwise, since before we heard they are
made one with Christ, and in Christ, etc.

This is a great dignity: This is a wonderful prerogative: and such as is the
perfection of all other, and wherein all the former (or the most of them) do
cease. Yea, this is such, that the very Angels of heaven are said (as it were)
to put forth their necks and (in some sort) to stretch out themselves to behold
it: 1. Pet. 1. 12.

It is much that before we heard, that many of Christ's titles are communicated
to the children of God: but this is much more: namely that the inheritance of
Christ, even the kingdom of God in heaven is theirs. For herein especially
does that their kingly dignity (before handled) consist, as before has been
showed.

This inheritance was typically fore-signified, and shadowed out to the
Israelites, by the land of Canaan: and therefore it is called by this name of
an inheritance: which properly signifies a division made by lot. So is the
future condition of Gods children called, that it might the better appear to
have been before represented by the land of Canaan, which according to the
commandment of God, Numb. 26. 55. and 33. 54. was indeed by Lot divided when
the Israelites came to the possession of it: Josh. 14. 2. etc.

So would the Lord have that land to be divided, that the bestowing thereof upon
the Israelites, might be imputed only to Gods goodness, not to any merit or
worthiness of their own. For The lot being wholly disposed according to the
pleasure of the Lord: Pro. 16. 33. what merit can there be imagined for any
thing that falls thereby? So the Lord would much more teach them, that if the
type were without respect of any worthiness in them, much more the kingdom of
heaven shadowed out by the type was to be imputed to the only free and gracious
gift of God: Romans 6. 23. where the word translated the gift of God, signifies
the free gift of God, or a gift of the free grace of God. This does not a
little amplify and increase the dignity of the children of God. The greater
gifts that a Prince gives freely unto any subject, the more does such a Prince
honor such a subject: How great a grace then and dignity is this, for the
children of God to be heirs of the kingdom of God, only by the grace and free
gift of God? without any price given for it? without any merit, desert, and
worthiness of it?

As the Apostle Peter does appropriate this inheritance only to them Whom God
the Father of his rich mercy has begotten again: 1. Pet. 1. 3. 4. so does
our Savior by one sentence twice with great vehemence repeated to Nicodemus,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God: and the second time, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. 3. and 5. And again our Savior says not, Fear not
little flock, it is the Fathers pleasure to give a kingdom; but he puts in
the Pronowns, your, and you, saying, It is your Fathers will to Note.
give you a kingdom: Luke 12. 32. Where the words. your Father, have also
relation only to them that are his children, and which may call God their
Father. Therefore also they that are so borne again, are called by our
Savior, the children of the kingdom, Matt. 13. 38.

As it is high treason for any man to say that he is heir apparent to an
earthly king, if he be not of the blood royal; so and much more is it high
treason against the king of heaven and earth, for any man to boast that he
hops for the kingdom of heaven, which is not of the blood royal (that I may
so speak) of God himself: that is, which by regeneration is none of Gods
children.

As in the time of Ezra, after the return of the people from captivity, some
that would have been priests, sought their writings of the generalogies, and
could not be found, and were therefore put from the priesthood: or rather, they
were kept from it: Ezra 2. 62. So, whosoever they be that would have this
inheritance, if by searching and examining their evidences by the word of God,
they shall not find themselves to be newborn of God, they shall be sure to
be kept from the kingdom of God.

This inheritance is Crowne-land; even such as is annexed to Christ's own
crown, and cannot be alienated from it; no not by lease, or for any term of
years: therefore none can have it, but such as are members of Christ, and made
one with Christ. As it is said, that God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. so it may be
said, that neither God nor Christ can give this inheritance to any, but only
to them, that being incorporated into Christ, and so made members of Christ,
are also the children and heirs of God.

When the mother of James and John petitioned to our Savior for her said two
sons, that one might sit at his right hand, the other at his left hand in his
kingdom: that is, (because she dreamed Christ's kingdom to be an earthly
kingdom) that they might be the two second persons next to himself in his
kingdom; one (as it were) the Lord Chancellor, and the other Lord Treasurer:
our Savior answered (after some questions had with them) that to sit at his
right hand, and at his left hand, was not his to give: but should be given to
them for whom it was prepared of his father, Matthew. 20. 20. etc. What meant our
Savior by this answer? Even this, not only that he came to be an example and
pattern of humility, and therefore not to take upon him the bestowing of
earthly offices and dignities: neither only, that to confer or bestow these
preferments of sitting at his right hand, and at his left hand in his kingdom
in heaven, was not in him, as he was only man (in which respect he denies
himself to know the day and hour of his second coming, Mar. 13. 32. and in
which respect only it seemed that this woman with her two sons came unto
Christ, scarce so much as dreaming of his divine nature, and of his kingdom in
heaven) but he also means, that the distinction Note.
and degrees of honor in the kingdom of heaven being already disposed by his
Father, viz. before all worlds, when he made his general decree of election
unto salvation, it was not now in his power to alter or change the same. This
(I say) seems plainly to have been the meaning of Christ, by the opposition
which he makes betwixt the denial thereof, to be in his hands, and the
acknowledgement of the giving thereof to them, for whom it was prepared of his
Father. For so he signifies, that the counsel of God touching the sitting at
the right hand or at the left hand of Christ, should stand, and could no more
be altered by Christ himself, than the general decree of God, of election and
reprobation. If then Christ cannot alter the decree of God, touching the
particular place of any in the kingdom of God, by giving that degree of honor
to one that the Father had prepared for another; how much less can he give
the inheritance of his kingdom generally to any, for whom God has not
prepared the same?

To speak yet more of this inheritance of the children of God, as it is said
of Absalom (in respect of his beauty) that there was none in all Israel, to be
so much praised for beauty, as Absalom, and that from the sole of the foot to
the crown of the head, there was no blemish in him: 2. Sam. 14. 25. so it may
be said of this inheritance touching the perfection thereof, that amongst all
the inheritances of the world, there is none so much to be praised as this
inheritance (whereof now we speak) of the children of God: because from one end
to another, and from one side to another, there is no blemish in it. That which
David speaks of his portion, as he was one of Gods children, may all and
every one of Gods children say of this inheritance. The lines are fallen unto
me in pleasant places, yea I have a fair heritage: Psalm. 16. 6.

All this is manifest by those four attributes whereby Peter describes and
commends this inheritance, calling it immortal, undefiled, not withering,
reserved in heaven: 1. Pet. 1. 4. Of what inheritance, of what kingdom in all
the world, can all these things, or any of these things be truly spoken?

Neither is this inheritance thus commended in respect of it self only, but
also in respect of all things therein. For are not all things in this
inheritance, immortal, undefiled, not withering, and heavenly?

To speak particularly and briefly of the former commendations: First it is
called immortal, because it is everlasting and without end, as before we heard
the condemnation of the wicked to be. Though it have a beginning, yet it shall
continue for ever. How long soever any shall be in possession thereof, yet the
time still remaining, shall be more then the time past.

What an excellent commendation this is, may (without further amplification)
appear by that before spoken of condemnation, in respect of the same
circumstance.

In earthly benefits, as here this commendation for time is set first, so we do
first enquire, how long any thing will last. Every thing is accounted the
better, the more durable the same is. Of evils, the longer is more feared and
shunned: of good things, the longer is more desired and labored for. In
question of leases, other things being like, the longer is more worth. Lands in
fee simple to a man and his heirs are more esteemed, then leases or other
chattels.

As this inheritance is immortal in it self, so it shall be to the children
of God, for whom it is prepared; and that are borne unto it: because they also
shall be made immortal, as well in their bodies, as they are already in their
souls: that so they may enjoy it for ever in their own persons for their
bodies and for their souls: and not in the person of any heirs or successors:
as it is in the inheritances of this world. But of this more afterward, upon
the second verse.

The second attribute, undefiled, signifies that there is no spot or blemish
in it. Yea, as the original word being substantiuely taken (as sometimes it is)
signifies a certain gemme or precious stone, that is incapable of any
pollution, and that being cast into the fire, will neither be corrupted nor
wasted; so may it be said of this inheritance. Yea, it is so pure, that as it
is said of Ireland, that it will not suffer any toad, snake, adder, or any
other venomous thing in it, so this inheritance will not admit or entertain
any thing, that is polluted or defiled. This I say brethren (says Paul) that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God: neither does corruption
inherit incorruption: 1. Cor. 15. 50.

This attribute seems to be a reason of the former. For as any thing is pure
and undefiled, so it is also durable. And that which is altogether pure and
undefiled, is also altogether durable, that is, immortal, and everlasting.

This word also being understood of this inheritance not only in it self, but
in respect of the heirs that shall enjoy it, imports that when once they
shall come to the full possession thereof, they shall be altogether freed from
sorrow and labor, whereto here they were subject, so long as themselves were
defiled, and so long as they lived here, where all things by them are polluted
and defiled. This is manifest by the answer of one of the Elders unto John
touching them which he had seen arraied in long white robes. These are they
(says the Elder) which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
long robes, and have made their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb (that
is, which are cleansed of all their pollution, and are become undefiled) then he
adds (as an appendix and consequence of the former) They shall hunger no
more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them: nor any heat
(viz. to scorch or hurt them) for the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne, shall govern them, and shall lead them to the lively fountains of
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: Revel. 17. 13. 14.
16. 17. So we are taught that in this inheritance there is no defect, no sorrow
or grief. What kingdom in the world is comparable? What King ever was there,
that sometimes has not wanted? and that sometimes has not mourned and wept?

Touching labor both of sin it self, and of all afflictions and misery by
sin, another voice likewise from heaven said unto John, Writ^, Blessed from
hencefort (or presently) are they which die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors: Revel. 14 13. In this inheritance therefore, there shall be no
sorrow, no grief, no pain: not so much as a tooth, or a little finger shall
ache. All shall be ease and comfort. Sin the cause of all want, grief and
pain being taken away, all effects also must cease. Is there any other such
inheritance in all the world? What a singular privilege therefore is this of
this inheritance to be so undefiled, and whereof likewise the heirs
themselves shall be undefiled?

The third attribute (not withering) is added, as for further direct
commendation of the inheritance it self, so likewise to amplify the first
attribute, immortal, by a comparison of the less. For it signifies that this
inheritance shall not only be immortal, but that also it shall not so much as
wither, or rather (according to the natural signification of the word) that it
cannot be made to wither. As the original word is sometime taken, for a kind of
flower, which will never wither (like to that amongst us which is called semper
viuens, or the everlasting flower, because it being gathered and kept in the
house, ever without water or any other moisture, it retains the beauty it had
at the time of gathering) so the beauty and glory of this inheritance, shall
never fade, wither, or decay; but continue the same for ever, in the whole, and
in every part, that it was at their first entrance, that shall be heirs thereof.
It shall not lose so much as one leaf, neither shall any leaf grow lithe,
and so hang down from the fellows. What an excellency is this? What kingdom
was there ever in the world, but that was in time impaired and blemished,
either by loss of some part thereof, or by not retaining the glory it had at
the first? How was the glorious kingdom of Israel, immediately after Salomons
time maimed by the falling away of ten tribes at once from the house of David?
How was the kingdom Judah afterward defaced, partly by often giving the
treasure of the Lord, to make peace with foreign nations, and partly and
principally in the captivity by the Babylonians, when their city Jerusalem
(before, the glory of the world) was sacked and destroyed, their noble and most
famous temple burnt with fire, and their princes and nobles partly slain, and
partly in most slavish manner carried into a strange land?

I allege no particular Scriptures for proof of these things, because the
whole book of Ieremiahs Lamentations does most lamentably describe them.

The same may be said of the kingdom of Babel, of the kingdom of the Medes
and Persians, of the kingdom of Greece, of the great empire of Rome; all which
are not only wasted and decayed, but also utterly consumed, the stamp only
of the Roman empire yet remaining.

The fourth and last attribute, reserved or preserved, notes the safety of
this inheritance, illustrated or confirmed by the place, in heaven. For all
things in heaven are out of danger and gunshot of any enemies whatsoever:
Matthew. 6. 20. That attribute (reserved) being so illustrated or confirmed by
the place, is also amplified by the persons for whom it is so reserved: viz.
for us: that is, for them whom before he had said God the Father had begotten
again, and made his children. The attribute it self (reserved) noting the
safety of this inheritance, is of the time perfectly past, and so insinuates
that this inheritance has Note.
bin kept a long time for the children of God, according to the words of our
Savior, saying, it was prepared from the foundation of the world for them that
were blessed of his Father, Mat. 25. 34. and according to the words of the same
Apostle in the end of the very next verse, where he calls the said
inheritance, the salvation which is prepared to be showed in the last time.
Since therefore this inheritance has been so long kept for the children of God,
they may the better assure themselves of it. For the long keeping of any thing
for another, does the better testify the full purpose of the keeper, that such
shall have it, as for whom he has kept it so long. Daily experience confirms
this, that it needs no other proof.

The place, in heaven does not only further confirm the said safety, but is
also a reason of the former three attributes. For as all things in earth are
mortal, defiled, and do daily wither, so all things in heaven are immortal,
undefiled, and free from all withering. Yea, it further commends the
excellency of this inheritance, as showing, that as high as the heaven is
above the earth, so and much more excellent is this heavenly inheritance, then
all earthly inheritances.

The pronoune us, referred to the work of regeneration before spoken, does
plainly note (as I said) a special reservation and preparation (long before,
even before all worlds) of the said inheritance, only for them that are
regenerated, and so made the children of God. What a great benefit is this,
that we shall have it, all of us, and not any other? even we that are the
sons of the free woman, borne by promise: and that none coming of the bond
woman, and borne after the flesh: Galat. 4. 23. shall be heirs (or have any
part of this inheritance) with us? Genes. 21. 10. The which is also manifest by
the constancy of Isack in blessing Jacob, without any reuocation or division
afterward of the said blessing betwixt Jacob and Esau: without any repentance
(I say) either as touching the whole blessing, or touching any part thereof,
though Esau sought the repentance of his father in that behalf with tears:
Heb. 12. 17. But of this propriety of this inheritance to the children of God
only, sufficient has been said before.

Now that our comfort may yet be the more touching the said inheritance, let us
observe, that the Apostle says not only that that inheritance is so kept for
us, but that also in the very next verse, viz. 5. he says, that albeit we are
here in earth in the midst, and thickest of our enemies (compassing us about
like mighty bulls of Bashan, and like dogs: Psalm. 22. 12. and 16, and as thick
as bees: Psalm. 118. 12.) and albeit in that respect, whiles we thus hue amongst
our enemies, we are subject to many dangers, yet we are as safely kept, and as
it were guarded (even walled round about) not by Angels alone, but by God
himself; yea, the better to assure us that we shall be as safely kept here in
earth (notwithstanding all our enemies) for that inheritance, as that is kept
for us, he says that we are kept by the power of God. So says our Savior,
that he will give his sheep eternal life, and that they shall not perish,
neither that any man shall pluck them out of his hands, because the father
that has given them unto him is greater then all, and no man shall pluck them
(by any violence) out of his hand: Ioh. 10. 28. 29.

So then the sheep of Christ, and children of God, are in the hands and custody
of God the Father, and God the Son. They may therefore as well doubt of the
power of God, as of their preservation for the inheritance now spoken of. O
inseparable happiness! Without the former preservation of this inheritance for
us, it is small comfort to hear it to be immortal, undefiled, and not
withering: yea, the more excellent that this inheritance is noted to be by
those three attributes, the more would be our grief, if it were not safely
kept for us. What comfort also should we have by all the four former
commendations, if we our selves might in the mean time perish, and miscarry?
Alas what comfort had king Edward the fifth by this great kingdom, when
himself was in the custody of his most wicked uncle, Richard the third, that
most unnaturally and horribly murdered him and his younger brother?

Besides all before written of this inheritance, the excellency thereof is laid
forth further in Scripture by phrases of such things, as are in greatest
regard, here upon earth: and chiefly by such things as belong to kings and
kingdoms.

Therefore it is said (as before we heard) that we shall be clothed in white:
that we shall have crowns upon our heads: and that we shall sit upon thrones,
yea, on the throne of Christ Jesus himself. Because kings also fare daintily,
therefore it is said, that the children of God shall eat of the fruit of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God: Ren. 2. 7. and of
the Manna, that is hidden. Revel. 2. 17.

As also in the Courts of Princes there is the voice of singing men and women:
2. Sam. 19. 32. so in heaven all the Saints, and all the Angels shall sing a
new song, and the song of Moses and of the Lamb: Revel. 5. 9. 10. 11. and 14.
3. where there is mention of harpes, and of a new song; yea, such a song that
no man could learn, but the elect bought from the earth.

Whereas Princes also dwell in stately and princely palaces: lift up thy eyes
to heaven, behold the beauty and glory thereof: and consider whether the inside
of the greatest and most sumptuous palaces in all the world, with all their
rich and sumptuous furniture, be comparable to the outside of heaven. If the
outside be so beautiful and glorious, are not the inner parts where God
himself with all his Angels are in all glory, much more beautiful and
glorious?

How does David often times commend the house of God upon earth? Does he not
speak of the tabernacle before the temple was built, by way of admiration: O
Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy tabernacles! Psalm. 84. 1. Does not he
therefore pronounce them Blessed that might dwell in his house? verse 4. yea
does he not say, that a day in the courts of God, is better then a thousand
elsewhere? and that for his part, though he were then anointed heir apparent
to the crown and diadem of the kingdom of Israel, yet he had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of his God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness? verse 10. If he thought the house of God so amiable upon earth,
which is (as it were) but the gatehouse of heaven, how amiable thought he
heaven it self to be?

Glorious things (says the Prophet) are spoken of thee thou city of God:
Psalm. 87. 3. what city of God? The earthly Jerusalem. What glorious things are
spoken of that city? That it is built as a city compact together in it self,
that thereunto the tribes of the Lord go up, according to the testimony to
Israel, (or of the Israelites) to praise the name of the Lord, and that there
are thrones set for judgment, the thrones of the house of David: Psalm. 122. 3.
4. 5. Were these and many other the like glorious things spoken of the city of
God, and of Jerusalem upon earth? What then may be said of the City of God, and
of the Jerusalem of God in heaven? That was but a type; this is the thing
signified. That was corruptible, and is now destroyed; this abides for ever:
That was an habitation for a time for corrupt and mortal men; this is an
everlasting habitation of God himself in his glory, for all the Angels, and
for all the Saints purged of all their sins, and made glorious, without any
spot or wrinkle: That was made by men and with hands; this was made by God
himself without hands. That had goodly towers, almost past numbering: Psalm. 48.
12. this likewise has many dwelling places, more artificially compact together
then all the gorgeous palaces of Jerusalem, or of all the Princes in the world.
Thither the tribes of Israel did go up: but hither all tribes of all nations
under heaven are and shall be gathered to praise the name of the Lord by
singing those songs before spoken of. There were the thrones of David: but here
is the throne of Christ Jesus, for the judgment of all the world. What shall I
say more? When we shall come to this inheritance, though the happy state
thereof be described by such things as are upon earth in greatest price (for
our better capacity) yet for all that, no such things are sufficient to set
forth, and fully to express the thousandth part of the excellency thereof. The
eye of man has not seen, neither has the ear of man heard, neither can the
things enter in to the heart of man, which God has prepared for them that love
him: 1. Cor. 2. 9. What tongue then of man, by any thing, or by all things in
the world is able to express them?

Yea, the truth is, that albeit the future condition of the children of God be
described by white raiment, by eating of the fruit of the tree of life, etc.
and of the Manna that is hidden, etc. yet we shall neither have apparel nor
food for our bodies in the world to come.

As man before his fall, lived by corporal food without apparel, and after
his fall had need as well of apparel to cover his nakedness, as of meat to
nourish him: so ^n the resurrection the children of God shall live without
either of both: without meat, and without apparel.

As concerning marriage it is said, that In the resurrection they neither marry
wives, nor wives are bestowed in marriage, but that they shall be as the Angels of
God in heaven: Mat. 22. 30. so shall it be for meat and apparel. The children
of God shall live forever without both. There shall be neither cold, nor
hunger, nor thirst. Their bodies that are sown natural bodies shall be raised
spiritual bodies. They shall still be bodies, and the same bodies in substance
that they were before: (otherwise how could it be said that they are raised
again?) but touching their qualities, as they shall be changed many other
ways, so also this way, that they shall be spiritual bodies, that is, such as
shall not live by natural meats, as upon the earth they did: but altogether by
the immediate virtue of the spirit, even as the Angels do now live in heaven.

This then in the life to come, shall be the perfection of the children of God,
that they shall need no outward means for their everlasting maintenance and
preservation: as here they did for their maintenance and preservation for a
time: yea, for a short time: which for the shortness thereof, is not worthy to
be called half a time.

So having nothing, they shall be ten thousand times more happy then they were
here having many things. Men are not so happy here by having many things, as
they shall be in the world to come by needing nothing. I mean no such outward
things, as without which before they could not live.

To illustrate this by a familiar similitude: As a man being in poor state and
in a mean calling here in this world (as a shoemaker, a tailer, a husbandman,
or such like) cannot live without such things, as appertain to such trades (as
the shoemaker cannot live without his last, cutting-knife and awle: the tailer
without his sheers and pressing iron: the husbandman without his spade,
mattock, flaile, plough, hedging bill, etc.) but yet the same man being
advanced to wealth and higher calling amongst men, has none of the former
things; and yet is not the worse, but the better, because he needs no such
things now, as without which before he could not live: so the children of God
in the life to come, being in full possession of their inheritance, shall be
never a whit the worse, because they shall have no meat, nor apparel, nor any
other such outward thing for maintenance and preservation of their state as
here they had: but they shall be so much the more happy and blessed, because
they shall need no such thing.

Besides all hitherto spoken of the happy and blessed inheritance of the
children of God in the world and life to come, whereas here they had the
company of men, yea often times of wretched and wicked men, such as of whom they
might cry out, as we hear David did, Woe is to us that we have them in our
company: Our souls have too long dwelt with them: in the life to come, in
stead of such company, they shall have the society and fellowship of the
blessed Angels, the least whereof is more glorious, then ever was Solomon in all
his roialty; or then are all the kings and Princes in the world, when they show
themselves most in all their kingly and princely robes and glory: yea, then (as
before we heard) they shall have perfect communion with God himself, Father,
Son, and holy ghost: and they shall see Christ Jesus God and man, in all his
glory, and be also themselves in their own persons partaker thereof (as we shall
hear more at large upon the second verse following) they shall (I say) see
Christ Jesus in all his glory, and be themselves partaker thereof, according to
the prayer of Christ himself for them in that behalf: Ioh. 17. 22. 23 24.

How sweet, happy, and comfortable a thing is this! when Peter, James, and John
saw Christ but a little transfigured in the mountain, and Moses and Elias in
some glory talking with him; how were they affected? how were they ravished?
How did Peter say (in the name of the rest) Master it is good for us to be
here: If thou will let us make here three tabernacles, etc? Mat. 17. 4. were
they thus affected? were they so ravished? did they so desire still to dwell in
the mountain, and to enjoy the sight only of Christ and of two of his Saints,
themselves being yet clogged with their sins, and clothed with corruption and
mortality? Oh how happy then shall that day be, when the children of God shall
see Christ Jesus in his perfect glory, accompanied and attended upon with
millions, and many millions of most glorious Angels: and when themselves also
shall have put on incorruption and immortality; and according to their degree
and measure be also crowned with a crown of the same glory!

The Prophet amongst diverse other arguments whereby he provoke all the
servants of the Lord, to praise the name of the Lord, sets down this for
one, that The Lord raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the poor
out of the dung, that he may set him with the Princes, even with the princes
of the people: Psalm 113. 1. etc. Was it, and is it so great a dignity, so great
an honor, so great an advancement, to make poor men to sit with Princes in
this world? What then is the dignity, honor, and advancement of the children of
God, to sit with God and with Christ Jesus, and with all the holy Angels in the
heavens?

It is here also to be considered, that this inheritance is so ample and so
excellent, that how few soever shall enjoy the same, they shall have never a
whit the more: and how many soever Note.
shall be admitted thereunto, none shall have any whit the less. In all
earthly inheritances it is far otherwise: yea clean contrary. The fewer they
are amongst whom any inheritance is divided, the greater is the portion of
every one. And the more the heirs of any inheritance are, (how ample soever
the same be) the less is the portion of every one.

All hitherto said, or which can be said: yea more then any tongue can speak,
or then any heart can conceive, is the more in respect of the certainty thereof.

Nothing in this world, though it be in present possession, is so certain, as
all spoken before of this inheritance. For the certainty of faith is much
greater, then the certainty of sense and humane reason.

This certainty of this inheritance, and of the things before spoken thereof
does not only depend upon that before written of the safety both of the
inheritance it self, and of the children of God to whom the same inheritance
belongs: but also upon diverse express scriptures and upon diverse other
reasons.

Touching scriptures, consider these that follow, and many other the like,
which the mention of these, and diligent reading will bring to thy
understanding. He that does these things (viz. which walks uprightly, works
righteousness, speaks the truth in his heart slandereth not with his tongue;
neither does evil to his neighbor, nor receives a falsereport, that
contemns a vile person, but honors them that fear God: and keeps his
covenant, though it be to his own hinderance, and gives not his money unto
usury, nor takes reward against the innocent) even this man shall dwell in the
Lords tabernacle, and rest in his holy mountain, and shall never be removed:
Psalm. 15. 1, etc. and 24 3. etc. They that trust in the Lord shall be (or are)
as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but remains for ever: Psalm. 125. 1.

Whosoever hears of me (says our Savior himself) these words and does
the same (viz. not perfectly, for that is not possible in this life, but
uprightly, which therefore is placed before Note.
all the particulars following in Psalm. 15. 2.) I will liken him to awise man,
which has built his house upon a rock; and the rain fell, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house. and it fell not, for it
was grounded on a rock: Mat. 7. 24. 25.

I say unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it: Mat. 16. 18.

All that the Father has given unto me, shall come unto me, and he that
comes I cast not away: Ioh. 6. 37. This is the Fathers will that sent me,
that of all that the Father has given unto me, I should lose nothing; but
should raise it up again at the last day: verse. 39. Marie has chosen the good
part, which shall not be taken away from her: Luk 0 42.

If ye do these things, ye shall never fall: 2. Pet. 1 10.

This world passes away and the lusts thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will
of God (that is, which endeavors sincerely to do it, as before was showed)
abides ever: 1. Ioh. 2. 17. This shall suffice for express scriptures. Many
other the like there are, but I leave them to the observation of the diligent
reader.

Touching other arguments: First the immutable constancy of God confirms the
certainty of the inheritance of Gods children. God is not as man, that he should
lie, neither as the Son of man that he should repent: has he said, and shall
he not do it? and has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Number. 23. 19.
1. Sam. 15. 29.

My counsel shall stand: and I will do whatsoever I will, etc. I have
purposed and I will do it: Isai 46. 10. 11. Whom he loves, he loves to the
end: Ioh. 13. 1.

The gifts and callings of God are without repentance: Romans 11. 29. God is
faithful: 2. These. 3. 3. With God is no variableness nor shadow of turning:
James 1. 17. He is faithful that has promised, Heb. 10. 23.

Secondly, in respect of Gods promise, in respect of Gods ^ath, in respect of
the earnest and pledge of Gods spirit given unto us, to seal us to the day of
redemption: in respect of the great price that Christ has given, and God the
father has received for this inheritance for us all that are Gods children: in
respect of Christ's former prayer for it, Ioh. 17. 20. which God the father
always hears, Ioh. 11. 22. and 42. and in respect also of his daily
intercession in the behalf for us at the right hand of God, Romans 8. 34. it
stands not only upon the mercy of God, to make this their inheritance
certain, but also upon his righteousness, 2. These. 1. 7. Heb. 6. 10.

Thirdly, the children of God (all and every one) are the members of Christ's
body, as before has been showed: As therefore it is impossible for any power
to take away any member of Christ's glorified body in heaven; so is it
impossible for any power to take away any member of his mystical body in
earth. The soldiers that brake the bones of the two thieves that were
crucified with Christ, could not for their lives break the bones of Christ,
because it was written: Not a bone of him shall be broken: John 19. 33. 36.
Could not a bone of his natural body be broken by the malice and violence of
all his adversaries, armed with the power of hell it self, and that because
the Scriptures had said in one place that a bone of him should not be broken?
How then shall it be possible for any member of his mystical body coupled
together by the eternal and all powerful spirit, to be altogether taken away
and deprived of that inheritance which God has prepared for it? especially
since the Scripture has not in one place, but in many places said, that not one
of them shall perish? I might add many other arguments for further
confirmation of this certainty: but because the next verse of my text offers
fit occasion to speak again thereof, therefore in the mean time I will
content my self with these. This notwithstanding I may further add for the
better amplification of the dignity of Gods children by this certainty of their
inheritance, viz. that thereby in poverty they are made content: in abundance
they are sober and wary: in the enmity of other against them, they are
courageous and magnanimous: and in afflictions they are cheerful and
comfortable.

By all hitherto said of this inheritance, who sees not the exceeding dignity,
and most honorable condition of the children of God? On the contrary, as the
state of the children of God is the better by their freedom from the
condemnation beforespoken of, although they should never come to this great
inheritance; so the state of all natural and wicked men, is the more base, the
more vile, the more woeful, and the more fearful, because (though it were
possible they should not be so condemned, as before we heard they shall be,
yet) they shall have no part of this inheritance, but shall be utterly cast out
and excluded: Genes. 21. 10. Revel. 22. 15. to whom it shall be said
(whatsoever they shall plead for themselves from their great works of
prophesying in Christ's name, and casting out devils in his name, etc.) I never
knew you, Depart from me ye that work iniquity: Mat. 7. 22. 23. and 25. 12.

Thus much of this inheritance, and of the benefits of the children of God in
the life to come.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the peace of conscience in the children of God.

ALthough I have heretofore spoken of diverse singular benefits of the children
of God both for this life and the life to come; yet there remains one more of
great price and excellency, without which all the former spoken of for this
life or for the life to come, enjoyed in this life, are of less reckoning.
This is peace of conscience accompanied with exceeding joy; of this the Apostle
speaks as of a fruit of forgiveness of sins and justification before
handled. Being justified faith (says he) we have peace toward God: Romans 5.
11. yet it is not only a fruit of justification, but also of all or of most of
all, at least of the knowledge of all or of most of all the benefits before
declared. For not only being justified by faith have we this peace of
conscience, but also by faith being made one with Christ, and in Christ being
quickened and freed from sin, made wise, holy, and righteous, and having
freedom to trade for heaven and heavenly things, being made the children of God
in special manner to glorify God: being so incorporated into Christ, that we
have also communion with the father and the holy ghost: such a communion with
all the three persons as shall continue for ever; such also as is represented
unto us by many excellent similitudes whereby our dignity is made more manifest,
in respect wereof many of Christ's names and honorable titles are communicated
unto us: as also whereby we have liberty with boldness to ask at all times
any thing for us at the hand of God, with better assurance of obtaining it, the
greater the thing is we ask: yea whereby we are freed from all the evils of
this life (as they are evils) and have right to all the blessings of this
life: and lastly whereby we are freed from everlasting condemnation, and are
made heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Having (I say) this manner of communion
with Christ, and all other benefits and prerogatives of the children of God
hither to spoken of, we have this peace of conscience and joy of heart whereof
we are now to speak. So this peace and joy being fruits of all the former
things, I have therefore reserved the handling thereof for this place after all
before written.

From hence, that this peace and joy are fruits of all the former benefits, it
follows, that as we have heard all the former to be proper to the children of
God, so these are in none other to be found but only in them. Where there is
not nor ever was the cause, there cannot be the effect: Secondly, this the
Apostle expressly teaches, opposing these two, one to the other: the spirit of
bondage and the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba father: Romans 8. 15. so
nothing first that the spirit of bondage unto sin, is the spirit offeare:
Secondly, that they that are freed from that spirit of bondage and have
received the spirit of adeption whereby they cry Abb^ father, are freed from
the former spirit of fear. There being therefore such an opposition betwixt
these two, there can be no agreement. As therefore all the children of God are
freed from the spirit of fear, so they only are freed from the spirit of
fear. Hence also it follows, that all the children of God and they only have
this peace whereof we speak. For they that are freed from fear must needs
have peace: and they that are possessed with the spirit of fear, cannot
possibly be at peace. To speak yet further of this peace, let us consider
that the children of God having (as has been showed) Christ himself, they
can no more be without this peace, then without the life, the light, the
knowledge, the wisdom, the holiness, the righteousness, the liberty, and
other things before spoken of. This is evident, because Christ is called the
Prince of peace: Isat 9, 6: can any have the Prince of peace, and be without
peace? Is it not expected that where there is in any company a Justice of
peace, there all should be at peace, and none should break the peace? how
then can we doubt of peace to be there, where there is and dwells the Prince
of peace himself? When Christ was newborn into the world, and lay in his
swaddling clouts, having done nothing in his own person, to wards our
reconciliation and salvation (his in carnation and coming into the world only
excepted) is not this a part of the song, that the Angels with the multitude of
heavenly soldiers did sing. in the hearing of the shepherds, Peace on earth,
as well as glory to God in high? Luke 2. 14. Having now by the blood of his
Cross, made that peace which was then proclaimed: Ephesians. 1. 15. Coloss 1. 20.
how much more may men and Angels, sing and say not only peace in earth, but
also peace in the heart of every child of God? Verily, all the children of God
may the better be at peace in their hearts, because the Prince of peace Christ
Jesus, in his own person has said to his diseiples (and in them to all that
belong unto him) peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the
world gives, give I unto you: let not your hearts be troubled nor grieved:
John 14. 27. It is much that he had said before by his Prophet, The work of
instice shall be peace, even the work of justice and quietness, and assurance
for ever; and my people shall dwell in the tabernacles of peace, etc. Isai 32.
17. 18. But this that he speaks in his own person is much more. As this
peace is thus manifest to belong to all the children of God, so that it is
proper only to them, and that the wicked have no part in it, does further
appear, because the Lord says that there is no peace to the wicked: Isai 48.
22. yea in the same respect (viz.) that there is no peace to the wicked) after
much peace promised to the godly, he compares the wicked to the raging sea,
which cannot rest, and whose waters do cast up (as it were continually) mire
and dirt: Isai 57. 20. Solomon likewise speaking of the wicked and the
righteous (that is, of them that are not and of them that are the children of
God, says, the wicked flees when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold
as a lion: Prou. 28. 1. Eliphaz says that the sound of fear is ever in the
ears of the wicked: and that even in the days of his prosperity the destroier
shall come upon him: Job 15. 20. Job himself likewise speaks thus of the
wicked, terrors shall overtake him as waters: etc. Job 27. 20. The wicked
indeed cry to other and to their own hearts especially, peace peace, as it is
often in the Prophets Ier. 6. 14. and 8. 11. but yet the Lord says (as before
we heard) that there is no peace to the wicked. Yea, how can they have peace,
that know not the way of Peace: Isat 59. 9. and which reject the Gospel of
peace: Ephesians. 6. 15. yea the Prince of peace Christ Jesus himself: and which
always are in contention wounding one another and sowing the seeds of discord
and contention amongst men? As when Iehoram said to Iehu, is it peace Iehu?
Iehu answered, what peace whiles the whoredoms of thy mother Iezabel and her
witchcrafts are yet in great number? 2. Kings 9. 22. so to the wicked that
shall speak of peace, or enquire after peace it may be answered, what peace
can there be unto them, when so many sins as they have committed in great
number remain uncancelled and unpardoned in heaven, and unrepented of in the
earth? This that I speak of the wicked is not only to be understood of the
meaner sort of the wicked, that are bare, poor, without friends, and worldly
delights: but also of Princes and other in great place, that have great
friends, that abound in wealth, that flow in delights of the world, that are
mighty in authority, and want nothing which might seem helpful to them
against fear, or to make for their peace and good security. And this is
manifest by the deadly fear of Nabal, Saul, Belshazzar, and Felix before
spoken of. If therefore the greatest sort of the wicked be subject to such
fears, who notwithstanding have many means in the judgment of men to secure
them against fear, what shall be said of other?

True indeed, the wicked do not always fear thus, because through the extreme
hardness of their hearts (whereunto God in great justice does give them over,
which is the greatest judgment of all other in this life) they are without
feeling of the cause of this fear. Sometimes also when they feel this fear
coming upon them, they labor by the pleasures of this life, or by company, or
by some such means, to shift and shake it off. But alas poor men, they strive
against the stream: yea they have wind and tide against them in that behalf.
The more they put off fear for a time, the stronger it will return in the
end: As a man troubled with the tooth-ake, for the mitigation thereof for the
present takes cold water, which makes the pain more violent afterward: and
as one that has scald his leg rhrusteth the same presently into cold water,
and thereby finds ease of the heat for a while, but afterward feels the
greater and longer pain: so they that by pastimes and pleasures and worldly
business, and good fellowship, put away their fears for a time, do find
them more extreme in the end. It is with such men as with many an ill debtor,
that being arrested by some bay liffe or sergeant, at the suit of some one of
his creditors, to avoid imprisonment does either violently resist, or smites
the bailiffe or the sergeant on the head, that he lays him for dead: or else
gerteth him into a tavern or Alehouse, and there makes him so drunk, that
himself escapes for the present. But what does he help himself by this
means? nothing at all: yea, he plungeth himself into further danger. For in
the end the creditor at whose suit he was arrested, deals the moreseuerely
with him. Even so the wicked that by any sleights pass over their fears, not
by humbling themselves to God the great creditor, to whom all men owe more then
they are able to pay (as has been before said) but by striving and struggling
and by making their fears drunk (as it were) for the present, do thereby in
the end increase their fears, and make them stronger and more violent then
before.

Great especially shall the fears of the wicked be, and far greater then
they shall be able to bear, when God shall come in special Judgment against
them. The Prophet Isay threatens the Jews with such a day of vergeance, as
wherein the wicked should go into holes and caves of the earth from before the
fear of the Lord and the glory of his Majesty, when he should arise to
destory the earth, Isay 2. 19. So the Prophet Osea, denouncing the judgments
of God against the Israelites says, that they should say to the Mountains,
cover us, and to the hills, fall upon us. Hosea 10. 8. According there unto
also our Savior seeing some women to follow him weeping as he went to suffer
upon the Cross for us, bids them not to weep for him, but for themselves
and for their Children: and why? because such days of Gods wrath were coming,
as wherein they (that is, the wicked and such as had persecuted him, yea and
their posterity) should begin to say to the Mountains, fall upon us, and to
the hills, cover us, Luke 23. 30. Most of all shall the fear of the wicked be
in the great day of the Lord. The fear (I say) of Kings of the earth, of
great men, of rich men, and of the chief Captains, and of the mighty men (who
most brag of their courage, and think scorn to be told that they will be
afraid of any thing) and of every bond man etc. the fear (I say) of all these
shall be so great, that when the sun shall be black and the moon turned into
blood, then they shall hide themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the
Mountains, saying to the Mountains and the Rocks, fall on us, and hide us
from the presence of him that s^^tcth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. Reu^lati. 6. 15. But even in this great and fearful day, such shall be
the peace of the Children of GOD, that they shall be bold and not ashamed before
CHRIST Jesus, as this Apostle has said in the former Chapter, verse 28. Oh
unspeakable happiness! Is not therefore the dignity of Gods Children in this
respect exceeding great? This peace of the Children of God shall abide with
them so, that they may always lift up their face and be stable without fear
etc. and that they may be bold, etc. and lie down safely taking their rest:
Job. 11. 15. For the Lord has promised that the Mountains shall remove and
the hills fall d^wn, but that his mercy shall not depart nor his covenant of
peace fall away: Isa. 54. 10: but shall be an everlasting covenant: Ez. 37. 26.

Hither also belongs that of Isay 9. 7. and that before alleged, Isay 32,
17. This also the Apostle teaches in the place before alleged, Romans 8. v. 15.
For in that the Apostle says they have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear again, he plainly notes that they that are now freed from the spirit
of fear shall never fear again. What then, shall the children of God have no
fear at any time? yes, they shall fear God more then before, in a child-like
manner, and so, as that in such fear of God they depart from evil: Job. 1. 8.
and as fear is commended to be the beginning of wisdom: Psalm. 111, 10. and to
be a well pring of life to keep from the snares of death: Pro. 14, 17. and as
the fear of God testifies us to be blessed, and is joined with great delight
in his Commandments: Psalm. 112, 2. and as this fear of God working the
keeping of his Commandments is said to be the whole duty of man: Eecl. 12, 13.
and as we are further exhorted even in respect of the promise of God, to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, and to grow up
to full holiness in the fear of God. 2. Cor. 7, 1. and to fear the Lord and
serve him. 1. Sam. 12, 24. or to serve the Lord in fear: and to rejoice in
trembling. Psalm. 2, 11. and to make an end of our salution with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2, 12. and lastly in consideration as well of his severe
justice in rewarding every man according to his works, as of his fatherly
goodness toward us, to pass the time of our dwelling here in fear: 1. Pet.
1. 17. Thus I say the children of God must fear and do fear. If men be
without this fear, they are secure and without the spirit of adoption: that
is, they are not the children of God, as afterward upon an other occasion we
shall hear again. But as for slavish fear, such as is forbidden, and such as
arises only from regard of Gods power and justice without respect to his mercy
and goodness and such as is repugnant to faith which is the assurance of Gods
favor: Heb. 10. 22. this is also contrary to the peace of Gods children: and
of this it is to be understood that they are delivered out of the hands of
their enemies that they may serve God without fear: Luke 1. 74. But are the
children of God indeed always without this kind of fear, so that they never
have any brunts thereof? I answer, that the children of God are not only spirit
but flesh: there is none of the children of God so regenerate, but that his
regeneration, or rather his sanctification which is (as I said) the slature of
a man regenerate, is here imperfect: although therefore so far forth as they
are sanctified or regenerate (for I will not strive about words nor be too
curious or precise for phrases) they be freed from fear as having received the
spirit of adoption which is contrary to the spirit of bondage and of fear, and
whereby they may be bold to call God their Father, and assure themselves of his
fatherly love toward them; ^et so far forth as they have some relics still
of the old man, so far they cannot but sometime fear, even so fear as fear
is forbidden. Yea, so much the more do they often fear (otherwise then they
should) both Gods justice and also the rage and cruelty of their enemies,
because the unsanctified part does so oppress, and sometime and for a time,
ouerwhel me the sanctified part and the spirit of adoption in them, that they
think themselves not to be regenerate at all, neither ever to have received
the spirit of adoption, but to be mere natural men, and as wicked as any
other. But although they do thus fear, looking only to Gods justice and not
to his mercy, and respecting only the corruption of nature remaining in them,
not the beginnings of grace, whereby they are assured of an inheritance reserved
in heaven for them, as also of their own preservation here by the power of God:
yet even then have they cause not to fear, but to be of good cheer in respect
of those arguments against fear before handled. As the wicked do sometimes
taste the powers of the world to come: Heb. 6. 5. that is, of the ioies of
heaven, so the Lord will have his children to have a little mark of the fears
that are proper only to the wicked, that they may pray the more earnestly for
recovery of their former peace of conscience, as David did: Psalm. 51. 8. and
12. and the (...) to esteem of it when they find it again: as also that after
the recovery of their former peace of conscience they may be more careful to
keep it themselves, and the more diligent in teaching other to keep it
likewise: for every benefit is the sweeter by taste of the contrary. Again the
Lord will have such fear of his children to be as a glass to the wicked,
wherein they may the better see their own fearful state and condition in not
being the children of God, as gathering by such fears of the godly, that they
themselves are in much more fearful condition and have much more cause to
fear. Moreover, such fear in the children of God, does often arise from the
mistaking of things, and from their imagination of that that is not. So we did
see before, that the d^sciples of Christ feared upon imagination that they had
seen a spirit when they saw him. So many of the children of God have in all
ages feared, and now do often fear: because they judge not aright of the
graces of God in themselves, but think they have no faith at all, no love at
all, etc. and therefore no assurance at all of Gods favor and of their own
salvation, because their faith, love, and other graces of God are weak and
come short of that they ought to be: because they are able to distinguish
between a nullity and an imperfection of Gods gifts, accompanying salvation in
them; therefore they think that to be a nullity, that is only an imperfection.
It is also with the godly in this case as sometime with a company of rebellious
subjects, where notwithstanding the king has pardoned and sent his pardon unto
them, signed with his own hand, and sealed with his own seal. For as such
having no skill to read their pardons, do therefore doubt of them, and fear
the kings displeasure: so many of Gods children, being pardoned of all their
sins, and having their pardon written in their hearts by Gods own finger, and
sealed with the spirit of adoption, do notwithstanding doubt and fear, because
they cannot well read the said pardon. But why can they not read it? either
because it is written in small letters, which their sight being but in part,
cannot see: or because they have not gone long enough to school for the
learning to read Gods hand perfectly and readily: or because they themselves
have forgotten that which they had learned in that behalf: or because they
have kept their pardon so rechlesly and carelessly, that the same being blotted
and obscured with many sins (through their negligence and carelessness
committed,) cannot well be read by themselves or any others for a time, viz. so
long as they live so carelessly, and till they have purged themselves of such
sins, as whereby not only the writing of their pardon is blurred, and made
vnlegible: but also their own sight is dimmed so, as they neither can read
their pardons, nor see any thing else touching their salution as they ought. So
had David blotted and obscured the pardon of all his sins and dimmed his own
sight by his sin with Bethsheba and against Vriah, that he was troubled with
many fears, which made him to complain of his state as if it had been as bad
as any man's, and that he prays the Lord to create in him a new heart, as if
he had never been regenerate before: Psalm. 51. 10. The afflictions also of this
life befalling the children of God (being especially compared with the
prosperity of the wicked) do so blind their eyes, that they cannot behold the
goodness of God to the peace of their consciences as they should, and as
sometime they behold the same. This made the Prophet to say, I have cleansed my
heart in vain: Psalm. 73. 13 and to think the state and condition of himself
to be no better then the state and condition of the wicked: yea to judge theirs
better then his. Yea David being banished from the Ark of God and in danger of
many enemies, had such trouble of mind and fears of heart that he was feign to
rebuke himself in that behalf, and to say to his soul (as before we heard)
why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Ps.
42. 5. 11. and 43. 5. Finally, sometime such seares of the children of God, and
the error of their judgment touching them, arise from some bodily cause, eue^
from a melancholik co^stitutio, whereby the judgment is so crazed, that it does
not err only in matters of God, and which co^cern salvation, but also in
things of this world and which co^cern this present life. For the abundance of
melancholy oftentimes takes away from men the knowledge of their best friends,
and makes them to think that they are utter enemies, and to fear the^
accordingly. No marvel then though the said humor do sometime obscure the favor
of God and darken the peace of conscience, even in the best of Gods children.
These that are thus occupied with fears, do measure their condition more by
feeling then by faith and other arguments of greater certainty then feeling.
But howsoever the children of God in these and the like respects be troubled
with such fears for a time: yet as before we said of other troubles of this
life, so I may also say of those fears, that the Lord does at the last deliver
them our of all, and turn them likewise to their great good: yea, for the most
part the Lord gives his children most inward peace when they have most outward
calamities: at least when they have Note.
most need of such inward peace, then also have the godly most peace, yea, most
comfort. When the wicked are most dismayed, namely in the times of greatest
storms and tempests; even of most mighty and fearful thundrings and
lightnings, at such times the wicked quake and tremble, as fearing some greater
evil toward them; and so indeed oftentimes it falls out: but contrariwise the
children of God looking not so much to the lightnings, nor harkening so much to
the thundrings, as considering therein the great power of God how able he is to
save them, and how soon he can subdue their enemies, do in this respect both
follow their callings the more quietly, and also hold up their heads the more
cheerfully. The like may be said of them in the hour of their death: Mark
(says David) the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man is
peace: Psalm. 37, 37. and why so? the son answers the father (I mean
Solomon answers David) saying, the day of death is better then the day that
one is borne (that is, to the child of God) Ec^l. 7, 3. and why is this?
because the day of death to the children of God is the day of deliverance from
all their misery. The children of God themselves die not, but their misery then
dies: yea, then also their sin the cause of their misery, and chief misery
it self, makes an end. Secondly, death to the godly, is but a short bridge,
and a speedy passage to eternal life: they take not only their leave of all
calamities, but they enter also into their Masters joy, and take now more full
possession, then ever before they had of that most blessed inheritance,
whereof before they heard, and which they had a long time most earnestly longed
for. On the contrary howsoever the wicked for a time, especially in prosperity,
seem to be at peace and so live securely fearing nothing, yet if adversity once
come, then they rage and storm: then they fret and chafe: then they rail and
rave: then they curse and swear: then they speak not only against men but
also against God himself: especially the day of their death is most fearful
unto them, as being the end of all their happiness, and the beginnings of
their greatest woe and misery: and so they finish their days most heavily,
most fearfully: yea sometime they are so discontent with some things befallen
unto them, or so tormented in their minds with fear of Gods judgments against
themselves, that they play the bloody butchers upon themselves. So Achitophel
in malcontent mind hanged himself: 2. Sam. 17. 23. so Judas (as before we
heard) in great desperation of Gods mercy did make the like fearful end of
himself: Mat. 27. 5. That sometime the children of God die unquietly in
outward appearance, it is to admonish other the better to prepare themselves
for their end, and to labor the more to treasure up for themselves comfort (by
keeping a good conscience) for the day of their death. That the wicked die
sometime peaceably and in show comfortably, either it is to admonish all men
not rashly to judge, since God can in a moment secretly work repentance: or
else howsoever some will say of such, that they went away like a bird, or died
like a lamb, yet rather if they showed no repentance, especially if they did
not indeed repent, they are to be thought to have died like beasts, that for
the most part, dying naturally of some disease and not being killed violently,
do only pant and groan, and make no other noise: As it is said of Nabal, that
when Abigail had related what David had purposed against him, and what she had
done to save Nabal from the execution thereof, that his heart died wit hin him,
and he became like a stone and so about ten days after he died: 1. Sam. 25.
22. 28. so the wicked dying in their sins and yet not dying raging nor rauing,
etc. do die like stocks or stones, that is, neither showing any more
repentance, neither any whit more regarding any goodness then stocks or
stones. But to return to the children of God, such is their peace upon the
grounds before mentioned, that as they are freed from the servile fear of Gods
wrath and justice, so they are likewise freed from all such fear of other
creatures as whereby they should be dismayed or disabled from such duties as
belong unto them. For what need they fear any thing, since God has made a
league with all creatures in their behalf? and since they know that all things
do work together for their good, as before we have heard? we may therefore
Note.
conclude they need not to fear any evil tidings: Psalm. 112. 7. yea though
they walk through the vale of the shadow of death: Psalm. 23. 4. but that every
one of them may say, the Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear?
the Lord is the strength of my life of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm. 27. 1. and
again, I will lay me down and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord make me
dwell in safety: Psalm. 4. 8. this peace of the children of God is not only
common to them all, neither only proper to them alone, neither only always in
them even in all troubles and in death it self (in manner notwithstanding and
with the exceptions before expressed) but it is also accompanied with great joy
of the holy ghost, and such as none of the wicked do enjoy though they be
kings and Princes, or otherwise abounding in all prosperity. Indeed commonly
the state of the children of God is accounted the most lumpish, dumpish, heavy,
and solitary state of all other. Yea, amongst many other things that do
discourage men from being the children of God, this is not the least, that they
think there is no joy, no mirth, no gladness belonging to them, but that if
once men will frame themselves to be the children of God, then they must bid
farewell to all joy, and they must prepare themselves to all sadness and
heaviness. But this is a foul and gross error, even proceeding from the
father of lies. For the truth is, that as the righteous and none but the
righteous are often bid be glad and rejoice: Psalm. 32. 11. and 33. 1. Phil. 4
4. and elsewhere; so indeed in respect of the forgiveness of sins, and of
the favor of God, and of all other benefits before mentioned, they have more
cause to be glad and rejoice then all the world besides. Yea, none but they
have sound cause to be glad, and rejoice: For joy and peace are as well as
accounted fruits of the spirit, as love, patience, goodness, faith,
gentleness, and temperance: Gal. 5. 22. and the kingdom of heaven is as well
said to be in peace and joy in the holy ghost, as in righteousness. Romans 14.
17. in both which places this is to be observed that the Apostie ioines peace
and joy together as I now do, even as the cause and the effect: it is
therefore evident, that there is no sound joy but where there is the spirit and
kingdom of God. The Lord speaking of the wicked and of the godly says thus,
Behold my servants shall rejoice and ye shall be astonted: behold my servants
shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall
howl for vexation of mind: Isai 65. 13. 14. Before likewise, the Lord had said
by the same Prophet, The redeemed of the Lord shall return and come to Ston
with proise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain
joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away. Isai 35. 10.
Therefore the Apostle commends this peacero be the peace of God and to pass
all understanding: Phil. 4. 7. first, because no humane understanding can
sufficiently comprehend it. Secondly, because no humane understanding can prize
or value it according to the worth thereof. Solomon also speaking of a good
conscience which is only to be found in the children of God, says that it is a
continual feast: Pro. 15. 15. because it brings that joy before spoken of,
and makes men always as merry as if they were at a greatfeast: always, I
say, and not sometimes only does a good conscience make a man merry, viz. not
only in abundance of other things and in prosperity, but also in want and
penury: vea under many greatand heavy afflictions. For so the Apostle
testifies of them to whom he did write, that being by the rich mercy of God
begotten again to a lively hope of that excellent inheritance whereof before
wespake, they didreioice, although by many afflictions they were in heaviness:
1. Pet. 1. 6. yea afterward he describes their sound joy by two notable
attributes unspeakable and glorious, verse. 8. As these christians did so
rejoice; so the Apostle Paul, though continually under great and heavy
afflictions and persecutions: Acts 20. 23. 2. Cor. 11. 23. yet he testifies
that the testimony of his conscience was his reioicing: 2. Cor. 1. 12.
Therefore often elsewhere he professes that he was so far from being ashamed
of his crosses and manifold troubles, that he did rather rejoice and glory in
them, and so we see indeed, that he and Stlas being in prison, did not mourn
and weep, but sang Psalms even at midnight: Acts 16. 25. The like joy we read
to have been, if not in all, yet diverse of the martyrs mentioned in the book of
the Acts and Monuments. Yea the truth is, that in respect of the premises the
meanest child of God that has faith and regeneration but as a grain of mustard
seed, has more sound and true matter of reioicing (even in afflictions) then
the greatest, the richest and the mightiest monarch in all the world, that has
not received the spirit of adoption. Yea, how can they rejoice that have no
communion with Christ, that are dead in their sins, that are no better then
fools and madmen, that are in bondage unto sins, yea, unto satan himself,
that have no freedom in heaven, neither any trade for any merchandise thereof,
whose sins do all remain in the book of Gods account, and that may
continually fear when God will enter into judgment with them, that have no
liberty to come to God, once to ask pardon of the said sins, because they
have not faith wherein they should offer up their prayers, and without which
all their prayers are abominable unto God: that have no benefit by the word of
God, either for their direction, or for their comfort, or for their defense
against the enemies of their salvation, and that therefore are always naked
and lie open to all their assaults, and that much less have any thing to do
with the sacraments which are seals of Gods word: that have no right or
interest in any blessings of this life, but shall give an account of every
thing they have had and used, as usurpers, and as thieues, against whom all
things work together for their evil, prosperity and adversity, friends and
foes: their good deeds which they seem to have done as well as their apparent
evil deeds: that are excluded out of the kingdom of heaven and are in the
state of condemnation, even so long as they continue without the spirit of
adoption: condemned already: what joy, I say, can any have that are in such a
case, though they be never so great, never so rich, and never so mighty
monarchs in the world? Verily as they shall (if they repent not) be thrown
into utter darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where
they shall be tormented for evermore with the devil and his Angels: so if they
know their woeful and miserable condition, they have cause to mourn and to
houle continually in this life: yea, more cause so to do, then the poorest man
in the world good or bad: because the more God does advance them in this world,
the greater shall their damnation be in the world to come, if in this life
they do not glorify God according to their said adua^cement. Since that the
children of God have such joy and peace, as that no afflictions do or can
express the same, how great is their dignity in that behalf? Their joy I
grant, may be and sometime is eclipsed and obscured for a time, by the same
means whereby it is so with their peace: for such as any man's peace is, such
is his joy: but as the sun being sometime eclipsed by the interposition of the
moon betwixt us and it, and more often darkened by thick and black clouds,
does notwithstanding break out again and shine as bright as before: so it is
with the children of God. Their joy is sometime obscured and hidden, not only
from others, but also from themselves. But though they weep for a time, yet
their sorrow shall be turned into joy, and their heart shall rejoice (for the
most part in this, and most certainly in the life to come) and their joy shall
no man take from them: Ioh. 16. 20. 21. As the wicked shall mourn, and no man
shall be able to comfort them (as before we have seen by the examples of Saul
and Indas) so shall the children of God rejoice, and no man shall take their
joy from them. Though sometime they lie among pots (or stones, and by many
afflictions be as it were colored) yet they shall be as the wings of a Dove
that is covered with silver, and whose feathers are like yellow gold: Psalm. 68.
13. they shall have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy of mourning: the garment
of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness: Isai 61. 3. yea even in their
heaviness their joy from above is greater then their mourning here below. As
Sampson found honey and the honey comb in the carcass of a devouring lion: so
the children of God find most sweet comfort even in the very belly and bowels
of those afflictions which devour the wicked: The riddle of Sampson touching
the foresaid honey (out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came
sweetness) was inexplicable to the Philistims till they had ploughed with
Sampsons heyfer: Judge. 14. 14. so indeed that the children of God are cheerful
and comfortable, even full of joy and gladness in their poverty, reproach,
sickness and such other like adversity, seems a thing very strange to the
ungodly, and no man can explicat or expound the same, but only the children of
God, and they that have ploughed with their heyfer, that is, with the same
spirit of understanding, wherewith they and they only are endued. For they only
have that white stone (spoken of before) wherein is a new name written, which
no man knows but he that receives it: Reu. 2. 17. And how great the peace
and the joy of the children of God is, and how truly it may be said to pass al
understanding, and to be unspeakable and glorious (as before we heard it to be
called) does not only appear by the fear and grief of the wicked, but also
by the like afflictions, trouble, and heaviness of mind sometimes in the
godly, when God, for the reasons (before spoken of) hides his face from them.
For that which is said generally of all creatures, may particularly be said of
them: if thou hide thy face they are troubled: Psalm. 104. 29. By this trouble
(I say) of the godly themselves, when sometimes for a time they have lost their
former joy and peace, it appears, how great their said peace and joy is, and
how worthy of that commendation, which before we have heard to be given unto
it. For ask one of them that have for a season lost their former peace and
joy, and that troubled in that behalf, yea ask the very wicked themselves,
which feel the terrors of an evil conscience, and fears of Gods wrath, ask
(I say) either the one or the other, what they would give for a release from
their troubles and fears, and for comfort, and they will cry out with tears,
that if they had a thousand worlds, they would give all for true peace and joy.
Consider how the Church mourns for neglect of her beloueds voice, yea how her
heart fainted in that behalf, and how she charged the daughters of Jerusalem,
that if they did find her well-beloved, they should tell him that she was sick
of love for him: Cantic. 5. 6. how David also was troubled, when he wanted that
peace and joy which before he had, we have already showed. Touching the joy of
the wicked which seems to be very great: first the truth is, that it is a
painted and pictured joy, without any ground: yea without any substance: it is
only in face and countenance, and (as wesay) from the teeth: it is not from the
heart: it is but as the laughter of frenzy and madness in the pangs of
death. Secondly, it is therefore very short and uncertain: as it is said of the
laughter of a fools, that it is like the cracking of thorns under a pot: Eccl.
7. 8. though it make a great blaze and a loud noise for a time, yet on a sudden
it vanishes and comes to nothing. Thirdly (which is more then the former)
the more the wicked laugh and are merry here, the more they shall weep and
mourn and houle in the world to come. As the strongest wine makes the sharpest
vinegar, even such as will fetch off the skin from the rough of ones mouth; so
the greater shall be their calamity, and their greater joy shall be turned into
the greater heaviness. But because many things before written, of the
prosperity of the wicked, may likewise be referred to that point of their joy
which arises from no other cause then from their prosperity, therefore I will
here cease to write any more thereof.

To conclude this point of the joy and peace of the children of God, as they
have better cause of peace and joy then all the wicked in the world (though
kings and Princes) so their peace and joy cannot but be much greater, how
poor, base and miserable soever they seem to be in the world, and are indeed
touching their outward state. They may rejoice when the wicked (even Princes)
may mourn: they may laugh, when such may weep: they may sing, when the others
for all their wealth, pleasures, friends, power and authority, and glory, may
cry and houle. As the Virgin Mary was saluted in this manner, bail Mary (or
rejoice Mary) thou art freely beloned, the Lord is with thee, etc. and again,
fear not, for thou have found favor with God, for thou shall conceive in thy
womb and bear a son, and call his name Jesus: Luke 1. 28. 29. 30. and as the
Angel said to the shepherds, be not afraid, behold I bring yon glad tidings
of great joy which shall be to all people, that unto you is borne this day in
the City of David a Savior, which is called Christ the Lord: Luk 2. 10. So no
man will deny but that Marie and the shepherds had cause to cast away fear,
and to be gi^^ and to rejoice both in respect of the person that did bid them
(...) (the same being a blessed Angel) and also in respect of the message it
selse; and that she had found favor with God. and should conceive and bear a
son, which should be^ called lesus, because he should save (and has saved)
his people from their sins: Matthew. 1. 21. and that when the Angels did so
appear unto the shepherds, the same Son was then borne into the world. How
much more then may all the children of God now throw away all sear, and
rejoice (even with joy unspeakable and glorious) ^ith not only Christ Jesus is
borne, but has also suffied, is risen again, and has ascended into heaven,
has accomplished all things for our salvation that were written of him, and
does sit at the right hand of God the Father in all power and glory, to protect
us from all our cnemies, and to make intercession for us: since (I say) Christ
Jesus has not only done all this for us, but is also conceined and formed
spiritually in us: Gal. 4. 9. and since we have put him on as a garment: Romans
13. 14. and since he dwells in us as in a temple, and has made himself one
with us, and us with him: Ioh. 17. 22. (as before has been showed) and since
by all these things he does assure us of the perfection of the whole work of
our salvation, and of never leaving us till he have brought us where himself
is, there to behold his glory, and to be partakers thereof, and that our joy
may indeed be full, never again mixed with any drop of heaviness, neither ever
any whit obscured or ouercast with any mist of sin or affliction?

Verily there is no question but that every one of Gods children in respect of
all things pertaining to their salvation already wrought by our Savior, and in
respect of their assurance of that which remains for themselves in particular,
has more cause to rejoice, then either Marie or the shepherds had by
understanding only of Christ to be conceived and borne, or to be already
borne, but not having accomplished it for which he was borne. As there can be
no greater indignity offered to an honest man, promising any thing which he is
able to perform, and giving earnest upon his promise, and further also binding
of himself to perform all that he has promised, then to doubt of his
promise, earnest, and further assurance: so, yea ten thousand times greater
indignity is it to God, for us to doubt of the things before mentioned, God
having not only promised them, but also made us far better assurance of them
then all the Princes in the world can make of any thing they promise. So far is
the full persuasion of these things, and joy according, from all presumption
against God, as the Papists do most boldly and wickedly affirm. Thus
therefore I conclude this part, that every one of Gods children being the seed
which the Lord has blessed, yea being that seed only, may say as the Prophet
says they should say, I will greatly rejoice (or reioicing I will rejoice) in
the Lord, and my soul shall be ioifull in my God, for he has clothed me with
the garments of salvation, and covered me with the robes of righteousness: he
has decked me like a bridegroom, and as a bride t^re^h her self with her
jewels: Isai 61. 9. In respect of this joy of the children of God (even of the
meanest of them) the joy of the wicked is nothing but sorrow, grief, anguish,
and vexation of spirit. Thus much of the peace and joy of the children of God.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the benefits that other do enjoy by Gods children.

Having thus spoken of the exceeding great benefits which the children of God
enjoy themselves: for the further declaration of their dignity, let us also
take a view of those benefits which other do enjoy by them. Here let us
understand, first that they hurt no body, but suffer every one with whom they
do live, or with whom they have any dealings, to live in peace, and quietly to
enjoy their own. Secondly, that they are many ways helpful, and do much good
unto other. The first is no small matter if we consider how harmfull the wicked
are continually unto all, with whom they dwell, as to some by their
profaneness and impiety, either animating them to the like, or discouraging
them from the contrary: so also to other by their irreverent behavior toward
their superiors, by their pride and violence against their inferiors, by their
contempt of their equals, by their cruelty and unmercifulness in word and
deed, by their unchaste speech, gesture, and other actions: by unjust dealings
touching the goods of their neighbors, and by their backbitings, slandering,
and false accusing, and otherwise defaming of them. They that have daily
experience or have heard of these things, would think it a great benefit to
live where they might be without fear of such damage. And that this is a
benefit and so to be accounted, appears by the words of Nabals servants to
Abigail after that Nabal had so wickedly and churlishly sent away the
messengers of David empty. For they do amplify the churlish and wicked answer
of Nabal to David's messengers, as by some kindness of David toward them in
the wilderness, so also by pleading that they had no displeasure, neither had
missed any thing so long as they were conversant with them, when they were in
the fields: 1. Sam. 25 15. But are these things all? No verily: but as
themselves do no hurt to other, so likewise they are great means to keep other
from doing that evil against God, against their neighbors and against
themselves, which otherwise they would commit: for who sees not that the
wicked conuersing daily with the godly, and being especially in their company
do refrain from many sins, many oaths, many blasphemies, many curses, from
much vain talk, filthy speech, and much foolish jesting, from other outrages
also which they would freely commit if they were by themselves alone. Many
times also the Lord keeps the reprobate themselves from some heinous sins
for the godlies sake, which otherwise they would greedily commit. Did not God
keep Abimelech king of Gerar, from defiling Sara for Abraham's sake? Genesis 206.
and may not the like be said of many other? Doubtless this is partly the
meaning of that which is written of Herod's fear and reuerencing of John
Baptist, that is, of the fearing to commit some evils for his sake, from which
otherwise he would not have refrained: Mark. 6. 20. So that Esau hoped of the
death of Isaac, and then purposed to have killed Jacob, what does it else
import, but that in the mean time he feared the committing of that fearful
murder for Isaac his sake? Genesis 27. 41. But not to stand upon this, let us come
to the good they do to other.

Here at the first let it be considered, that as God made the woman first to
be an help to the man, so by this first combination of man and wife there is
exceeding benefit of the one by the other, where both parties joined together
are the children of the Lord. For there the husband loves the wife even as
Christ loves his Church, accounting her as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone; cleaving only unto her, protecting her from all wrong, instructing her
where she is ignorant touching her salvation, increasing the knowledge which
she has, bearing with her in her weakness, provoking her to all good duties
belonging to her sex and calling. So the wife reuerencing the husband, is in
all things in the Lord subject unto him, and ordered by him; governing the
things wisely that are committed to her charge, for the good of her family; not
only bringing forth children as the Lord blesses the marriage bed unto them;
but much also helping her husband in the Christian education of them in the
fear of the Lord. So Bethsheba helped David in the instructing of Solomon:
Pro. 31. 1. David himself being employed in the public affairs of the
kingdom. So Lois the grandmother, and Eunice the mother of Timotheus, were
great helps (or rather more then helps, doing all themselves alone) for the
instructing of Timothy in the Scripture from his childhood. Furthermore, the
Christian wife is an help to her husband, by ouerseeing the ways of her
servants, and seeing them to do their work early and late. Both such parties
also are comfortable one to another, in prosperity reioicing together, in
adversity mourning together; and so bearing one another burdens, that betwixt
both it is the lighter. This mutual help and benefit that the man and wife,
being both the children of God, have one by another, is more apparent by the
great hindrance that the one has by the other, either where they are both
wicked, or where they are unequally yoked, the one striving upward toward
heaven, the other drawing downwards even to hell. Yet where there is such an
unequal match, sometime the believing wife saves the unbelieving husband,
sometime the unbelieving wife is saved by the believing husband, the one
converting the other: 1. Cor. 7. 14.

Touching the children of such parents, oh in how happy state and condition be
they, in respect of the children of other! For first of all they are within the
Covenant of God made with their parents for this life and for the life to come,
whereby God does bind himself to be their God, and the God of their seed: Genesis
17. 78. and to bless them that bless them, and to curse them that curse them:
Genesis 12. 3. Yea though but one of the parents be the child of God, and the
other none of Gods children, yet the children of two such so unequally yoked,
are within the Covenant by virtue of that party which is the child of God: 1.
Cor 7. 14 Is not this a singular benefit, to be within the Covenant of God? It
was a great honor to Abraham, that Abimelech king of Gerar came to him, and
made a Covenant with him: Genesis 21. 27. How great then is this honor, that the
Lord of heaven and earth, the king of kings, vouchsafes to look down from
heaven, yea as it were to come down from heaven, and to make a Covenant with
man! yea with poor miserable man, that would never so much as once have looked
toward heaven, but only to make war with heaven, and with God that dwells
in heaven: even with every man (I say) and woman that fears him: yea not only
with them, but also with their posterity! Verily this Covenant is the more,
because by virtue thereof it is said. The children of thy servants shall
continue, and then seed shall stand fast in thy sight: Psalm. 101. 28. And
again: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and delights greatly in his
Commandemen^s: his ^^ed shall be mighty upon earth* the generation of the
righteous shall be blessed: Psalm. 112. 1. 2. If children receive not benefit
by this Covenant, it is because they themselves do break Covenant with God,
and do not honor the God of their Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart
and willing mind, as David exhorts Salomo^: 1. Cron. 28. 9. and in this
respect the children of God may be said to fall away from God and to go back
(albeit they themselves never had any grace of God, neither ever walked with
God) because by their wickedness, they do in a manner disclaim and renounce
the covenant of God made with their fathers. So Manasses at the beginning of
his reign, and long before he had repented or entered into the way of walking
with God, even when he did evil in the sight of the Lord like the abomination
of the heathen, etc. is said to have gone back^ 2. Chro. 33. 2. 3. viz. because
he had transgressed the covenant which God had made with his father Ezekiah,
and walked not in the ways of his said father: Notwithstanding although some
of the next children of the children of God, or the whole next posterity of
such, do fall away and so renounce the covenant of God, yet this does not
altogether abrogate and disanull the said covenant of God made with the good
parents of the said children: because the efficacy thereof does not appear in
their next generation. For the covenant of God is made to thousands of them
that love him and keep his commandments. Though some boughs of a good tree be
broken off, and so wither and come to nothing, yet the stock and root
remaining, there may other spring out as good as any at the first: so is it
with the children of God, with whom God has made his covenant. One or two, yea
many whole generations may be cut off or fall away, yet the covenant of God
remains with the stock or root and first parents. This Paul does excellently
handle by this very similitude touching the Jews: Romans 11. 16.

This is further manifested, if we consider, that after the days of Solomon
there was often succession of evil kings to good kings, and yet the covenant
made with David remained firm and inuiolated. Yea, after the days of
Iehoshaphat the kingdom of Judah continued by succession, for many years
together in the hands of wicked kings, none other of the house of Iehoshaphat
being mentioned to have feared God. For first succeeded Ieh^ram: 2. Kings 8.
16. and 2. Chro. 21. 1. then Aha^^ah. 2. Kings 8. 24. 2. Chro. 22. 1. then
Hathaliah 2. Kings 11. 3. 2. Chro. 22. 10. or rather (because she was but an
usurper) Ioash: 2. Kings 12. 2. 2. Chro 23. 4. Fourthly Amatziah: 2. Kings 14.
2. 2. Chro. 25 1. Fifthly, Vzziah, or rather Azariah: 2. Kings 15. 1. 2. Chr.
26. 1. Sixthly Iotham, 2. Kings 15. 33. 2. Chr. 27 1. ^^uenthly Ahaz 2. Kings
16. 1. 2. Chro. 27. and then Hezekiah, 2. Kings 18. 1. 2. Chro. 29. 1. So
between Iehoshaphat and Ezekiah two good kings of Judah there were seven wicked
kings all succeeding one another, besides Hathaliah, that immediately after
Ahaziah usurped the kingdom. All these seven kings, I say, were evil and
ungodly, though some of them at their entrance into their kingdoms made great
shows of godliness. Neither had any of these seven any good child, for ought
that we know; but only Ahaz, whom Ezeki^h his son succeeded. Yet in the days
of Hezekiah the Lord comfort him against Zenaherib, and promises to save
Jerusalem for his own sake, and for David his servants sake: 2. Kings 19. 34.
So he notes that all the former succession of evil kings so long together,
even for the space of about 155 years, at least not much less, had not
disanulled and made void the former covenant of God made with David. Yea we
may say more, that sometime the promise of the Lord made to the wicked (though
indeed as they in some things resemble the children of God) is kept with their
posterity and they also have the benefit of it: This has been showed before by
the performance of Gods promise made to Iehu, even to his sons afterward
(though all wicked) to the fourth generation. What a gracious privilege then
is it to them that are the children of God indeed, that even their children are
by their parents within the covenant of God? Although also wicked children of
good parents, do deprive themselves of all benefits of Gods covenant, touching
the life to come, yet they do receive many by the same covenant touching this
present life. Ismael had not only the seal of the covenant (circumcision) but
for the covenants sake made with Abraham, God heard him praying for Ismael that
he might live in his sight, and answered him most graciously, saying, As
concerning Ismael I have heard thee, lo^ (...) blessed him and will make him
fruitful and will multiply him exceedingly: twelve Princes shall he beget, and
I wi^^ make a great nation of him: Genesis 17. 18. By the said example of Ismael,
and by the benefit he had by the prayers of Abraham praying for him; we see,
the posterity of the children of God to have great benefit by the prayers of
their parents. If the prayer of the righteous avails much, for any, if it b^
fe^^ent: James 5. 17. much more may we assure our selves that the prayers of
the righteous parents for their children do avail much, because they will
pray most fervently for them. If God heard Abraham praying for wicked Ismael,
he will also doubtless hear other parents, praying for their children in the
says of Abraham especially for such children, as do themselves also believe.
Therefore the Gospel testifies, how many children were sometime restored from
death to life, and sometime were released from a bodily possession of satan, by
the suit of their godly parents to our savior in their behalf: Mat. 9. 18.
Mat. 15. 22. Mat. 17. 14. Mark 9. 17. Great likewise is the benefit of Gods
childrens children, by better education, better precepts, better exercises of
religion, better chastisements and corrections, and better example of life and
conversation then the children of the wicked for the most part have. As the
children of such parents as are themselves the children of God, have these
benefits by their such parents, so likewise great is the benefit and comfort
that such parents have by their children, that walk in the covenant of God:
viz. by their fear of God, by their obedience to them, and their prayers for
them, and by their good behauiours toward all other: in which respect Solomon
does often commend such children, in the book of the Proverbs: A wise son
makes a glad father: Prou. 10. 1. and 15. 20. My son if thou be wise mine
heart shall rejoice, and I also: Pro. 23. 15. and again, the father of the
righteous shall rejoice: he that begets a wise son shall have joy of
heart: thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall
rejoice: verse 24 25. My son be wise and rejoice mine heart, that I may
answer him that reprooueth me: Pro. 27. 11. and 29. 3. sometime also it comes
to pass that good children become parents to their parents, by releeuing them
in their necessities, and helping them in their outward state: so Joseph is
said to have nourished his father Jacob, and all the rest of his sons, and
their families: Genesis 45. 18. and 47. 12. so likewise Ruth was a great help for
maintenance to her mother in law Naomi: and much other comfort had Naomi by her
in her old age. The contrary is manifest of wicked children, both by many
sentences in the Proverbs before alleged, and also by many examples, of Ismael,
Esau, the sons of Eli, Hophni and Phine as, Amnon and Absolon the sons of
David, and of many other.

As it is thus between the husband and the wife, and parents and children,
that are themselves the children of God; so the master and servant that are the
children of God have much greater benefit one by another, then wicked masters
and servants have: for how great was the mutual comfort both that Abraham had
by the faithful service that his servant performed, whom he employed about a
wife for his son Isaac? and also that the same servant had by the former
instruction and example of Abraham, whereby no doubt he was brought to make
such conscience of faithful service unto Abraham? For does not the Lord
himself say of Abraham, I know him, that he will command his servants and his
house after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and
judgment? Genesis 18. 19. Yea wicked masters have great benefit by such servants
as are the children of God. Laban an Idolater could say of Jacobs service, I
have perceived that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake: Genesis 30. 27.
Potiphar Joseph's master saw that the Lord was with Joseph, and that the Lord
made all to prosper that was in his hand, and so Joseph found favor in his
sight, and served him, and he made him Ruler over his house, and put all that
he had in his hand: and from that time that he made him Ruler over his house,
and over all that he had, the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's
sake, and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in his house, and
in the field: Genesis 39. 2. Yea Potiphar had a further benefit by Joseph, because
when his wife most impudently enticed him to filthiness with her, Joseph most
graciously denied it, and said, Behold my master knows not what he has in
the house with me, but has committed all that he has to mine hand. There is
no man greater in this house then I, neither has he kept any thing from me,
but only thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great
wickedness, and so sin against God? And albeit she spoke to Joseph day by
day, yet he hearkened not vnt^ her to lie with her, nor to be in her company:
Ge. 39. 8. 9. 10. Was not this a great benefit, so to have his wives chastity
preserved, she her self prostituting and offering her self to such wickedness,
and seeking it from time to time. By this example also that is made more
manifest that I said before, viz. that other have benefit by the children of
God, in as much as they do them no such hurt as the wicked are ready to do
upon every occasion, be it never so slight or slender, yea sometime without
any occasion. Thus we see the benefits that other have by the children of God
in a family, both the children of God themselves one by another, and also the
wicked and ungodly.

In like manner other also abroad have great benefit by the children of God.
Touching the advancement of the children of God to civil magistracy, it is
thus said: When righteous men rejoice (that is, are advanced to great dignity
and Magistracy; for so the opposition following shows, that these words must
be thus interpreted) there is great glory: (that is, there is great prosperity
of all states and degrees) but when the wicked rise up, every man is pried
into: Prou. 28. 12. that is, every man's outward state is so sifted, and loaded
with taxations and impositions, that he has small cause of joy. The like is,
Pro. 29. 2. When the righteous are increased (in honor and authority) the
people rejoice: but when the wicked man bears rule, the people sigh. To the
same purpose belongs that, Eccl. 10. 16. 17. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy
King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning: Blessed art thou, O Land,
when thy King is the son of the nobles, and thy Princes eat in time, for
strength, and not for drunkenness: that is, That Land is happy and full of
blessings, whose Rulers descended of the race of the children of God, and are
themselves so also. For this (as we heard before) is only true nobility. By
all these sentences we see both that every people has many blessings that have
the children of God (as sons of the King of Kings) to be their Rulers: and
also that much misery and many calamities are there where ungodly men bear
sway. As the people have many blessings when God aduanceth his children to be
governors over them; so Magistrates are so much the more happy, by how much
the greater number of the children of God they have within their dominions, or
under their government. Indeed Haman said to Ahashuerosh, There is a people
(mea^ing the Jews and the people of God) scattered and dispersed among thy
people in all the provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from
all people, and they do not observe the Kings Laws: therefore it is not the
Kings profit to suffer them: Ester 3. 8. But Queen Ester speaking by a better
spirit, even by the spirit of truth, that cannot lie, and entreating the
repeal of the Kings edict, which the said Haman by the former accusation had
procured against the Jews for their destruction, pleads the contrary, and
says, that if the adversary should prevail for destroying the Jews in such
manner, he could not recompense the Kings loss: Ester 7. 4. So diverse other
adversaries, Rehum and Shimshai, and other wrote to King Artashashte, that
Jerusalem had been a rebellious City, and wicked: and so Artashashte
himself by letters acknowledged as much: Ezra 4. 12. But Darius upon better
grounds writes that kindness should be showed toward the building of that
City, and the house of God therein, and that to this end, that they might pray
for the Kings life, and for his sons: Ezra 6. 10. So he showed, that he
rather hoped for a blessing upon himself and his sons, then feared any evil
by the Jews. Experience also shows, both what true loialtie and safety
Kings and Princes (as well Popish, and otherwise wicked, as godly and
religious) have had by Protestant and truly religious subjects, that have been
the children of God; and also what treachery and treasons have been
continually wrought by wicked subjects, especially by Papists, against their
Sovereigns, as well Papists as Protestants.

And touching Ministers of the Gospel, infinite are the benefits that the
people enjoy by them: by their public preachings, by their private
instructions and consolations, by their good example, and by their prayers: yea
one faithful Minister is the strength of the whole kingdom (...) lives. Not
only did Elisha cry after Elisah wh(...) away, as he saw him carried up in a
whirlewinde (...) My father, my father, the chario^ of Israel and the
horseme(...) of: 2. King. 2. 12. But Io^sh also the King of Israel (ever(...)
King) coming to Elisha when he lay sick even upon his deathbed, wept in
like manner over him, and most mournfully said, O my father, my father, the
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen of the same: 2. King. 13. 14. They also
that obey the doctrine and exhortations of such Ministers, and follow their
godly example, are not only a great benefit unto them, by maintaining them,
and making them partakers of all their goods, Gal. 6. 6. but also by their
prayers (as has been showed) and diverse other means. Therefore the Apostle
Paul called the Philippians his joy and his crown, Phil. 4. 1. And the Apostle
John to the elect Lady says, I reioiced greatly that I found thy children
walking in the truth: 2. Ioh. 1. 4. And afterward he bids her and hers to
look to themselves, that (says he) we lose not those things which we have
done, but that we may receive a full reward. To Gaius also he writes thus: I
have no greater joy then this, to hear that thy sons walk in truth: 3. Ioh.
4. On the contrary, when the Ministers of the word are not the children of God,
they are great pests and plagues to the people, even as wolves to the sheep.
And when the people be wicked, they are as great a grief and vexation to the
Ministers: Ier. 20. 7. to the end of the chapter, and 15. 10. etc. That which I
have said hitherto, may be said also of other betwixt whom there is any special
bond. The more that any man is the child of God, the more benefit has every
one, kinsman, friend, and other, by him: viz. by his speech and communication,
and by his life and conversation: for in both those respects he shines as a
light in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, to give direction in
the darkness of this world by holding so forth the word of life, that other
may the better walk toward heaven, Phil. 2. 15. His mouth will speak of
wisdom, and his tongue will talk of judgment: the Law of his God is in his
heart, Psalm. 37. 30. 31. The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge, but
the heart of the foolish does not so: Pro. 15. 7. The tongue of the just man is
like fined silver: but the heart of the wicked is little worth. The lips of the
righteous feed many: Pro. 10. 20. they admonish also them that are unruly. They
comfort the feeble minded: they be are with the weak: they be patient toward
all men: they do not recompense evil for evil to any man: but ever follow
that which is good both toward themselves and toward others: 2 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
15. They exhort one another daily whiles it is called to day, lest any should
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and so depart from the living
God: Heb. 3. 12. They consider one another, to provoke (or whet) to love and to
good works: they forsake not the fellowship that they have one with another in
the exercises of religion: Heb. 10. 24. They are merciful, and lend: they
distribute and give to the poor: Psalm. 112. 5. They do good, and be rich in
good works, ready to distribute and communicate: 1. Tim. 6. 18. They are just,
and give to every man his right, owing nothing to any man but love: Romans 13. 8.
If in the time of their ignorance and their unregenerate state, or afterward,
through the corruption of nature, they have taken or gotten any thing unjustly,
being converted, and knowing the wrong they have done, they will willingly make
restitution, with recompense also for their wrong. So did Samuel offer to do
if any man could have charged him rustly with doing wrong to any: 1. Sam. 12.
3. So did Zaccheus Luk 19. 8. They comfort the afflicted: they strengthen the
weak ^ they raise up them that are fallen, by the spirit of meekness,
considering themselves, lest they also be tempted: Gal 6. 1. That which Job
says of himself, that he was etes to the blind, and feet to the lame, etc.
Job 31. 16. they likewise put in practice toward others in the like
necessity. Yea howsoever the wicked hate and abhor the children of God, yet
they also have great benefits by them. They fare the better for them every day
they rise: and the godly are the fairest flowers of the garland of the wicked.
They escape many outward judgments, and enjoy the like mercies by their
means. This is plain, not only by the words of Ioash King of Israel,
touching Elisha; neither by the example of Laban, that confessed himself to
have fared much the better by Jacob; and of Potiphar, who saw that God blessed
him for Joseph's sake: but also by diverse other examples. The whole world
escaped drowning so long as Noah was among them. Fire and brimstone came not
from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrha all the while that Lot was in their
Cities. For Paul's sake all that were in the ship in great danger were
preserved, and safely set on land, though the ship it self were broken in
pieces: Acts 27. 14. The like may be said of diverse other. As before we
heard, that sometime the wicked are kept from sins by means of the godly, so
also they are sometime provoked to do that good by them, which otherwise they
would not do. Did not Saul many good things, in suppressing of the Witches,
etc. by the means of Samuel, which otherwise he would not have done? Did not
Ioash King of Judah most worthily repair the house of the Lord, and otherwise
do that which was upright in the eyes of the Lord all the days of Iehoiadah
the Priest? who notwithstanding as soon as Iehoiadah was dead, hearkened to the
flatteries of the Princes of Judah, and fell so grievously, that he commanded
Zachariah the son of the foresaid Iehoiadah, to be stoned to death, only
for rebuking him by the word of God for his sins, and exhorting him and the
rest of the people to repentance: 2. Chron, 24. 2. and verse. 17. 18. 19. Is not
Herod said to have done many things by means of John Baptist? Mark. 6. 10.
Neither only do the children of God much good generally to the wicked, but
even particularly also to them that are their enemies, according to Gods
Commandment in that behalf, doing well to them that hate them, and praying
for them that persecute them and bate them: Lu^. 6. 27. If also they that hate
them be hungry, they give them bread to eat: if they be thirsty, they give
them water to ^rinke: Prou. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20. And all this they do, as they
are the children of God, and that they may declare themselves so to be: Matt.
5. 45. As our Savior the natural son of God healed the high Priests
servants ^are that Peter had with his sword stricken off: Luk 22. 51. and
prayed for them that did crucify him: Luke 23. 34. So Stephen one of Gods
children by adoption, prayed for them that stoned him to death, that God would
not lay that great sin to their charge: Act. 7. 60. So Mela a certain Bishop
of Rhinocurum set the best and dainti^st fare he had before them that were
sent to kill him: Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap. 31. Polyearpus did the like to them
that were sent to apprehend him: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 15. Yea the
children of God do good not only to the living, but also to the dead; not by
praying for them, whereby they should dishonor God, and do them no good (as
before has been showed) but otherwise, and that both to their friends, and
also to their enemies. So Naomi commended Booz for not ceasing to do good to
the living and to the dead: Ruth 2. 10. because he had showed great kindness
unto Ruth her self for her husbands sake that then was dead. So David showed
kindness to Mephibosheth the son of his ancient faithful friend Jonathan
for Ionathans sake that was dead: 2. Sam. 9. 7. and commanded also Solomon his
son to show kindness to the sons of Barzilla^ the Gileadite (then dead) because
Barzillai whilst he lived had showed kindness unto him: 1 King. 2. 7. The
same David also put the Amalekite to death that had brought him tidings of the
death of Saul, and that had told him that he had quite killed him being half
dead before: 2. Sam. 1. 13. Then he made likewise a most excellent mournful
song in commendation of the good things that had been in Saul whiles he
l^ued: verse 19. Afterward also he sent messengers unto Iabesh Gilead, with
great thanks (as it were) to them, and most high commendation of them, as men
blessed of the Lord (or whom he prayed to be blessed of the Lord) because
they had showed kindness to their Lord Saul, and had buried him: 2. Sam 2. 5.
Yet who knows not how mortal an enemi^ Saul had been unto David? Neither do
the children of God themselves only good to their enemies, living or dead, but
they sometime cause the very wicked that are wholly set v^on revenge, to show
kindness to their enemies For when Elisha had brought the army of the
Aramites that had been sent to fetch him, into the midst of Samaria, so that
they were in the hands of the King of Israel, and when the King of Isreal's
fingers itched against them, so that he said to Elisha, My father, shall I
smite them? shall I smite them? (this repetition argues that he was very
forward to have smitter them) Elisha answered. Thou shall not smi^e them. Do
thou not smite them that thou have taken with thy sword and with thy bow? Set
bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their
m^ster. And so that King (though a wicked man) did not reason the cause with
the Prophet, or any whit cotradict his counsel; but most willingly made great
great preparation for the^: 2. King. 6. 21. By all these things we see what
great benefits other of all sorts, superiors, inferiors, equals, good and bud,
foes as well as friends, the living and the dead, receive by the children of
God. If any that profess themselves the children of God, be not thus
beneficial to other, or be hurtful to any, it is either because they are
hypocrites, and be not that in deed which they profess themselves to be, or
because the old man yet remaining in them, in some particulars prevails
against their new man, and the flesh against the spirit of adoption, whereby
they are regenerated, and do cry and call God their father.

Let us yet proceed a little further, and consider that the children of God are
not only beneficial to men both of their own sort and others; but that likewise
other creatures fare the better for the^. As al things at the first were made
for the use of man very good when he should be made in the image of God, and in
that respect were made (no doubt) the more excellent, that they might be the
better to serve him that should be made more excellent then they, to have the
dominion over the^: so it is not to be doubted, but that man falling away from
his excellency, the rest of the creatures also lost a great part of their
excellency and beauty, wherein before they were created: that so still there
might be the fitter proportion betwixt the^ and man who was to have the use of
them. Therefore it is expressly said, that they groan, and as it were sigh with
an earnest desire of release from that vanity, whe^unto by the sin of man (at
the first committed, and daily increased) they are made subject. As it is so
with the^ by the sin of man, so it seems probable (for in this case I am not
pere^ptory) that as the number of Gods elect do daily increase, and the image
of God in mankind is generally more and more repaired, so the rest of the
cretures of God find some release from, or at least some mitigatio^ of their
former servitude and bondage by the vanity whereto they were and are yet
subject. Moreover, as the children of God are fuller the^ any other me^, of the
works of justice, mercy, and goodness unto men, so are they unto other
creatures, whether they be such as are common, and wherein none has any
propriety, or such as particularly belong either to or others. Touching the
first, viz. such as no man can challenge any propriety of, or any special
right and interest, as the Lord has commanded, that if a man do find a birds
nest in the way, in a tree or on the ground, whether they be young or eggs,
and the damme sitting upon the young or eggs, that he that sindeth such a
nest, should not take the damme with her young, but that be should only take
the young, and let the damme go: Deuteronomy. 22. 5. 6. as (I say) the Lord
commands this, so the children of God that know this Commandment, are ready
to show mercy in that behalf, according to the said Commandment. Touching
such creatures as whereof some have a propritie, it is said to him that has
such creatures, Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the corn: Deuteronomy. 25. 4. which particular rule for the care of oxen that do any
thing for us, is likewise to be understood generally of every other creature,
the labor whereof we use in our business. According to this precept Solomon
speaks of the practice of Gods children, and of other in that behalf: A
righteous man regards the life of his beast: but the mercies of the wicked are
cruel: Prou. 12. 10. Daily experience also teaches, that the godly have great
respect to their beasts, both for their work, taking no more of them then they
are able to do, neither laying greater burdens upon them then they are able to
bear: and also keeping them, and giving them meat accordingly. Whereas on the
contrary, we daily see the great cruelty of the wicked toward their working
cattle, making them to work as long as they can go on their legs, yea
sometime till they fall and sink down under their work, laying extreme
burdens upon them, keeping them so short for meat, that they have nothing but
skin and bone, and most cruelly beating them, as though themselves had made
them, and were able either to restore them to life, or to make others new in
their stead, when they had by such hard dealing killed them. The Lord shows
how odious this is, by opening Balaams ass^s mouth to reprove Balaam for
smiting him for that wherein he did better then he: Numbers 22. 28. Touching
such creatures as belong to other, the Lord commands thus: If thou meet thine
enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall bring him. to him again. If
thou see thine enemies Ass lying under his burden, will thou cease to help
him? (as if he should have said, will thou be so hard hearted and unmerciful?)
thou shall help him up again: Exodus 23. 4. As this is commanded, so the
children of God are ready to perform it. In respect of this benefit that other
creatures thus have by the children of God, as also in respect of the bondage
wherein they are by the sin of man unto vanity, whereunto they are subject,
we may very well think, that if such creatures had knowledge, understanding,
and judgment, to discern twixt the children of God, and the wicked, they
would utterly renounce all service of the wicked, and wholly and only with all
willingness and cheerfulness submit themselves unto the children of God.
Thus much for the benefits that inferior creatures (I mean the creatures of
this nether world) do receive by them that are sealed with the spirit of
adoption, and therefore are regenerated and borne again to be sons and
daughters of God. But is this all? Not so: we may yet take one step further.
And as before we descended from man to other base creatures here below, so we
may now from both those kinds ascend unto the very heavens, that is, to
principalities and powers in the heavenly places. Touching these therefore, it
is first said by the Apostle, that this was one special end of his ministry,
and of the ministry of the Gospel of others, viz. to make clear unto all
men what the fellowship of the mystery is which from the beginning of the
world had been hid in God. Wherefore unto all men? That so unto principalities
and powers in heavenly places might be made known by the Church the manifold
wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3. 9. 10. By this place we plainly see, that the Angels
have the benefit of more knowledge then before they had. Of the fellowship of
the foresaid mystery, and that by the Church. What is the Church but the
company of Gods children? This is the more manifest by that that there is said
of that mystery, to have been before hidden in God himself, and not so to
have been opened to the sons of men in other ages, as now it is: verse. 5.
and to have been kept secret since the world began: Romans 16. 25. For do not
these phrases intimate, that the said mystery had been hidden so in God
himself from the beginning of the world, that the very Angels themselves did
not fully understand it till it was made known by the Church? The same is to
be thought of many mysteries contained in the Revelation, because it is said
of the book in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne written within,
and on the back side, sealed with many seals (whereby the Chapters in the
Revelation following seem especially to be understood) because (I say) it is
said of that book, that none in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, was
able to open the book, or to look thereon, but only the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, that is, Christ Jesus, Reu. 5. 2. This Lion of the tribe of Judah does not
only understand the same book himself, but also by his spirit makes it
known to the Church, by whom also the Angels (attending thereupon in all
assemblies thereof) seem likewise to come to know it, and not by any immediate
revelation thereof unto them in heaven, neither (as some do weakly imagine) by
contemplation of God himself, in whom all things, past, present, and to come,
are as it were engraven. For so they should know the secrets of men's hearts,
and the day of judgment, which none knows but God himself. For are not all
those things engraven in God as well as others? I grant the Angels to know much
more of their own nature, and of the nature of God himself, then the Church
knows, yea then perhaps is revealed in the written word: yet this lets
not, but that the Angels may be ignorant of the meaning of some things
contained in the word, concerning Gods pleasure toward the Church, till the
same by the spirit of Christ be revealed to the Church. I will not so enlarge
this point in this place as Isee it handled in some late printed books: but I
will content my self with this thus generally spoken thereof.

Another benefit of the Angels by the children of God is, that they have great
iov of their conversion and repentance. This our Savior teaches plainly by a
double parable, Luke 15. 3. etc. one of the lost sheep, the other of the lost
groat, for the finding whereof there was great joy: the application of b^th
which parables is thus made by our Savior hin self: I say unto you, that
likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, etc. and
again, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God for
one sinner that conuerteth: 7. and 10. And indeed there is a great reason of
this their joy: for do men reicice in earth for the birth of a sinner? and
shall not the Angels in heaven rejoice for the regeneration of a christian? Do
men rejoice for the birth of one of Gods enemies? and shall not the Angels
rejoice for the birth of one of Gods children? Do the true subjects of an
earthly prince rejoice and declare their joy by some testimony, at the birth of
a child to such an earthly Prince? how much more should the Angels in heaven
(Gods perfectest subjects) rejoice at the birth of a child to God himself, the
king of heaven and earth? even of one that shall it self be, and is as soon
as it is borne, not only a Priest but also a king, as before we heard? Is there
joy in earth for the birth of one that shall die again, and perhaps a
miserable death? how then should the Angels not rejoice in the birth of one,
that shall never die more: but shall live for ever: a life of grace here till
the time of translation from hence do come, and then a life of glory with
themselves: yea, with Christ Jesus? Did the Angels rejoice when Christ was
borne a man upon earth? and shall they not rejoice when men are borne partaker
of the divine nature from heaven and for heaven? yea wherefore did the Angels
so rejoice at the birth of Christ? was it not because by his birth in the world
many should afterward be borne unto God? As soon as ever Christ had taken the
book before spoken of, out of the hands of his Father, to open the same to the
Church, how did the Angels rejoice and sing for joy, as well as the 24. Elders?
Reu. 5. 8. 9. Did they so rejoice at the taking of the book to be opened to the
Church? how much more cause have they to rejoice and sing when by the opening
of mysteries in the same book contained, men shall be enlightened with true
saving knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and be also newborn
children unto God? As the Angels do thus rejoice in the first regeneration of
the children of God, that is, when men first begin to be the children of God:
so it is not to be doubted, but that their joy is increased, as such graces are
increased in men, whereby they are the more declared both to men and Angels to
be so regenerated, and newborn unto God. I might amplify this point much
more: but having been large in other things, it shall be sufficient thus
briefly to have spoken of this matter. So we see what great benefits, both men,
and other creatures, the inferior creatures of this inferior world, and the
superior creatures, even the blessed Angels in heaven have by the children of
God. Is not this therefore a great increase of their dignity? Is it not an high
commendation of their state and condition? That the wicked are hurtful to all,
and beneficial to none, does make their estate the more base and vile, abject,
and contemptible. Therefore that the children of God are hurtful to none, and
so beneficial and helpful to many, it must needs make their condition more
honorable and noble.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of diverse similitudes and comparisons setting forth the dignity of Gods
children.

TO omit diverse other arguments whereby the dignity of Gods children might be
furthered, enlarged and illustrated, let us now come to certain comparisons.
Herein I will a little transgress the order of Logicians (as I have not
hitherto been curious therein) and therefore I will begin with some
similitudes, whereby the holy ghost in respect of some things before handled,
does set forth the excellency of the children of God. From these similitudes I
will proceed to other comparisons. Touching similitudes, the book of the
Canticles is most plentiful in this behalf. For whatsoever by similitudes is
spoken generally in commendation of the Church, does belong to all the children
of God, as members of the Church. As therefore in respect of the excellent
graces of God before handled (as it were the matter wherein stands the essence
of the children of God) we heard the children of God to be compared to a Dove,
whose wings are covered with silver (that is, seem to be) and whose feathers
are as yellow gold: Psalm. 68. 13. so also to the whole Church Christ speaks
thus: My love behold thou art fair: behold thou art fair thine eyes are like
the Doves: Cant. 1. 14. In the next Chapter the Church speaks thus of her
self: I am the rose of the field (or rather the rose that grows in sunshine
places, that is most odoriferous) and the lilie of the valleys: verse I. and in
the next verse Christ applauding and approving the former similitude says,
like the ltlie among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters: in which
comparison Christ plainly compares the wicked; that are adversaries to Gods
Church, unto thorns, good (in a manner) for nothing, but for the fire, and
such as will continually prick and otherwise annoy the children of God. Where
this is to be observed, that the Church her self Note.
speaks not thus of the wicked, but that Christ calls them by the names of
thorns, to teach the Church and every member thereof, to be sparing in judging
and censuring their adversaries (how hurtful soever) and to leave judging and
censuring of them to Christ. But to return to that former similitude of
lilies, it is there and often afterward in the same book used to magnify the
state of Gods children as much above all other, as the lily of the open field
(always having the benefit of the sun) is more beautiful then all other
flowers: and this similitude is the more to be regarded, because our savior
speaking of the same says, that Solomon in all his roialty was not clothed
like one of them: Mat. 6. 29. yet was Solomon the most glorious king that ever
was in the world. Our Savior therefore teaches the state of Gods children
(being like to the lilies) to be more honorable then all the state of most
glorious earthly kings. In the next Chapter our Savior again compateth his
Church to a most straight pillar of smoke arising from the most rich and
pleasant composition of odors, that can be deu^sed even made of myrrh,
frankincense, and all the spices of merchandise: mounting (as it were upward)
toward God, as the accustomed incense prescribed by the law chapter 3 6. In the
4. Chapter, verse 1 Christ does not only (as before he had done, compare the
eyes of the Church to the eyes of a Dove, but says also that her locks were
within, (not hanging out like the locks of harlots) and that her hair was like
a flock of goats which looks down from the mountains of Gtlead: that is,
that all their outward behavior was most comely to behold, as a flock of well
fed goats kept in good order: Secondly, he adds, ver. 3. that her teeth were
like a flock of sheep in good order, which go up from the washing: whereof
every one brings forth twins, and none is barren among them: that is, whose
Ministers of the word (which do as it were chew the cud for the souls of other)
are all (touching principal points of doctrine and other behavior) in good
order, agreeing one with another, bringing forth fruit most plentifully, to
the great increase both of the number of souls in the Church, and also of all
good works in every particular member thereof. Yea he adds moreover, verse
3. that her lips are like the thread of scarlet, and her talk comely: (that
is, all her speech was gracious) and that her temples were within her locks as
a piece of a pomegranat: that is, that her countenance was most modest and
bashful, as if she blushed, and were red cheeked, like a pomegranat. In the 4.
verse he proceeds to other comparisons, saying, that her neck was as the
tower of David, built for defense, and that a thousand shields hang therein, and
all the targets of strong men: whereby he signifies, that such as were to bear
and sustain her government, were all like to David's Tower, well replenished
with all armor of proof, and such as were manifest arguments of most glorious
victories. In the fifth verfe he says yet more, that her two breasts were as
two young kids that are twins feeding among the lilies: whereby he
signifies, that all her doctine being only taken out of the old and new
Testament, does most sweetly agree together, without any difference, like two
twins: and is most sincere milk, wherewith as with most dainty and tender
kids flesh, fed in most pleasant pastures, full of all pleasant and amiable
flowers (such as were lilies amongst them, and cows lips and peagles are in the
best of our pasture grounds) she nourishes both her self, and all the
children that God does give unto her. In the 8 verse, and the rest following,
he calls her by the name of his spouse, (as before we heard) and so
signifies, that she is as dear and precious unto him, as any wife or new
married spouse is to any husband. In the 9. verse also he compares her to his
sister, in respect that she is to be an inheritrix together with him of his
Fathers Kingdom. Yea he does compare her to a sister so beautiful, and decked
with chains and other ornaments of Gods spirit, that he confesses himself
to be wounded and ravished with the love of her. In the 10. verse he
amplifieth that her love in respect of those graces by other comparisons,
preferring the same before wine, and the savor of all other spices, because as
some being wounded, and with their wounds sainting, are revived by wine, and
comforted by sweet odours; so he being before as it were wounded with her love,
was again revived and comforted with her graces. In the 11. verse he
compares her lips (that is, her gracious words proceeding out of her lips)
unto the sweet droppings of the honey comb, yea to honey mixed with milk, as
being not only pleasant, but also nourishable, as before we heard the lips of
the righteous to feed many: Pro. 10. 21. In the same verse also he compares
her good works (never separated from her gracious speech) unto the savor of
garments smelling as sweet (that is, being as acceptable) as the sweet wood of
Lebanon is to men, as the Angel testifies Cornelius his prayers and alms to
have been unto God: Act. 10. 4. In the 12. verse, for the better expressing of
hisloue, calling her again by the name of his sister and spouse, he sets
her forth by three other similitudes, saying that she is as a garden enclosed,
as a spring shut up, and as a fountain sealed up: by all which he commends
both her safety from all enemies, and from all corruption and put^efaction of
the world; and also her preservation and reservation for the only use of
himself, and of all other whom he will have refreshed with her living waters.
In the 13. and 14. verses he compares her works again, or all the race and
posterity of her (signified by plants) for profit, beauty, and pleasantness,
to an orchard of pomegranats, with sweet fruits, as cipres, spikenard, saffron,
calamus, and cinnamon, with all the trees of incense, myrrh, and aloes, with all
the chief spices: then he concludes in the 15. verse his whole commendation
of her in that place with the similitudes or metaphors before used, saying by
way of exclamation, Ofountaine of the garden! O well of living waters, and the
springs of Lebanon! nothing thereby, that there is not living water to be had,
but by communion with the Church, to whom alone Christ gives the water of
eternal life, whereof ^hosoeuer drinks shall never thirst any more. In the
fifth Chapter there is little of the Church, but only some titles or metaphors
repeated that before we heard of. The rest of that Chapter is most divine
description of Christ himself by diverse metaphors suitable to these, whereby
before Christ himself had described the Church. In Chap. 6. ver. 3. Christ
describes the Church by 3. attributes, every one illustrated by a similitude,
saying, that by the grace of God, and in respect of the spiritual gifts that
God had bestowed on her, she was beautiful as Tirzah (that had been a goodly
city in the borders of Israel, where before Samaria was built, Ieroboams chief
kingly palace seems to have been, 1. King. 14. 7.) comely as Jerusalem,
called the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth, Lament. 2. 15.
and terrible as an army with banners, viz. by her excellent discipline, and by
the majesty of him that dwells in her, and protecteth her. In the verses
following some former similitudes being repeated, in the 9 verse, besides the
last former similitude, in the end of the said verse, he sets her forth by
3. other similitudes, viz looking forth as the morning (that is, most
gloriously) fair as the moon (even at the full, and in a clear night) and
pure as the sun, that is, without all mixture, and not having some parts
thicker then some other, (as the moon seems to have) but being all and every
part alike and the same: as the Apostle using a word taken from the sun,
would have the Philippians to be, Phil. 1. 10. In the seventh chapter Christ
seeing the Church coming (as it were a far off) congratulateth her coming
with a speech of admiration, saying: How beautiful are thy going with shoes O
Princes daughter! so he compares her to the daughter of a Princes, and
describes her parts from the feet upward, by most excellent similitudes,
telling all posterity, that her feet were most soundly and safely shod (as it
were) with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and her hippes or thighs
compassed with Jewels, the work of cunning workmen (or made most
artificially) that is, girded with the girdle of truth: verse. 1. or else by the
Jewels of the thighs or hippes, he means some special ornament in those
times, worn upon that part, thereby signifying the virtue of chastity: and
this the rather seems to be the meaning, then the other, because if from the
shoes we shall ascend to the middle, and then descend back again in the
verse following to the nauill, there might seem to be some disorder not well
agreeing to so elegant a description. Then from the hips or thighs, he
ascends higher to the nauill, saying thereof, that it is as a round cup
wanting no liquor: and of her belly, that it is as a heap of wheat compassed
about with lilies: verse 2. meaning by that similitude of the navel, that she
had not a barren womb, but was already so fully concerued, that her fruit
should be as a great quantity of wheat, growing out of a most sweet soil, as
that is which bears lilies: from the navel and the belly, he comes to the
breasts, showing them to be as two young kids that are twins: 1. full of dainty
food for the nourishment of the seed, wherewith before he had said she was
conceived. From the two breasts he comes to the neck, comparing the same to a
Tower of Iuorie: thereby signifying the authority of the Church, for the
strength and whiteness or beauty thereof, to be like unto Iuory, and for the
height thereof to be like to a tower: after the neck, he compares her eyes to
artificial pooles in the frequented gate: that is, in the kings gate, which
was the chief way to the threefold town of Jerusalem: and wherein likewise
was a great market of cattle, and the poole of Bethesdas, that had five
porches: by this similitude noting the ministers of the word, which are the
eyes of the Church, to be most clear and quicksighted, for the better
enlightening of the cics of other, and therefore greatly frequented and resorted
unto, as some common thorow-fare, highway, or great market: verse 3. he
describes also her nose by the likeness of the tower of Lebanon, looking
toward Damascus: by this similitude reaching the Church to be of exquisite
judgment for the discerning of all doctrines and spirits of men, and other
things that differ: verse 4 Last, verse ^. he sets forth her head to be as
skarlet. and the bush of her head like purple, so that the king is tied in her
beams: thereby signifying the attire of her head to be so graceful and
excellent, that no king can behold the same, but he will be greatly in love
thereof: or that he himself Christ Jesus, ^s so enamored of her, upon the
sight of her beautiful attire, that he is willingly tied (as it were) to be
present perpetually in her holy congregations. By all this elegant and
excellent description of the Church in each part thereof, Christ Jesus would
have all to know her to be so glorious, as that no earthly thing is to be
compared thereunto. Therefore afterward in the 7. verse (as if he thought no
words sufficient to set forth her excellency) he says further, that her
stature was like a palm: tree, and her breasts like the clusters: so that he
means, that she is tall and straight, flourishing the more, the more by
persecution she is pressed down: and also that the old and new Testaments,
her two breasts (as before we heard) are never dry, but always full of liquor,
and most precious and comfortable doctrine, like to the blood of grapes. In the
8. verse, besides some former similitudes, he compares the savor of the
Churches nose to be like unto apples: by this meaning, that her breath that
comes out of her nostrils is most pleasant and delectable. In the 9. verse he
proceeds, saying, that the roof of her mouth is like good wine, which goes
straight up to her welbe loved, causing the lips of him that is asleep to
speak: by this similitude signifying, that the word of God in the custody of
the Church, and delivered by her ministry, is like to wine, that sparkleth
upward, and which works so powerfully (being the word of life) that even the
dead hearing the voice of God therein are awakened, and have their mouths
opened to speak to his praise. These be the chief similitudes whereby Solomon
in that most excellent song, called therefore The Song of Songs, that is, the
most excellent of all songs; whereby (I say) Solomon in that most divine song
generally sets forth the excellency of the whole Church, and the which may
be applied to every particular member of the same. In respect therefore of
these similitudes, we may well conclude again the state of all the children
of God to be the more excellent.

Besides these, let us also briefly consider of some other similitudes whereby
in other respects the dignity of Gods children is likewise set forth unto us.

First therefore let us call to mind the excellent speech of that wicked man
Balaam, which notwithstanding he spoke not of himself, but by the holy Ghost,
and wherein he prophecieth most divinely of the state of the Israelites,
comparing them most elegantly in one sentence to diverse things: As the valleys
(says he) are they stretched out, as the gardens by the rivers, as the Aloe
trees which the Lord bath planted: as the Cedars besides the waters: Number. 24.
6. That which he speaks of the children of Israel, may much more be spoken of
all the true Israel of God, even of all that by regeneration and adoption are
such children of God as now we speak of. Secondly, let that also be remembered
that is, Psalm. 1. 3. where the children of God by other properties described in
the two first verses, the Prophet says further, that they shall be like trees
planted by the rivers of water, which do bring forth their fruit in due
season: whose leaf shall not fade. The application of which similitude he
makes in the next words, saying, Se whatsoever he does, shall prosper; then
he adds a contrary similitude of the wicked, saying: the wicked are not so:
but as the chafe which the wind drives away, verse 4. The Prophet Jeremy
has the like in a manner of both, I mean both of the children of God, and
also of the wicked. But first of the wicked, then of the children of God: for
having set down this general sentence of the wicked, Cursed is the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord, (so do all the wicked) then he proves the same by a similitude: for he
shall be like the heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when any good
comes: but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land
and not inhabited. Chap. 17. 5. 6. In the very next verses he adds the
contrary of the children of God, saying: blessed is the man that trusts in
the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is (such are the children of God) for he
shall be as a tree that is planted by the waters, which spreads out her root
by the river, and shall not feel when the heat comes: but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not care for the year of drought, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit. In the Psalm 92. 12. the Prophet commends the righteous by
these similitudes, the righteous shall flourish like a palm tree, and grow
like a cedar in Lebanon, such as be planted in the house of the Lord shall
flourish in the courts of our God, they shall bring forth fruit in their age,
they shall be far and flourishing. But of the wicked it is said, the wicked
shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be consumed as the fat of
Lambs, even with the smoke they shall be consumed: Psalm. 37. 20. We have
heard likewise before other similitudes in respect of the certain estate of
Gods children, viz. that they are said to be like to mount Sion, and like to
Jerusalem compassed about with mighty mountains: Psalm 125. 1. 2. and like a
house built upon a rock, against which no storms can prevail: whereas on the
contrary, the wicked (though hearing the word but not doing it) are compared to
a house built upon the sand, which when storms and tempests came, was
overthrown: Mat. 7. 24. With these let us remember the comparison before
mentioned, of the children of God, unto a thing hallowed to the Lord, and unto
his first fruits: Ierem. 2. 3. The Prophet Zachary compares the people of God
to the Apple of Gods eye: Zach. 2. 8. By both these similitudes the holy Ghost
teaches, that as things in the law consecrated to God, as the first fruits,
and other things, were precious unto God, and as every man accounts highly of
the apple of his eye, and is very tender thereof; so all the children of God
are very precious to God, and he is very tender of them. Do not all these
similitudes much set forth the excellent state and condition of Gods children?
There are many other the like similitudes, but having given this taste of these,
I will leave the rest to the reader, as he shall meet with them in the
scripture. To come to other comparisons, if it were a great honor to the
Israelites to be called the people of God, yea such an honor as that in that
respect, they were more excellent then all other nations, how great a thing
then is it now for them that at that time were no such people of God, to be
called the sons of the living God? Hos. 1. 10. Paul often calls himself
the servant of Jesus Christ, the son of God, as reioicing in that name, and
thinking the same more honorable, then if he had been heir of all the
monarchs of the world. And indeed what service of any King, or of all Kings,
is comparable to the service of God, King of kings are able to give such
rewards for their service, as there is in keeping of Gods commandments? Psalm
19. 11. If it be such an honor to be the servant of the Son of God, is it
not much more to be the son or daughter of God himself? Let no man here
object, that the difference is not great, because they that are servants of
Jesus Christ, are also the children of God. For though this were so in the
particular example of Paul, yet it is not so in the general: all are not the
children of God, that are the servants of Jesus Christ, or of God himself.
Judas was a servant of Jesus Christ, as well as the rest of the Apostles.
Nebuchadnezer is called the servant of God: Ierem 27. 6. yet neither of them
both were the sons of God by adoption, such as we do now speak of.

It is a great honor to be called the friend of God, as Abraham is called:
James 2. 23. as likewise for Lazarus to be called by Christ himself, his
friend, and the friend of his Apostles: John 11 11 and for the disciples of
Christ to be called his friends: John 15 15. how great then is this dignity to
be taken into so near a familiarity with God, as by God himself to be called,
and to be made indeed his children: yea such children, as are made one with his
own and only natural son? To proceed yet further, although the state of
Adam and Eve in their first creation, being made in the likeness of God
himself, having the sovereignty over all other inferior creatures, and being
placed in the garden of Eden, were very excellent, yet the state of the
meanest of Gods children by adoption in Christ is far more excellent, more
honorable. For the first state of Adam was not so excellent, but that it was
mutable, and was indeed changed, in as much as he lost that excellent state,
wherein a the first he was created. But touching the state of Gods children by
adoption in Christ, we heard before that it is so certain, that it cannot be
altered: every name written in the book of life, shall so remain written, and
shall never be blotted out. Whom God has once blessed as to makethem his
children, they shall be blessed for ever. Adam had the grace of persisting, in
the favor of God, and in his first state if he would. But every child of God
by adoption, has the grace of willing to persist, and the most constant
promise of God, with many other assurances (before mentioned) that he shall
persist, and never wholly and finally fall away. The first honor and
prerogative of Adam was, that he had power not to sin. The honor and
prerogative of Gods children now by adoption is much more, viz. that they have
not power to sin: whosoever is thus borne of God, sins not, neithe^ can
sin: 1. John 3. 9 Christ himself as he was man, was (and is) more excellent
then Adam, before his fall, because the manhood of Christ was personally united
to the Godhead: There was no such communion betwixt God and Adam. As Christ was
thus more excellent then Adam, so his obedience could not but be more
excellent then the obedience of Adam in his integrity: therefore also it
follows, that the reward of Christ's obedience was likewise more excellent.
This reward being not for himself, but for them whom the Father gives him,
and who were predestined to be adopted ^^ him (for Christ merited not for
himself as the Pr^^sts teach) therefore it follows that the reward of all
that are adopted in Christ Jesus, is and shall be better then the reward of
Adam should have been, if he had stood in his first perfection: because the
righteousness of Christ is made theirs. The present estate indeed of Adam was
better, then the present state of Gods children here. But the future state of
Gods children by adoption is far greater, for the reason before mentioned, then
the future state of Adam should have been, though he had never fallen. Yea,
touching the present state also of the one and of the other, because Adams
stare should always have been uncertain, and the hope of Gods children by
adoption is most certain, so that whosoever is once by adoption made the child
of God, shall never be dejected from the same state: therefore also in respect
of this certainty, the prerogative of adoption is greater to every one
adopted, then the prerogative of Creation was at the first unto Adam.

It is one thing to have an help, without which a thing is not done, and
another thing to have help, whereby a thing is done. Unto the first man being
made so right, that he had power not to have sinned, not to have died, not to
have lost his excellency, there was given an help of perseverance: not whereby
he did persevere: but without which by his free will he would not have
perseuered: but now to the children of God by adoption, there is not only
given such an help of perseverance, that they may persevere if they will; but
also such, as whereby they have perseverance it self: that is, not only that
without this gift they cannot persevere, but also such, as whereby they cannot
but persevere. For Christ has not only said, without me ^e can do nothing,
but also, ye have not chosen me. but I have chosen you, and ordained you that
ye go and bring forth fruits, and that your fruit remain: Job. 15. 5. and 16.
Many other the like places there are to the same purpose, as before we have
heard. Adams immortality wherein he was first created was conditional, viz. if
he should not sin: but in the resurrection, the children of God shall be
absolutely immortal without any condition. To leave this comparison, as we
have seen before the state of the poor children of God to be more honorable
and excellent then the state of the richest men in the world, and of the
mightiest Princes upon earth, which are not the children of God: so also is it
better then to be a Prophet or an Apostle endued with the greatest gifts that
can be, for the working of the greatest miracles. For what will our Savior say
to them, that at the last day shall plead for the^ ^^lues, that they had
prophesied by his name, and by his name cast out devils, and done many great
works? himself says, that he will profess unto them (they having not been
the children of God) I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity:
Mat. 7 23. To the seventy also that returning reported unto him, that the
devils also had been subdued unto them through his name, he says, in this
rejoice not, that devils are subdued unto you: but rather re^oice that your
names are written in beauen. Luke 10. 17 and 20. Is it not thereby evident, that
to be written in heaven is more then to be an Apostle, or at least then to have
the authority of prophesying and the power of casting out devils in the name of
Christ. Is not the same also manifest by examples? Was not Balaam a Prophet? at
least, did he not prophecy most excellently of the Israelites prosperity, of
the destruction of their enemies, even of the Moabites, whose King had hired
him to have cursed Israel? As also of the coming and of the kingdom of
Christ: Number. 24. 15. Did not Caiphas himself prophecy of the necessity of
Christ's death for the people? Ioh. 11. 50. Was not Judas an Apostle? Had not he
as well as the other eleven power to cast out devils, and to heal every
sickness and every disease? Matthew. 10. 1. To proceed yet further, does not our
Savior himself prefer them that do his Fathers will which is in heaven
(who are they but the children of God by adoption in Christ?) before his mother
and his brethren according to the flesh? Matthew. Matthew. 12. 48 49. Luke 11. 27.
What shall I say more? or what other comparison shall I make? Truly I may
generally conclude this point of Gods children, in comparison of all other men,
with that general sentence of Solomon, before spoken in the title page, that
the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: Prou. 12. 26. From those
comparisons of the children of God with other men, I may now ascend into heaven
it self, and compare them with the holy, and blessed, and glorious Angels: and
that first in some sort as equal fellows and companions: secondly, being in
some respect more excellent and honorable then such Angels. The first is
acknowledged by the Angels themselves: for when John falling down before the
Angel which had bidden him to write, Blessed are they which are called to the
Lambs Supper, would have worshipped him, he forbade him so to do, saying, See
thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren: Reu. 19. 10.
and 22. 9. Touching the second, the Angels are not only fellow servants unto
God with the children of God but they are also themselves servants unto the
children of God: for it is expressly said, that they are ministering spirits,
sent out for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. 14. Who
are such heirs of salvation but only the children of God? Romans 8. 17. It is
also written in the Psalm: The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them: Psalm. 34. 7. The same is curdent by
examples of the Angels in scripture attending upon diverse particular persons:
upon Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, David, Daniel, Mary, Joseph, Peter,
Cornelius, Paul, etc) yea not only attending upon them, but also delivering
them out of their dangers, in flicting the judgments of God upon their
adversaries, and otherwise helping and comforting them according to their
necessities. This is the more, because it is never said, that the children of
God are servants to the Angels. Yea, when the children of God have offered
their service to the Angels, at least to worship them, they have refused and
forbidden it, as before we heard. Neither do the Angels attend upon the
children of God whiles they live only, but also when they die; viz. to carry
their souls into heaven: Luke 16. 22. But this perhaps may seem no good
argument for the prerogatives of the children of God, above the Angels, because
sometime a Prince may honor an inferior subject, with the attendance of a more
honorable person, and with some service to be done unto him, by such a more
honorable person then himself: and because also the Angels being mightier, may
seem therather to guard and otherwise to attend upon the children upon earth in
respect of their manifold infirmities and weaknesses, as also because of their
great adversaries, and not for any such dignity of the children of God upon
earth as we have spoken of. Though I should grant all this, and not contend of
the preferment of Gods children above the Angels in that respect: yet this I
may boldly (I think) utter, that there seems to be a great pre-eminence of
the children of God, in respect that there is a more near conjunction betwixt
Christ and them, then there is betwixt Christ and the Angels. I mean in
nature, not in place. In place, the Angels for the present, are nearer to
Christ then the children of God in earth; but in nature the children of God are
nearer to Christ then the Angels. For it is expressly said that Christ took not
the nature of Angels unto him, and it is plaintly affirmed that he took on him
the seed of Abraham: Heb. 2 16. and that he was made of the seed of David: Romans
1. 3. as also it is said, that he took our nature upon him in respect of his
conception in the womb of the virgin: so by contracting and marrying himself
unto us, and and us unto himself, he has made (as we heard) a further union
with us, whereby it is said of us in respect of him, that we are flesh of his
flesh. So then by conception and incarnation, he is made one with us: and by
the former contract of marriage, we are made one with him. First he is flesh of
our flesh, and bone of our bone, and secondly, we Note.
are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: this latter speech cannot be
spoken properly, but by virtue of his marriage and contract with us: for
otherwise he is rather flesh of our flesh (touching his humanity) then we flesh
of his flesh. Because we in that respect were before him. The former cannot
truly be said to be of the latter: but the latter may well be said, to be of
the former. According also to that before spoken by virtue of the said marriage
contract of Christ with us, we are said to be members of Christ, or of the body
of Christ with us, we are said to be members of Christ, or of the body of
Christ. To apply all this, is the like ever said of the Angels that they are
members of Christ? yea how can they be said to be his members, being altogether
of a diverse nature from him? for must not the head and the members be both of
one nature? or will not the whole that has a head of one nature, and the body
of another, be a kind of monster? I grant, that Christ improperly and by a kind
of metaphor may be called the head of the angels, in respect that (even as
mediator) the angels and powers, and mights, are subject unto him: 1. Pet. 3.
22. but that he is the head of the angels in such sort as he is the head of
elect men, adopted to be the children of God, it cannot be, because they cannot
be his members as we are. In respect therefore that we are more nearly united
unto Christ then the angels (first by nature in his conception, secondly by his
marriage contract with us) why may I not say, that we have a kind of
pre-eminence above the angels? for as every thing is more vile the further off
it is from that which is most excellent: so every thing cannot but be the more
excellent, the nearer it is to the most excellent. Moreover we have before
heard, that the great names and titles of Christ are communicated to the
children of God. Can the like be showed of the Angels? As therefore because God
had in Scripture said of Christ, thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee, and never so said of the Angels, the Apostle makes this conclusion. that
Christ was made so much more excellent then the Angels, by how much he had
obtained a more excellent name then they: Hebr. 1. 4. so why may not I make the
like conciulion from the premises, that the children of God are made so much
more excellent then the Angels, by how much they have obtained more excellent
names then they? The names of Seraphims, principalities, powers, and mights,
etc. are great names: but are they like to the names before mentioned:
especially may they be compared to the name Christ?

Again, for as much as we have before heard, that the regeneration or new
birth, or second creation of the children of God, is a greater and more
excellent work then the first creation of all things; and since the Angels have
their part only in the first creation; why may not this also be thought to
be some prerogative of the children of God above the Angels? Last of all
Christ promises, that the children of God shall sit with him in his throne, as
himself sits in the throne of his Father, and that by them he will judge
the world, yea the Angels that are fallen. Has he promised any such thing to
the Angels that do stand? or has he said any such thing of them? they are
indeed said to stand before him, and about his throne, etc. but they are never
said to sit in his throne. To stand before him, and round about his throne,
imports only service: But to sit, and that in his throne, imports
authority and majesty. But some man against all before spoken, of the
preeminence of the children of GOD in earth, above the Angels in heaven, may
perhaps object, that our Savior speaking of the state of Gods children in the
world to come, does set it forth by their similitude to the Angels in heaven,
saying, when they shall rise again from the dead, they are as the Angels of
God in heaven: Matthew. 22. 30. If in the resurrection, they shall be but like
to the Angels, how can they here be said to have any preeminence above them? To
this I answer, that it is but a slight and weak objection: for our Savior
does not simply say, that in the resurrection the children of God shall be like
the Angels: but only that as touching marriage (where of the question was
propounded by the Sadduces) they shall be like, and therefore he says, In the
resurrection, they neither marry wives, nor wines are bestowed in marriage,
but they are as the Angels of God in heaven. So then this comparison of likes
is not in all things, but only as touching marriage: and this is more manifest
by that which follows in the second verse of this present text, where we read
(and shall afterward by Gods grace hear) that at the appearing of Christ we
shall not only be like to the Angels, but also to Christ himself, which is
likewise more then ever we read of the Angels.

Now though I have hither to thus written of their preeminence of the children
of God, above the Angels, in respect of their communion with Christ, and by
virtue thereof, yet we must never forget, that as there is that preeminence, so
also in some other respects, the Angels (for the present time especially) have
great prerogative above the children of God. Namely, first that they dwell in
heaven; the children of GOD in earth: Secondly, that they are altogether
spirit; the children of God flesh and spirit: Thirdly, they are free from all
sin, and consequently from all misery, the fruit of sin; the children of
God, whiles they are clothed with corruption, are subject to sin, and do
sin daily; and by sin, they are also subject as to many other calamities,
so at last to death it self. So in these resp^cts they are inferior to Angels:
but in the former they have a great prerogative. What a dignity is this? what
an honor? what a glory, to all the children of God, to be so advanced? was it
not a great honor for Daniel, to be one of the three rulers, that were by
Daniel, to be one of the three rulers, that were by Darius set over all the one
hundred and twenty governors, whom he had before set over all his whole
kingdom? How great then is the honor of all the children of GOD, in that
they have a preeininence above Angels, who in respect of other creatures under
GOD, are principalities, powers, mights, and dominions? What was Darius
himself? yea, what was great King Solomon, in all his earthly pomp, in all
his honor, in all his roialtie and glory, in respect of the least Angel?

If any man, notwithstanding all before written of this point, touching the
preeminence of the children of God above Angels, shall differ in judgment, let
him unanswerably and plainly (without cauilling) answer my former reasons, and
show better for his judgment, and I will easily change my former opinion. I
affect not any novelty: I am not delighted with singularity: neither am I so
peremptory in any thing that I hold (differing from other the true servants of
God) but that I am ready in all humility to submit my spirit to the Prophets,
which shall speak according to the ancient holy Prophets and Apostles. In the
mean time, let not this point be thought a curious or unnecessary paradox:
but let it rather be regarded, as a point of great use, to provoke us to more
thankfulness unto God, and to be so much more zealous of his glory, by how
much the more he has advanced us: and finally, the more to comfort us, and the
better to assure us of the continuance of Gods favor toward us, the more
highly he has exalted us.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the promises of God to them that shall show kindness to any of the
children of God: and of the threatenings to the contrary, etc.

Having hitherto been thus large and plentiful in laying forth the dignity
of Gods children; I will now enlarge the same but by one argument more: viz. by
the promises of God to them that shall do any thing for his children, by his
threatenings against those that do them any hurt, and by the performance from
time to time of the said promises and threatenings. For hereby it does the more
manifestly appear in what price and reckoning they are with God.

Touching the promises and threatenings of God in behalf of his children, they
are first of all joined together. For, when God first made a special covenant
with Abraham and his seed, this is one special article (as before upon other
occasion we have heard) of the said covenant, that God would bless them that
should bless him, and curse them that should curse him: Genesis 12. 3. Was this
promise made to Abraham as one man? Not so: but as he was the root and father
of the faithful. Therefore all the faithful children of God have right to the
said promise: and it does belong to every one of them as well as it did to
Abraham himself: so that whosoever shall bless or do any good to any of
Abraham's children by faith, he may as well look for a blessing from God, as
any that blessed Abraham, or did any good to Abraham himself: and whosoever
shall curse or do any hurt to any of Abraham's children by faith, he may as
well fear a curse from God, as any that ever did curse or do any hurt to
Abraham himself.

Touching promises in particular, If he be blessed (that is, under many
blessings) which generally judges wisely of the poor, Psalm 41. 1. and that
generally likewise is merciful, because he shall obtain mercy, Matt. 5. 7.
then much more blessed, and much more may they hope for mercy, that judge
wisely of the godly, and that show mercy to the children of God.

Again, the Prophet prays (or exhorts to pray) that they may prosper that
love Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 6. by Jerusalem there meaning, not only the public
state of the Church, but every particular member thereof, because it cannot go
well with the whole, except it go also well with every member. Now although
that be a prayer, or exhortation to prayer, yet the matter thereof insinuates
a promise: for neither the Church, nor any part thereof, may pray for any thing
in their own behalf, or in behalf of any other, whereof they have no
promise. Forasmuch therefore as the Church prays (or exhorts to pray) for
them that love Jerusalem, viz. that such may prosper; it follows, that there
was and is a promise of the prosperity of all those that love Jerusalem, (that
is, of the Church, and whole compaine of Gods children) and every part
thereof, that is, of every one of Gods children therein, or thereunto
belonging. Our Savior speaks yet more plainly and expressly, saying, that he
that receives arighteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive
thereward of a righteous man: and that whosoever shall give unto one of his
little ones (that is, to one of the smallest and meanest children of God) a cup
of coldwater only, in the name of a disciple, verily he should not lose his
reward: Matt. 10. 41.

Thus much briefly for the promises of God to all that shall show any kindness
to any of his children.

Touching the threatenings against all that shall deal unkindly with them,
first, all that our Savior speaks of offending generally any one of his
little ones, Match. 18. 6. Mark. 9. 42. Luk 17. 2. may particularly be applied
to this purpose.

If the Angel of the Lord also (as D^borah reports) said, Curse ye Meroz:
Curse ye the inhabitants thereof because they came not to help the Lord, to
help the Lord against the mighty: Judge. 5. 23. (so condemning them, not to
have helped the Lord, that did not help his people) how much more does the
curse of God belong to them that go out to hurt the children of God, or that
do any thing for the damnifying of them? When the Prophet Jeremiah had said,
that Israel was as a thing hallowed unto the Lord, and his first fruits;
presently he adds, All they that eat it shall offend: evil shall come upon
them, says the Lord: Ier 2. 3. By eating there, the Prophet means the
offering of any indignity unto them. For in the time of the Law, when things
according to the Law were consecrated unto God, what common person soever (not
of the stock of the Priests) did eat of them, they did greatly sin against
the Lord, and provoked his heavy indignation against themselves. When the
Prophet Zecbariah had said, He that touches you, touches the apple of his
ete; immediately he adds this commination against such persons, saving, For
behold I will life up mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to those
that served them, etc. Zech. 2. 8.

The Prophet Amos says against the rich men of Israel, that dealt hardly with
the poor, buying them for silver, and for old shoes, selling unto them the
refuse of the wheat, etc. (as many rich men do in these days) the Prophet
Amos (I say) speaks thus against such: The Lord has sworn by the
excellency of Iaacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works: Amos 8.
6. Did the Lord with an oath so threaten them that dealt hardly with the poor
of Israel, who long before were fallen away from God? What then (do we think)
threatens he against all those that any ways deal hardly with them whom in
his abundant mercy he has begotten again unto himself, and whom so begotten
he loves with an everlasting love, and will never cast them off?

When Amalek came out to fight against the children of Israel, as they came out
of the land of Egypt, and were traveling by the wilderness toward the land
of Canaan, the Lord spoke thus unto Moses: Write this (says he) for a
remembrance in the book, and rehearse it unto Joshua (who was to succeed
Moses, and in his stead to fight the Lords battles against the enemies of
Israel) for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
Also he said, The Lord has sworn that he will have war with Amalek. from
generation to generation: Exodus 17. 14. and 16. Though this were spoken and
threatened particularly against the Amalckits, yet it insinuates a general
commination against all the like enemies of the children of God.

To conclude this point of Gods promises to them that show kindness to his
children, and of his threatenings against those that do show them any
unkindness: to conclude (I say) this point, as I began the same: viz. with a
sentence comprehending both; so let us remember that our Savior applies the
parable of the unrighteous Judge, and of the poor widow, in this manner: Hear
what the unrighteous Judge says; Now shall not God avenge his elect, which cry
day and night unto him; yea, though he suffer long for them? I tell you, he
will avenge them quickly: Luke 18. 6. 7. This word, to avenge, seems to
import, not only a promise of delivering the elect from all their wrongs, but
also a threatening of a judgment against them that had wronged them.

All this of Gods promises to the friends of his children, and Note.
of his threatenings against their enemies, is much more to be understood of
all good toward them that are any furtherers of their salvation, and of all
evil against them that do any wates oppugn and hinder their said salvation.
Therefore as such love to the Saints is reckoned up as a thing accompanying
salvation, Heb 6 9. 10. so also to hate and persecute the children of God is
set down as a token of perdition: Phil. 1. 28.

The more excellent also the person of the children of God is to whom any
kindness is showed, the greater promise is made unto him that shows such
kindness. Therefore in the place before alleged, Matt. 10. 41 it is said, that
He that recesueth a Prophet in the name of a Prothet, shall receive a Prophess
reward. The same is to be understood of threatenings: The more excellent the
person is that receives any wrong, the more is threatened to him that does the
wrong.

Thus much of these promises and threatenings. Touching the performance of them,
the Scripture affoordeth us many examples to witness the same.

As Ebedmelech a stranger (none of the people of Israel, but a Black-moore) had
made request to the king of Judah for Jeremiah being in prison, and so had
delivered him, Ier. 38 8. etc. so when the city of Ierus^lem was taken by the
Babylonians, according to the word of the Lord before spoken by Jeremiah in
that behalf; then did Ebedmelech find favor, and was delivered from
captivity, according to Ieremiahs prophecy also thereof, when the Jews were
taken captive, etc. Ierem. 39. 16. 17.

How also did the Lord recompense the widow of Zarephath for her kindness
toward Elisa, when having but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little
oil (no more then would make a cake for one meal of her and her son, then
to die, because of the extreme famine in those days) vet she believed the word
of the Lord by Elisa, and did cheerfully make him a cake first, before she
made any thing for her self and for her son? For first of all, that meal in
her barrel, and that oil in her cruse, did not waste or diminish, until the
Lord sent rain upon the earth: and secondly, when her son (afterward falling
sick) died, by the means of the said Elisa, he was restored again to life:
1. King. 17. 10. etc. so her kindness rece^ued a double recompense.

How plentifully also was the kindness of the Shunamite toward Elisha
recompensed ^viz. fourefold: First, by the gift of a son unto her in her
latter age, when she had been barren alwares before. Secondly, by restoring
her sard son to life again being dead: 2. King. 4. 8. etc. Thirdly, by
admonishing her before hand of the seven years famine to come, and aduising
her to go some where with her family to so^ourne during that time of famine.
And fourthly, bv directing her at her return after those seven years, to come
at that very instant to make petition to the King for her lands (which in her
absence seemed to have been seized to the Kings use) when Gehazi was making
report to the King of the great acts that Elisha his master had done, and
particularly how he had raised this woman's son from death to life. For by this
means (Gebizi telling the King that this was the woman upon whose son Elisha
had done that great cure) she did not only speedily recover her lands, but the
King also, upon her confessing her self to be the said woman, commanded all
the mean profits of the land to be restored unto her, even all the f^uits of
her lands, since the day she had left the land, until that very time: 2. King.
8 1. etc. So even that wicked man teaches all men to show most favor to such
whom they understand the Lord Note.
most to have favored, and to do most for them, for whom the Lord has done
most.

The good counsel that Iethro the father in law of Moses gave unto Moses for
the ease of him of that great burden which he saw to be too heauv for him, and
for the better government of the people, Exodus 18. 18 etc. was not forgotten,
but most graciously remembered. For diverse hundred years after, when all men
would have thought that kindness to have been dead and buried in the grave of
everlasting oblivion, the Lord ra^sed up one to recompense the same, that was
of all other the most unlikely, as before he had fet water out of the rock.
Even Saul that was most ungrateful to David that had done most valiantly for
him and for all his people, that afterward most cruelly slew in one dav 85
persons of the Lords Priests, and most bloodily smote the whole c^^y Nob (the
city of the P^^ests) with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, both
child and suckling, both ox, and ass, and sheep: 1. Note.
Sam. 22. 18. etc. (as it were in despite of God, and to be revenged of him,
for casting him off because he had not done the like against the Amalekites
according to Gods Commandment in that behalf: 1 Samuel 15. 1. etc) and who also
before, chap. 14. 44. and afterward chap. 20. 33. for David's sake. would have
killed his own son Jonathan. Even this wicked, barbarous, hard-hearted, and
desperate Saul, did the Lord raise up to remember the foresard kindness of
Iethro to his posterity, yea to be importune with them for recompencing the
same. For being sent against the Amalekites, and there finding the Kenits
dwelling among them (who were the Kenits but the posterity of Iethro, which
was also called Keni? Judge. 1. 16.) spoke very earnestly unto them to depart,
etc. saying, Go, depart, and get ye down from among the Amalekites, list I
destroy you with them: for ye showed mercy to all the children of Israel when
they came from Egypt: 1. Sam. 15. 6. What was the mercy of the Kenits, but the
fore said counsel of Iethro their father? Behold therefore a worthy example of
justice in a most unjust man, not to be so overcome with surie against some
whom God himself will have to be destroyed, as to forget kindness toward
them that have not offended, but are rather (in respect of themselves or of
their ancestors) worthy of kindness. A comfortable president also for all
the children of God, to teath them not despair, but to know that the Lord can
make them that are of themselves most cruel, to show them mercy in their
distress. Finally, a most excellent spur likewise to quicken and provoke al
men to be the more ready to show favor unto the children of God, since the same
may be remembered even by such to their posterity long after when themselves
shall be dead and rotten: yea not only to provoke them to do good to them that
have done any good for themselves, but also to those that have done good to
their predecessors and forefathers, yea to the posterity of such as by whom
their forefathers have received any benefit. All this was the more in Saul, not
only because he was such an one as he was, but also because we read not of any
such express commandment for the showing of that kindness to the Kenits, as
before Saul had received for severity against the Amalekites: where therefore
we may further observe from that which is in the same chapter recorded of Saul's
showing favor to the Amalekits (contrary to Gods commandment) that the more
expressly God forbids us any thing, the more ready we are to do that which
he so forbids.

Thus much for performance of Gods promise to all them that show any kindness
to his children.

The Scripture is as plentiful in examples of performance of his threatenings
before mentioned, against all those that show any unkindness unto any of them:
yea, as God is more large in his threatenings generally against such as
transgress his Commandments, Leuit. 26. 14. etc. and Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. so
his word seems to have more rather then fewer examples of his justice in
performing his threathing particularly against all those that are enemies to
his children.

As the Lord threatened for the unjust death of Naboth to take away the
posteruie of Ahab, and to cut off from Ahab him that ^isseth against the wall,
(that is, all his male children) as well him that is shut up, as him that is
left in Israel, and to make his house like the house of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, that made Israel to sin, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah, because of the provocation wherewith he had provoked, and made Israel
to sin; and touching Iezebel (who for Ahabs sake had commanded to put Naboth
to death) that the dogs should eat her by the wall of Izreel: and further,
that the dogs should eat him of Ahabs stock that died in the City, and that
the fowls of the field should eat him that should die in the field: As (I say)
the Lord had threatened all this for the innocent blood of Naboth, (even of
poor Naboth that had but one vineyard) to so great a King and Queen as Ahab
and Iezebel were: 1. King. 21. 21. etc. so was not all performed accordingly,
partly, 1. King. 22. 38. and partly, 2. King 9. 35?

As the Lord from time to time by Jeremiah had threatened captivity and
desolation to the Jews, partly for their other sins, partly for their hard
dealing with him, so was not all performed?

As our Savior threatened to make Jerusalem desolate, not only for her great
contempt and obstinacy generally, in that he having labored to gather her
children together as an hen gathers her chickens, they would not for all that
be so gathered together; but also particularly, because they had killed the
Prophets, and stoned them which had been sent unto them: Mat. 23. 37. so was
it not performed in due time? and is not that city desolate (as touching the
habitation of the jews) to this day? and are not the Jews more scattered
here and there through all countries upon the earth, then any other nation
whatsoever? As the Lord had commanded Moses to write in a book the utter
destruction of the Amal^kites, and that the Lord would have everlasting war
with them till they should be confounded, so did he not remember this book
of remembrance 400. years against after-generations, when all men thought it
to have been so raked up in dust, that it should never have been revived? Did
not the Lord, for execution of that which he had written before, raise up Saul,
telling him, that he remembered (though all other had forgotten, and did not so
much as dream of any such thing) what Amalek had done to Israel, how they had
laid wait for them in the way as they came up from Egypt: (a worthy thing to
be considered by all such as securely sleep in their old sius long sithence
committed, Note,
because God does not speedily execute sentence: Eccl. 8. 11.) and therefore
straightly commanding him to go and to smite Amalek and to destroy all that
pertained unto them, having no compassion on them, but slaying both man and
woman, both infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both camel and ass? 1.
Sam. 15. 2. 3.

As the Lord threatened by the mouth of Zechariah the son of Iehoiada, when he
was most wickedly and unkindly put to death by Ioash, whom Iehoiada the father
of Zechariah preserved (when all his other brethren were murdered) and advanced
to the kingdom of Judah: as (I say) the Lord threatened by the said Zechariah at
the time of his stoning to death, that the Lord would look upon his death, and
require it so did not the Lord indeed look upon it, and require it? For did he
not send a fourefold judgment upon Ioash and his people in that behalf?
First, when the year was out, Aram came against him: and against Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people, sending the spoil of
them to the King of Damascus.? Yea though the army of Aram were but asmall
company, yet did not the Lord deliver a very great army (of loash) into their
hands? Secondly, did not he (being left by the Aramits) fall into great
diseases? Thirdly, did not his own servants so thirst after his blood, that
though they saw his diseases to signify he would not live long, yet they
could not stay till he died of them, but conspired against them for the blood
of the children of Iehoiada the Priest (not so much respected by them, as they
were directed by God to revenge it) and slew him on his bed. Fourthly, when he
was so slain, is it not noted, that they buried him (indeed) in the cily of
David (but for his dishonor) not in the Sepulcher of Kings? 2. Chron. 24. 21.
etc.

Not to trouble the reader with too many examples, I will add but one more of
the performance both of Gods promise, and also of his threatening, as well in
the life to come, as before we have heard the same by the former examples to
have been performed in this life.

For how does our Savior describe his last sentence in the day of judgment?
Does he not give this the reason why he placed the sheep on his right hand,
and pronounced them blessed, and bade them inherit the king dome prepared for
them from the foundations of the world: viz. that when he was hungry, they had
given him meat; when he thirsted they had given him drink; when he was a
stranger, they had lodged him; when he was naked, they had clo^hed him; when he
was sick, they had visited him; when he was in prison, they had come unto him?
And when they are described to reply, when they had seen him so and so, and
when they had done so and so unto him: does not our Savior answer, Verily I
say unto you inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren ye have done it unto me? Does he not in like ma merset down the
reason of his sentence against the goats, placed on his left hand, and
condemned to everlasting fire, prepared for the dineil and his angels: viz for
that he had been hungry and they had given him no meat; he had been thirsty,
and they had given him no drink; he had been a stranger, and they had not
lodged him, etc. And when they are there produced as replying, When saw we thee
thus and thus, and did not thus and thus unto thee? does not our Savior
return this answer, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me? Mat. 25. 34 etc. Do not these things
further demonstrate the excellent state of Gods children? Do we not hereby
see, in what grace and favor they are with God? What greater interest can
there be, what sweeter fruit then the reward of the kindness that is showed unto
the children of God? what heavier loss, what sharper sauce, then the
judgments of God upon them that show any unkindness unto the children of God?
Though they perhapssee no benefit for the present, but rather may seem to
impair their outward state, yet in the end they shall find that, in respect
whereof they shall think wharsoeuer cost they have bestowed upon the children
of God, to be the best bestowed money that ever they laid out in all their
lives. Though these (viz. that disgrace, and otherwise wrong the children of
God) escape a while unpunished, and seem to laugh in their sleeves, and to
show their faces in all companies plesantly with Agag, and to say in their
hearts, as he spoke with his tongue, Truly the bitterness of death is past: 1.
Sa. 15. 32. yetwofull (without repentance) shall their reward be at the last,
when they shall find that they had been better (the greatest, the proudest, and
mightiest of them all) to have bitten their fingers ends to the bones, to have
eaten the flesh from their arms, or to have gone a thousand miles of an
errand, and that on their bare feet, all the while upon thorns, then to have
done any hurt to the least, to the poorest, and to the meanest of Gods children.

Last of all, the more any king rewards any kindness done to any of his
children, or punishes any indignity offered unto them, the more he shows
himself to regard such as have received such kindness, or met with such
indignity: and the more he does grace and honor them before his people, that
see his rewards upon such as have showed that kindness, or that hear of his
severity against such as have offered that indignity. I conclude therefore the
like of the dignity and honorable state of the children of God in respect of
his gracious promises made and performed to any that show but the least
kindness toward the least of his children: as likewise in respect of his
indignation threatened and executed upon all that do any of them any wrong.
Thus much for this point: and thus much also for all the arguments whereby I
thought good to lay forth the doctrine of the dignity of Gods children.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the uses of the former doctrine concerning the dignity of Gods children.

IT remains now, according to my order before insinuated in the beginning of
the fourth Chapt. that I show the use of all the doctrine hitherto handled
concerning the dignity of Gods children. These I will only touch, and (as it
were) but point at with the finger, leaving the further enlarging of them to
the better consideration of the reader, as also of such as shall have occasion
more to apply and press them then it is fit for me to do in this Treatise.

Thesevses are generally of two sorts: viz. either common to all, even to the
wicked as well as to the children of God: or special, either to the wicked
alone, or to the godly alone.

Touching common uses, this doctrine first of all serves to correct the base
opinion that most men have conceived of the children of God, and to teach us to
think and esteem of them according to those things before spoken.

All men (for the most part) regard men more according to their state in the
world, that is, according to their riches, to their honor and credit with
great men in the world, to their power and authority for doing of worldly
matters: All men (I say) for the most part do more regard men according to
these things, then according to their adoption, according to their graces,
whereby they show forth their adoption, and according to that estimation in
which the said graces accompanying adoption, do declare them to be with God
himself.

Neither is this the fault only of natural men (such as are not the children
of God themselves) but even sometimes of them that are themselves regenerated,
and sealed with the spirit of adoption: even they (I say) do not so regard one
another as they ought to do in respect of their adoption: yea the children of
God do often times think the more basely of themselves, and are the more
dejected in their own hearts, because they are so little regarded by other.

But since we have heard before how honorable their state and condition is,
and how God has most highly dignified and advanced them, why should they not
be so regarded of other? Why should they not so esteem of themselves? Not any
whit to puff themselves up, and to make themselves to set up their bristles
(as it were) with contempt against any other, but rather to comfort themselves
the more against such contempt, disgrace, and indignity as they meet with in
the world at the hands of other?

This use the Apostle James commends, when he exhorts, not to have the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons, or to esteem of men
according to their ccstly apparel, or outward countenance which they did bear
in the world; but according to their riches of faith, and according to their in
heritance in the kingdom which God has promised to them that love him: James
2. 1. etc. Under this opinion I comprehend also love of the heart, and honor
of the outward man, agreeable to the said opinion.

For so much James signifies in the plac^ before alleged, by having the faith
of Christ inrespect of persons: which appears plainly by his words
immediately following: viz. For if there come into your company (says he) a
man with a gold ring, and in good apparel, and there come in also a poor man
in vile raiment, and ye have respect unto ^im that wears gay clothing, and ye
say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place: and s^y unto the poor, Stand
thou here, or, Sit here under my footstool. These words (I say) of the
Apostle do plainly show, that he reprooueth not only a base opinion inwardly
of the children of God, but also the outward abasing and disgracing of them, by
preferring men before them according to their riches and costly apparel, etc.
And this James wrote not to heathen men, nor to mere naturals, but to them
whom God of his own will had begotten with the word of truth, to be as the
first fruits of his creatures: chap. 1. 18. thereby showing, that it is a fault
not only amongst the men of the world, too lightly both in their judgments,
and in their affections, and also in their outward carriage to regard the
children of God; but also in them that are of the same father, and have the
same in heart ance.

And this indeed in these days is a fault not only amongst profane men, that
contemn all goodness; nor amongst Papists, and professed Atheists: but also
amongst professors themselves, even of the best sort: viz. too much to esteem
the gay men of the world, and such as are gentlemen borne, and have good
estates in the world, though they be never so wicked and ungodly, and
despisers of all grace: and too basely to esteem, and too little to regard the
most apparent children of God, known to be virtuous, and showing many tokens
that they are turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, and have received ^orgiuenesse of sins, and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith in Christ: Acts 26. 18. Whom a king will honor, all
his subjects also honor much more. Therefore it is said, that when Ahashuerosh
promoted Haman, and exal^ed him, and set his seat above all the Princes that
were with him, then all the Kings servants that were at the Kings gate, bowed
their knees, and reverenced Haman, (though an Amalekit) because the King had so
commanded, etc. Ester 3. 1. 2. We see also, whom the King creates Earl, or
Baron, or makes a Knight, all other, good and bad, high and low, call him by
names agreeable, and do otherwise honor him accordingly. Shall the King of
Kings then honor men with the title and dignity of his children? and shall not
men esteem and respect them in like manner?

This use is necessary specially in judgment. For in judgment especially
appears the contrary corruption: men for the most part prevailing most in
their suits, that can set the best face upon their matters, and that can most
brave and flaunt it out by their apparel, riches, friends, and countenance in
the world: and they that have none of these, but are poor, yet rich in the
graces of adoption, going to the wall, and being utterly put down, how good,
how honest, and how righteous soever their cause is. But (as I said before) I
mean not too largely to stand upon any use, but only to point them out
briesly; therefore I will proceed.

Another common use of the same doctrine, and not much unlike the other, is,
that that we do not only not contemn the children of God inwardly, neither
only love them, or outwardly honor them, but that also we refrain from all
other unkindness against them, and that we be ready to perform any courtesy
unto them. Let us do good unto all (says the Apostle) but especially to them
that are of the household of faith: Galat. 6. 10. Who are more of the household
of faith then the children of him, of whom is named the whole family in heaven,
and in earth? Ephesians 3. 15. Who would be accounted behind in showing kindness
to the children of a king? and to offer any unkindness to any of them, is
little less then treason. There is no unkindness offered to them, which is
not more dangerous to us then hurtful to them. There is no kindness performed
to them, whereby we receive not as much benefit as they: yea, much more,
because the bestowing of it is compared to seed cast upon waters, that is,
sown upon the low grounds by the waters, that are always most fruitful:
Eccles. 11. 1. and the recompense to be looked for for thereof is compared to
the reaping in time of harvest: Galat. 6. 8. 9 Other arguments for further
proof of this point have been touched before: Chap. 12. in that which has
been written of the love of Gods children, and chap. 21. where we heard of the
efficacy of the prayers of Gods children, as well for the wicked sometimes, as
for the godly, and chap. 28. where we entreated of the manifold benefits that
other do enjoy by Gods children: and finally in the last before of the promises
of God to them that do show any kindness to his children. It shall not
therefore be needful to enlarge this use with any other arguments in this
place. Let this only be added, that if men were persuaded indeed of the
excellency of the children of God, and of that gain that is in showing any
kindness unto them, they would strine who should show most, and every man
would think him happiest that could show most. Is it not so toward the
children of eathly Princes? and that pattly because of their excellency, and
partly because they hope one day to have all plentifully recompensed?

This (no doubt) made Abraham and Lot so forward to show kindness to the
children of God, that the one sat in his tent door, the other at the gate of
the city of Sodom, as looking for some of the children of God whom they might
entertain with such kindness: and therefore also as being ready so to do, and
indeed they did accordingly. For they did no sooner see the Angels of God
coming toward them in the form and habit of men, but presently they ran
toward them, and would never leave them, till they had brought them into their
houses, and made them the best cheer they could: Genesis 18. 1 and 19. 1. etc.

This made the poor old laboring man of Gibeah be so liberal, that he did no
sooner see the Leuit and his concubin^ wandering about the streets of the said
city without entertainment by any, but that upon very little conference with
them, and he complaining how destitute he was of lodging, through the
inhumanity of that place, he without any further delay or deliberation spoke
most kindly unto him, and did most courteously receive him and his concubine
into his house, ministering unto them both, according to all their necessities:
Judge. 19. 20.

This made the Shunamit to constrain Elisha to eat bread in her house, as also
most earnestly to persuade her husband to make him a little chamber (of
purpose) with walls, and a bed, and a table, and a stools and a candle stick,
that be might (the oftener) turn in thither as he came that way: 2. Kings 4. 8.
etc.

This made Tabuba (otherwise called Dorcas) full of good works and alms, and
to make coats, and garments, for such as could not make them for themselves:
Acts 9. 9. 33. and 39.

This made Lydia, not only to beseech Paul and Timothy, but also to constrain
them (if they judged her faithful to the Lord) to come into her house, and to
abide there: Acts 16. 15.

This made Gaius so bountiful, in entertaining all the saints, that he is not
only commended by Paul as his bost, and the bost of the whole Church: Romans 16.
23. but that John also testifies of him and to him, that he did faithfully
what soever he did to the brethren, and to strangers, etc. who also did bear
witness of his said love before the Churches: 3. John 5.

How few such are in these days? How few men like to Abraham, to Lot, to the
old Gibeonite, and to Gaius? How few women, that for bounty and forwardness
therein, are comparable to the Shunamit, to Tabitha, and to Lydia?

A further common use of this doctrine, is to teach all both good and bad, the
honorable condition of the ministers of the word, by whom it pleases God to
call unto be his children. Before indeed we heard the dignity of Gods children
to be the greater, because God employed such honorable persons as the ministers
of the word are, in begetting them to himself. But as children are the more
honorable, the more honorable their parents are, so sometime also parents are
made the more honorable by their children. Therefore the woman that heard the
gracious words which came from our Savior, for his sake commended his mother,
crying out aloud before all the multitude present, Blessed is the womb which
bare th e, and the paps which thou have sucked: Luke 11 27. In like manner
therefore we may now as well commend the honorable state of the ministers of
the word, by the children of God instrumentally begotten by them to God, as
before we amplified the dignity of Gods children, by the honor of the ministers
of the word. This is the more to be observed, because in the first creation of
man, God did all himself alone, not using therein the ministry of any Angel.

That now therefore in the second creation, and restoring of man he imploieth
men to effect the same, it is no small grace and credit to them whom he does so
employ; the rather because it has been before showed, that this second
creation of man (in the judgment of man) cannot but be acknowledged a far
greater work, then the first creation either of man only, or of all other
things. Had I not been so plentiful as I have been already in the former part
of this treatise; and were not some other things remaining, not altogether to
be omitted: the manifold indignities that in these last days are every where
offered as generally to all the children of God, so specially to the ministers
of the word, would require this use to be much stood upon. Of many indignities
so offered unto the ministers of the word, it is not the least, but rather the
chiefest, and that which wounds most, that arises from the people
themselves, where such ministers have exercised their gifts, and spent their
strength: and perhaps also (for example of liberality to other, or by necessary
charges) exhausted their own outward states: having either nothing, or very
little left for maintenance os themselves in their age, when they most need
comfort: or at least not having half so much to leave to many children, as
their parents left to them alone. For such to be neglected, and contemned: yea,
also oppugned and pursued by their own people with many unkindness, cannot
but be a grievous sin against God, and an heavy discouragement of such
ministers. This indignity also is the greater, if it be at such times as when
such Ministers are under other afflictions, either public or priu^ate: For
what is this but to add affliction to the affl^cted? Psalm. 69. 26. and 109.
16. whom rather they should comfort? verily this cannot be excused: but must be
acknowledged an heinous sin: yea, though it be not doneroughly; and as it
were with stones or staves to pelt them away: or otherwise violently to drive
them out of their towns: but rather upon other pretenses, after a courteous
manner to entreat them to depart, and (as it were) to go out of their coasts.
Did not the Gergasens or Gadarens so to Christ? Mat. 8. 34 Mark 5 17. Did not
the governors of Philipp^ the like to Paul and Silas? Acts 16 34. yet either of
them had some color (at least of carnal reason) to do as they did. The
Gergasens or Gadarens had as then received but little benefithy Christ: onlv he
had cured one man in their coasts that was bodily possessed of a legion of
devils: the working of which cure had cost them the loss of an heard of swine,
of about ^000: Mark. 5. 13. The Philippian magistrates having ouershot
themselves in beating and imprisoning Paul and Sil^s being Romans, and in that
respect exempted from all such indignities in all places under the Roman
jurisdiction, might fear great danger to themselves by their said hard dealing
with Paul and Silas, if Paul and Silas should have taken advantage against
them, and might have had the benefit of the Roman law, for their said
advantage. Yet has the Scripture recorded these things both of the Gergasens
of Gadarens and also of the Rulers of Philippi, as great barbarism under the
pretext and cloak of a certain kind of humanity: what then is to be said of
such, in these days of the clear light of the Gospel, that shall use the
like smooth discouragements of their Ministers, that have faithfully preached
the Gospel to them and theirs? that have never hindered them the worth of a
little pigge, (but rather perhaps have sustained much loss at some of their
hands) and at whose hands they need not to fear any manner of danger by their
stay amongst them, or their taking any advantage against them?

Let all such unthankful people toward their faithful Ministers, well
consider what is said of the children of Israel for not showing kindness to
the posterity of Gideon (otherwise called Ierubbaal) even after the death of
the said Gideon or lerubbaal: The children of Israel (says the holy history)
remembered not the Lord their God, which had delivered them out of the hands of
all their enemies on every side. Neither showed they mercy on the bouse of
Ierubbaal, or Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had showed unto
Israel: Judge. 8. 34. 35. If the Israelites not showing kindness to the house
of Ierubbaal, or Gideon, were so noted and observed, yea so blamed and censured
by the holy Ghost, as also joined with their not remembering God himself, when
as Ierubbaal or Gideon had only delivered them from bodily enemies, will not
the Lord note and observe much more all inhumanity and unkindness showed, not
to the posterity of godly Ministers, but to such Ministers themselves in their
own persons, but to such Ministers themselves in their own persons, by whom
(instrumentally) God has delivered (or at least offered to deliver) such people
out of the hands, and from the power, bondage, and thraldom of their
spiritual enemies, that so they might be children to God himself?

Yea such may rather fear, lest by such discouragements offered to their
Ministers (whereby they are forced to depart, and to seek for more peace and
comfort elsewhere) the Lord Jesus Christ may say unto them in behalf of such
Ministers, as sometimes he said to the Jews touching himself: viz. that when
such are so gone from them, then they seek them, and shall not f^^de them:
Job. 7. 34. that is, then they wish they had them again, but shall not have
their desires. Especially, it were well that all such would fear in time that
which follows in the same place, viz. that where they shall be (when God
shall have taken them to himself into heaven) they cannot come. But wishing
and praying for better things to the most mortal enemies of any ministers of
the word, I do thus leave this use, and proceed now to other.

Another common use therefore of this doctrine of the dignity of the children of
God is, that the more excellent we hear their state and condition to be, the
more all sorts of men should take delight and pleasure in their society and
fellowship. The rather because it is no small means, both to make them that
are not the children of God, to be his children: For he that walks with the
wise shall be wise: pro^. 13. 20. and also to strengthen them that are already
the children of God, the better so to continue, and the more to grow in all
those things, wherein does consist the being of the children of God, and which
are the notes and marks of them. For if a little leaven sowreth the whole
lump: 1. Cor. 5. 6. and if evil words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15. 33.
then it cannot be, but that good words and the good behavior of men, must be
and are of great efficacy, not only to convert at the first, but also afterward
to strengthen and further in all goodness, them that are already converted.
And this is taught both by our Savior: Mat. 5. 16. and also by the Apostle
Peter: 1. Pet. 2. 12. Therefore also, so amiable should the society of Gods
children be to all, even to the wicked, that although they should not purpose
to make use of the fellowship of Gods children to their conversion, yet if at
any time they should be violently deprived thereof, then they should be so
distempered (as it were) and disquicted therewith, that nothing else should
please, satisfy, and content them, till they do again recover the same.

When the enemies of Daniel, by their exceeding importunity had overcome
Darius, for tne casting of Daniel into the lions den, how was the said Darius
(though an heathen) affected therewith? verily so, that he went into his palace,
and remained fasting, and forbad the instruments of music to be brought
before him, and lastly that his sleep went from him: Dan. 6. 18. If Darius
(not only a wicked man, but also a mere heathen, and altogether out of the
Church) were so affected, and so disquieted with the loss of Daniels company
for a time, till he recovered him again, how should all other wicked men
(especially living within the Church) take their loss of the company of the
godly, till the same be restored again? Again, if the company of some of the
godly ought to be so amiable, and their absence so doleful (as it were) to the
wicked themselves, how amiable should the communion of an whole Church be unto
them (yea, to all) so long as they may enjoy it? And therefore woeful and
doleful ought the casting of them out to be, from the communion of an whole
Church, if they shall so continue in their wickedness, as to deserve the same?
what then is to be said, both of those that are so contumatious and obstinate,
as to continue in their sins till the Church proceed justly and according to
the rule of the word to the fearful sentence of excommunication against them,
whereby they are given over unto satan? and also of those, that being so
proceeded against, do not regard the same? and lastly of those that in a kind
of pride, and high conceit of their own excellency and sufficiency, without
just and sufficient cause, do make a wilful separation of themselves from such
whole Churches as have the pure ministry of the word, and administration of
the sacraments according to the word: and wherein they have been bred and borne
(not only as men, but as the children of God, if they have at all received the
spirit of adoption) and where also, after their regeneration, and according to
their regeneration (if they be regenerated) they have been maintained,
nourished, and increased by the sincere milk of the word?

To enlarge this point of the desire of all men; yea, of the delight that all
men (even the wicked) should have in the communion of the godly, let the same
be further applied to the matching of themselves in marriage with the children
of God: yea, though themselves ^e never so honorable and noble in the world,
and the children of God (for worldly things) never so mean, base, and
contemptible. For as the Lord does often forbid his children to match with the
wicked: and as such matches are testified oftentimes by many examples to have
been very dangerous for the perverting of the children of God (especially by
the example of Solomon: Neh^m. 13. 26.) so it cannot be denied, but that the
matching (even of the wicked) with the godly is very effectual and helpful to
draw them that are so matched (though before wicked) to be the children of God
themselves also. And why should any honorable and noble personages in the world
(being vn^egenerated) disdain to match with the children of God, being
otherwise for education, qualities, conversation, and behauior fit? yea,
rather, why should not the children of God disdain to match with the wicked,
though themselves be never so meanly borne, and the said wicked never so
honorably descended in the world? what is carnal nobility to nobility of the
spirit? what is it to come of Princes in the world, in respect of being of the
blood royal of God himself, the king of kings? yea why also in that respect,
should not the greatest nobles in the world (not regenerated) think it a great
advancement, to match with a son or daughter of God (fit for qualities as
before I said) though borne of never so mean and poor parents?

As it is honorable and no manner of disparagement at all for the wicked
(though never so nobly descended according to the flesh) to match in marriage
with the children of God, though in worldly respects, never so meanly borne
(being otherwise as I said for conditions fit to match with so honorable
persons) so are such matches likewise of no mean efficacy, to draw such wicked
ones as sometimes they match with, to be themselves of the number of Gods
children. So says the Apostle (as before we heard) what know thou O wife,
whether thou shall save thine husband? or what know thou O man, whether thou
shall save thy wife? 1. Cor. 7. 16.

Hereof Ruth is a most pregnant and lively example: For being her self an
heathen, and having matched with one of the sons of Elimelech and Naomi, she
was so effectually converted by this match, that after the death of her husband
she would by no means part from Naomi. Indeed Orpah that matched with another
son, though she seemed a while to be very earnest to go with Naomi, into the
land of Judah, yet she was at the last persuaded to return back to her own
people; but Ruth had tasted so deeply of the spirit of adoption by her foresaid
match and marriage, that her mother in law Naomi (for the better trial of her
soundness therein) using many words to persuade her to return back as Orpha
had done, she answered most graciously, constantly, and resolutely to the
contrary saying, I^^reat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee; for
whither thou go, I will go: where thou dwell, I will dwell: thy people
shall be my people, and thy God, my God: where thou die, I will die: and
there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death
depart thee and me: Ruth 1. 16. 17. O rare example! O noble pattern! O
admirable president. Let not men therefore, only match and mate themselves with
them that are the children of God, but let them also so animate and hearten
themselves, to hold fellowship and communion with them, that albeit they should
be most earnestly persuaded by the children of God themselves to depart and
forsake them, yet they do answer such as shall so persuade them, as Ruth did
Naomi, Entreat us not to leave you, nor to depart from you, for whither ye go,
we will go: where ye dwell, we will dwell, etc.

Yea verily, the more steadfast should all be in holding fast the communion and
fellowship of Gods children, in respect of those benefits which before we have
heard in Chap. 28. to accrue and grow to all (especially by marriage) matched
and living with the godly: yea, not only to themselves, but also to theirs. I
write not this to encourage the children of God to match with the wicked (a
thing much condemned as we have heard) but to repress the pride of the wicked
in disdaining the company of the godly: at least all marriages with them,
especially if there be any imparity on their part to the godly in respect of
nobility, worship, or portion: yea not so only; but also to teach them
notwithstanding to match themselves and their children, with Gods children, (if
by any means they may attain thereunto) in respect of the dignity and
excellency of them; as also of those benefits that may be expected by them.

Now although these uses hitherto mentioned be common both to the wicked, and
also to the children of God; yet they are to be acknowledged principally to
belong to the children of God themselves. They principally are to honor them
according to their dignities, and to use them kindly according to their
necessities. They principally are reverently to regard the Ministers of the
word, whom God has ordained as isntrumental fathers to beget children to
himself. They principally are to take delight, both generally in the society
of the children of God, and also more particularly in matching and making
marriages with them.

Yea they that are most noble and wealthy are not to disdain them that in
worldly respects are base and poor. Who may for nobility and riches be
preferred before David, by God himself advanced to a kingdom? Yet he
generally of the company of the children of God says, that all his delight was
in them that were excellent in the earth: Psalm 16. 3. And again: I am a
companion (not of some, as of some of the noblest and wealthiest, but) of all
them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts: viz. how base or poor soever
they be, Psalm. 119. 63. Therefore touching the wicked, he does not only say,
I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with the
dissemblers: I have bated the assembly of the evil, and have not companied
with the wicked: Psalm. 26. 4. 5. neither, I have hated them that give
themselves to deceitful vanities: Psalm. 31. 6. neither again, Do not I hate
them (O Lord) that hate thee? and do not I earnestly contend with them that
rise up against thee? I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine
enemies: Psalm. 139. 21. 22. David (I say) does not only say thus touching the
wicked, but to show his detestation of them the more, he says with great
vemency Away from me (or auant) ye wicked for I will keep (or that I may
keep) the commandments of my God. Psalm. 119. 115. so nothing, that no man can
keep the commandments of God, except with great detestation he reject and
renounce the company of the wicked.

As David spoke thus generally of the society of the godly, and therefore
contrarily of the fellowship of the wicked (to note that none can delight in
the godly, that abhors not the ungodly) so for marriage, though he were the
anointed heir apparent of the Crown and Kingdom of Israel, as also a Prophet
that had composed diverse Psalms before, yet he disdained not to match with
the widow of the churl and perfect country clown Nabal, because by her
wisdom she had showed her self to be one of the daughters of God. 1. Sam.
25. 39.

Thus much for those uses of the former doctrine of the dignity of Gods
children, which are common to all. Now follow those which are more special.
These are twofold: viz. either concerning the wicked and such as are in their
natural state, not regenerated, or belonging and proper to the children of
God, newborn, that have received the spirit of adoption, whereby they call
God their father.

Touching the wicked, as they may hereby see their own woeful and fearful
state and condition, the same having been in the former arguments showed to be
in all things (or most things) contrary to the state and condition of the
children of God: so let them learn to abhor the same, and in such manner to
dislike of themselves as they are unregenerated, that they may make the more
haste to change their copy (as we use to speak) and to come out from among
them that are of their ownesort, and to join themselves with the children of
God, and to be one of them.

The wicked and unregenerated think themselves the only happy men of the
world. But alas, how they are deceived may appear by the premises. Not only
is the poorest, the meanest, the weakest and the sickest, the basest, the most
destitute and forlorn child of God (destitute I mean of all worldly help
and comfort) in far better state then the greatest Monarke in the world, that
is not by regeneration the child of God: but such an unregenerated man is also
in far worse state and condition then any worm, any toad, or any other
creature whatsoever, and that both for this life and for the life to come.

For this life, because every other creature has all things Note:
necessary for the kind thereof, without any care, and without any grief or
sorrow. What mighty Monarke had ever so?

For the life to come, because all other things perish with their life, but the
wicked remain in their souls, and are committed to Hell, there to be
reserved in chains and unspeakable torments till the last judgment day, when
their bodies also shall be raised again, and joined to their own souls, and
so both in soul and body they shall be cast again into hell fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, thence never to be delivered, but there to be
tormented for evermore, as before has been showed.

Should not this make them to make all haste to forsake this state, and to
join themselves to the children of God?

Neither let them fear so to do, whatsoever their former sins have been.
For if once they see and dislike their unregenerated state, then are they in
the way to adoption and regeneration. Such came Christ to heal, and to call to
repentance, Matthew. 9. 12. 13. Luke 19. 10. Such Christ has promised to
comfort, and to ease of the heavy burden of their sins, Matthew. 11. 28. Such
have the better warrant so to do, because it is written by the Prophet
Zecharie, that the Lord of bosts had said, that in these last days ten men out
of all languages of the nations should take hold of the skirt of him that is a
Jew, and say, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you:
Zecbar. 8. 23. Other Prophets also before had written to the same purpose thus:
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain^ of the house of the Lord
shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and
say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Iaakob, and be will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths,
etc. Isa. 2. 2. Mich 4 1.

Many other the like promises there are for the encouragement of all (how
wicked soever) to change their state, and to make haste in that behalf, before
they perish in their wicked condition.

The examples likewise of those, Act. 2. 37. of the jailer, Act. 16. 27. of
Paul himself, of Mary Magdalen, of all the heathen converted by the Apostles,
and infinite other, may further encourage men unto this have, for entering into
the way of adoption.

If once they enter, let them proceed and go forward: not half way, but
throughout, and to the end. Agrippa was half, yea almost persuaded to be a
Christian: Act. 26. 28. but we read not, that he was altogether persuaded so
to be a Christian. Though we may not absolutely say that he never afterward
fully and wholly became a Christian, yet that (but almost) mentioned in the
Scripture, and no more either there, or in any other place being testified of
his perfect conversion, may justly make us all the more to doubt of him.

Many in the days of Christ were his Disciples for a time, who at the last
took such offense at his Doctrine, that they went back, and walked no more
with him: John. 6. 66. After that, many were followers of the Apostles, who
afterward forsook them: 2. Tim 4 6. Heb. 10. 25. 1. Ioh. 2. 19.

It is a dangerous thing thus to enter, and not to go forward: No man that
puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is apt to the Kingdom of
God: Luke 9. 62. As this is true in the particular calling to the ministry, so
much more in the general to Christianity, If any after they have escaped from
the filthiness of the world, (that is, after they made profession of
renouncing the filthiness of the world) through the knowledge of the Lord, and
of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet entangled therein again, and overcome,
the latter end is worse with them then the beginning, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 20.

The means whereby they that are wicked may be released of the bondage of
their sin, and made the children of God, is (as we have heard) principally
the ministry of the word.

So likewise the society and fellowship of them that are the children of God
already, as before we heard.

If notwithstanding all hitherto said, they that are wicked, will not forsake
their wickedness, but will still remain such as they are, yet let them take
heed of all wrongs and injuries against them that are the children of God, lest
in the end it be to their cost, and they repent, as Judas did, when it is too
late. But of this point also before.

Thus much for the uses of the doctrine of the dignity of Gods children which
are proper and special to the wicked.

Touching them that are the children of God indeed, let them especially first
of all take heed that they fall not from their excellent state. It is true
indeed, that they that are once truly the children of God, shall ever so
continue, and cannot fall away. Howbeit, we are exhorted often to take heed to
our selves in this behalf, Heb. 3. 12. and 10. 23. and 12 15. and elsewhere,
because exhortations are the speciallest means for our upholding.

We condemn all, that being but base and beggarly, and yet taken into some
noble man's or gentleman's house and service, where they are in the way to
preferment, cannot keep themselves well whiles they are well. Especially we
condemn them, that having found such favor with Princes, as that from a low
degree they are advanced to some honorable condition (as the Earl of TERONE
and other) cannot contain themselves, but break their lists, and so bring
themselves to their former baseness. How much more then may they be condemned,
that being translated from death to life, from darkness to light, from
bondage to liberty, from servants and slaves of the Devil, to be the sons
and daughters of God, from Hell to Heaven, do what in themlieth to return
again to their former misery?

Although indeed the true children of God can never be altogether vnchilded
(as it were) and utterly degraded, yet they in particular things so fall, yea
generally for a time so decline, that they may seem, and often times seem to
other and to themselves, never to have been the children of God. All this is
by negligence and security. For as Blessed is the man that fears always,
Prou. 28. 14. so it is woeful, even a thing that brings much woe often times
to the children of God, to be at any time but a little sleepie, drowsy,
secure, and watchlesse.

A second special use for the children of God is, that having found this love
before spoken of, with God, to be made his children, they trust in him, and
depend on him, not fearing, but that he that has made them his children, and
will give them a kingdom fit for such children, will also, and much more, give
them all things for this life: Luk 12. 32. Our little children when they rise
in the morning, yea our servants also, take no care what they shall eat, or
what they shall drink; but they leave all such care to us their fathers and
their masters, and it is indeed our duty to provide all such things for them.
For he that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household,
denies the faith, and is worse then an infi^ell: 1. Tim. 5. 8. Hitherto
belongs the speech of Moses unto God, Number. 11. 12. 13. and the practice of
Bathshebaes huswife, Prou. 31. 15. Why then should not we much more, that
profess our selves the children of God, cast all our care upon our heavenly
father that cares for us? 1. Pet. 5. 7. Under this use I comprehend infinite
comfort of the children of God.

The grounds of this comfort being handled before, and some of them to be
touched again in the next verse, I shall not need to stand upon them now.

Yea with this trust in God, and comfort from God, we may join patience both
toward God, and also toward men. Toward God, because we have heard before,
that he corrects vr only in love, and for our great good, that we may not
be condemned with the world: 1. Cor. 11. 12.

Toward man, because he is but Gods hand to chastise us, and cannot go
beyond his commission: and last of all, shall himself be called to account for
whatsoever wrong he does unto us. God himself will judge and revenge our
cause for us: yea the more that we hold our peace, and put up all without any
resistance or murmuring. As it is the glory of a man generally to pass by an
offense, Pro. 19. 11. so especially is it the glory of the child of God. It
is no credit for a man to strive with a boy, nor for the sons of Nobles to
contend with base persons: yea it is most for their credit, with a kind of
disdain and contempt to let such persons go without any revenge, as though
they had offered them no indignity.

The application of this we have heard before, in speaking of the true
nobility and magnanimity of Gods children.

A third use is, that they love him that has loved them, as before we heard.
We look that our children love us better then other, though other be better
able to prefer them. How much more should we love God that is Almighty?

A fourth use of the dignity of Gods children, for the children of God
themselves, is, that they are advanced thereunto, b^ careful not only
specially to depend upon him, but also generally to walk worthy of their said
calling and dignity, Ephesians. 4 1. and to honor him that has so honored them.
We are commanded to honor our earthly fathers, Exodus 20. 9. A son (says the
Lord) honors his f^ther, etc. If I then be a father, where is mine honor?
Malach 1. 6.

This walking worthy of our calling, and this honoring of God our father,
consists in two things: First, in hearing of his word: secondly, in walking
according to his word, and conforming our selves to the likeness of God
himself. My son, hear thy fathers instruction and forsake not thy mothers
teaching, Pro. 18. He that is of God, hears Godsword. Ioh. 8. 47.

The hearing of Gods word is nothing without obedience, and conforming our
selves unto God. As obedient children, fashion not your selves unto the former
lusts of your ignorance: but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation, etc. And if ye call him father, which
without respect of persons judges every man according to his work, pasle the
time of your dwelling here in fear: 1. Pet. 1. 14 15. etc.

The Lord has not graced us with titles of his children, that we should be
proud, or swagger, and live as we list in all licentiousness, chambering, and
wantonness, as the children of many great men in the world do: but therefore
are we a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, that we
should show forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into
his (...) light: 1. Pet. 2. 9. and that as strangers and pilgrims here we
should abstraine from fleshly lusts, which fight against our souls; and hasto
our conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, (or any other not called to the
same honor) that they which speak evil of us, as of evil doers, may by our
good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the visitation:
verse 11. 12.

The children of Princes use to wear princely robes, and other princely jewels
and ornaments.

So to hear God, so to obey God, so to conform our selves unto God, is our
princely robes, our princely jewels, and ornaments, far passing all the robes,
jewels and ornaments whatsoever of all the Princes in the world: Prou. 1. 9.
and 4. 9. whereby we are distinguished from the base men of the world, whereby we
are all glorious within, and have our clothing (as it were) of broidered gold:
Psalm. 45. 13. Peter speaking of humility, exhorts the younger sort to deck
themselves inwardly with lawlinesse of mind: 1. Pet. 5 5. And before in
speaking of women, and to women against the ga^ish and uncomely apparelling
themselves with broyd^red hair, gold, etc. he opposes unto such things the
vncorrupt man of the heart, with a meek and quiet spirit as a thing before God
much set by: Chap. 3. 4. That which is spoken of these particulars, is to be
understood of all other parts of holiness and righteousness. Whereby we do
resemble God, as in mercy: Luke 6. 36. and in forgiving one another: Mat. 6.
14. Ephesians. 4. 32. and in other the like.

These things are the marks of Gods children, without which in truth, and in
some measure, neither other can discern them, nor themselves can know
themselves to be the children of God.

These robes and ornaments being once put on, must never be put off, and laid
up for high days; and solemn assemblies; but they must be worn at all times,
and in all meetings. Much use, wears and consumes other ornaments, but the
more these ornaments are worn, the better they are.

Thus the Israelites were commanded to walk in the ways of God: Deuteronomy. 8. 6.
Solomon is commended for loving the Lord, and walking in the ordinances of
David his father: 1. Kings 3. 3.

So the Rechabits are in some sort commended for obeying some ordinances of
their Father, and by their example the Jews are condemned for not having the
like regard of the ordinances of God: Ierem. 32. 5. etc. On the contrary, the
sons of Samuel are discommended for not walking in the ways of Samuel: 1.
Sam. 8. 3.

The application of these examples is so easy, that I need not to stand upon
it.

This is the sum of all, that the more God has dignified us, in making us
his children, the more we honor him, by hearing his word, and keeping his
commandments. The more we do for our own children, or show kindness to any
other, the more duty we look for from our own children; and the more also we
expect, that they to whom we show kindness should both regard our words, and
also do that which we require of them Shall we that are but Gods instruments in
all that we do: and that do nothing, neither can do any thing in respect of
this our adoption whereby God aduanceth us to be of beggars and rebels his
children, and heirs, even heirs together with his own Son Jesus Christ;
shall we (I say) look for so much service and duty at the hands of other, that
are in many respects our equals, if not in some our betters, (though we in
some other are in the world their superiors) and shall we not perform much
more unto God? One maine argument that kept Joseph from yielding to the filthy
desire, and wicked request of his mistrisse, was the consideration of that
which his master had done for him. My master (says he) knows not what he
has in the house with me: but has committed all that he has to mine hand.
There is no man greater in this house then I: neither has he kept any thing
from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great
wickedness, and so sin against God? Genes. 39. 8. 9. If Joseph made such
conscience of duty toward his master, because he had so graced and advanced
him in his family, though he were still but a servant, what conscience are we
to make of all duty to God for honoring of him, that being so base and vile as
we were, are by him advanced to be his children?

That we may thus hear and obey God, it becomes us especially to avoid the
society of the wicked, before lightly touched. And indeed what greater disgrace
for the sons of a Prince and a mighty monarke, then to confort with clownes
and scullians, and such like? Much more may be said of the disgrace of the
children of God by the communion and fellowship of the wicked. If we cannot
avoid their company, yet let us take heed of all pollution by them. Noah and
his family lived amids the whole sinful and wicked world: and Lot among the
filthy Sodomits: yet these kept themselves unspotted. Our Savior says to the
Angel of the Church of Sardi, Thou have a few names yet in Sardi which have
not desiled their garments: Reu. 3. 4. yet these few lived amongst a great
number, that had a name to be alive and yet were dead. Howsoever therefore we be
thrust and thronged with the wicked, yet such must be our care for our selves
that their soily and filthy garments may not defile and pollute ours.

We must also take heed of too much worldliness: lest thereby we be defiled,
and do spot those ornaments and rich robes before spoken of: we must use the
world as if we used it not. As the moule always lives in the earth, and yet
keeps her skin as fair, as clean, and as fine as the best and most
curiously brushed velvet gown in a kingdom, so must we keep our adoption, and
all the robes thereof. even in the mids of this sinful and therefore most
dangerous age.

This caveat, thus to look to our selves in respect of the world is very
necessary. For there is nothing more dangerous to man's salvation, then the
world with the riches, delights, honors, and other things therein. When no
tentation else could take hold of our Savior, then the devil set upon him with
this argument from the world: viz that having showed him all the kingdoms of
the world, he would give him all these, if he would fall down and worship him.
Esau for the world sold his birthrigh: Heb. 12. 16.

Judas for a small morsel of the world sold and betrayed his Lord and master,
and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Demas fo^sooke the Apostle Paul. and embraced this present world: 2. Tim 4.
10. The like may b^ said of many other.

Another more special use conce^neth chiefly the ministers of the word: viz.
that the more exc^llent they understand the state of the children of God to be,
the more diligent they be in teaching of them, and warching over them; as also
the more careful to feed them with the purer, and better diet beseeming their
excellency. Do not nurses to the children of kings and Queens thus? at least,
ought they not so to do? may they then whom God has appointed to be nurses to
his own children, be more careless?

This briefly shall suffice for the uses of the former discourse of the dignity
of Gods children: yea, this also shall serve for the first part of my present
text, viz. of the Apostles exhortation to the serious consideration of the
dignity of Gods children.

CHAP. XXXII
Of the objection that might be made against all generally, before written of
the dignity of Gods children, and of the first part of the Apostles answer
thereunto.

THe former part of this text being already handled, it remains now to
speak of the second: viz. of the Apostles answer to an objection that might be
made against that which the Apostle had spoken, and which I have now more
plentifully laid forth, of the dignity of Gods children. This I will but run
over in a trice, because that which I have written was the principal point,
the which at the first I intended and propounded unto my self. That which
remains, is but an appendix of the former, and therefore it needs not so
largely to be handled.

The objection which might have been made against the Apostles former
commendation of Gods love in making us his children, is this. Is the love of
God so great, so unspeakable, and so admirable in making us his children? And
is our state and condition in being the children of God, so worthy, so
excellent, so honorable? How can this be, since of all other men in the world,
we are least respected, least regarded? yea, we are not so much as known
(almost) in the world? To this the Apostle gives a double answer: or
acknowledging indeed the thing objected, viz. that we are not regarded, yea,
not so much as known in the world, he gives a double reason why the world does
so little respect us, scarce knowing us: namely, first, because it knows not
God himself, in this verse: secondly, because it is not yet evident to the
world what we shall be hereafter, in the beginning of the next verse.

Before we come to the words themselves, let us note, and only note this, that
whosoever will commend any thing to other, as worthy of their consideration and
observation, they must before also think of that which may and will be
objected against the same, as also prepare answer to the said objection. For
there is nothing so holy, so excellent, so sound, but that the wit of man has
somewhat, or will have somewhat to object to the disgracing, abasing, and
perverting thereof. Therefore the Lord has given us such a word, even such a
Scripture and written word, as is not only profitable or sufficient to teach
(namely the truth) but also to improoue (or to couuince and confute all
errors, and whatsoever may be objected against the said truth) neither only
to instruct in righteousness, (that is, to exhort us unto all virtue) but also
to correct (or to reprove all vice, and whatsoever may be said against
virtue) that so the man of God (that is, the Minister of the word) may be
absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. This might largely be
proved by infinite examples in the Scriptures: but as I promised only to note
it, so I will perform my promise in that behalf.

To return therefore to the words of the Apostle, let us first see the meaning
of the said words, and then the matter it self.

The first word [the world] has diverse significations. First, it signifies
the whole mass and lump of all Gods creatures, especially visible: as when it
is said, that God made the world: Act. 17. 24. and that he chose us before the
foundations of the world were laid: Ephesians. 1. 4. Secondly, it signifies this
inferior part of the world, with all things therein contained, or thereto
belonging. So it is said, the devil did show unto Christ all the kingdoms of
the world, Matthew. 4 8. And the field is the world, Matthew. 13. 38. And, He was
the light, that ligtneth every one that comes into the world: Ioh. 1. 9. He
was in the world: verse 10. And, Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world: 1. Ioh. 2. 15.

Thirdly, it is taken for the elect men of the world: Behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world: Ioh. 1. 29. So God loved the world:
Ioh. 3. 16. He sent not his son that the world might be condemned, but that
the world might be saved: verse 17. Fourthly it is used only for the wicked of
the world, and for all men unregenerated, and that for two reasons. First,
because they savor only the things of this world, and do mind nothing but
worldly things: Secondly because they are the greatest part of the world; and
for the most part bear the chiefest sway and swinge in the world, as though
they were the only lords and kings of the world: whereas indeed the least part
is theirs: yea, they have no right or interest to any thing in the world, as
has been before showed. The word translated world, naturally signifies order,
or ornament, and beauty, because indeed all things were at the first created in
most excellent order, and were so beautiful, that they were a great ornament
to God himself, the creator of them. Now the wicked are not only the greatest
part, bearing the greatest sway and swinge in the world; but also accordingly,
they are the only gallants (outwardly) of the world: brauing it out above all
other in such manner, that if they were out of the world, the world might seem
to be no world, and to have no beauty in it. In this signification is the word
taken when it is said, the world knew not: Ioh. 1. 10. If the world hate you,
ye know that it hated me first. If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you: Ioh. 15. 18. 19. So it is taken: Ioh.
16. 8. He shall reprove the world of sin: and Ioh. 17. 9. I pray not for the
world. So it is taken in many other places. These are the principal
significations of this word world, and in this fourth signification it is taken
in this place. The next word here, is the word knows. To omit the diverse
significations of this word in other places, here it signifies (as before has
been insinuated) not to acknowledge, not to regard, or respect. So it is said
that our Savior shall say at the last day to them that shall plead their
prophesying, and casting out of devils in his name, I never knew you, etc. Mat.
7. 23. that is, I never approved you, liked you, or regarded you. Yea, here, as
the words Despise not prophesying, 1. These. 5. 20. import not only, that they
should not contemn it, but also that they should honorably regard it, so this
word not to know, in this place signifies not only, not to regard, or respect,
but also to contemn and despise: yea, to hate, and to prosecute, and to
persecute, with all evil. So it is taken else where: All these things will they
do unto you for my names sake: because they have not known him that sent me:
Ioh. 15. 21. These things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the father, nor me: Ioh. 16. 3. In both these places not to know signifies,
not only to be ignorant, or to neglect, or not to regard, but also to contemn
and despise. The same is the signification of this phrase in this place. The
meaning therefore of these words (for this cause the world knows you not) is
this, that for this cause the wicked and unregenerated of the world do not
acknowledge and regard you, that is, they do contemn, despise and persecute
you: so also of the words following, because it knows not him, that is,
because they regard not or respect not himself: yea, because they contemn and
despise, and (what they can) do also persecute him. Thus we see the objection
that might be made against the excellency of Gods children to be taken from the
hatred of the world, that is, of all the unregenerate in the world against
them: and the answer thereunto to be, that this is not a thing to be marvelled
at, or so to be taken, that we should be discouraged by it, and the more think
the dignity of Gods children not to be so excellent as before the Apostle had
commended it to be, for as much as they that do thus little regard and brook
Gods children, yea hate and despise them, do as little regard, and as hardly
brook God himselse: yea, they hate and despise him. And this their not knowing
of God; yea their hatred and despising of God, is the very cause why such do
not know the children of God, but hate and despise them.

The truth of both these, viz. that all the wicked do hate and despise both the
children of God, and also God himself, and that they do therefore hate and
despise his children, because they do first hate and despise him, is
sufficiently evident by the places before alleged: For the said places do not
only manifest the signification of the words and phrases, but the truth also of
the things themselves. And the reason why the wicked do make so little reckning
of Gods children, and of God himself; yea why they hate and contemn both, is
because of the great contrariety that is betwixt them, and betwixt Gods
children, and God himself: even as great as is betwixt light and darkness:
betwixt good and evil. As God himself is light and has no darkness in him: 1.
Ioh. 1. 5. so they that have fellowship with him, and walk in light (even all
his children) are called the children of light and of the day* 1. These. 5. 5.
and lights themselves: Philip. 2. 15. Therefore as God himself does hate and
condemn all darkness, and all works of darkness, so his children do the like,
and cannot bear them in the wicked, but do reprove them rather: Ephe 5. 11.
This then is the reason of the hatred of the wicked against the children of
God, and against God himself.

And this hatred is manifest by examples of such, as being bound one to another
by the bond of nature, notwithstanding hate them to whom they are so bound,
even because of the light that is in them, whereby they show themselves the
children of the light, even of God himself. So Cain hated Abel, because his
own works were evil, and his brothers good: 1. Ioh. 3. 12. So Ishmael hated
Esau Jacob: Saul both David and also his own son Jonathan, for his good love
toward David. The like may be said of many other: yea indeed, of the hatred of
all that are wicked, against the godly. That sometimes the wicked are said to
love the children of God, yea also to reverence them, and to show them much
kindness: it is first of al for other causes and respects, not for their
godliness: as for their beauty: their skill in music, or in some other such
thing: for their policy, and for such like: as before in handling the maine
exhortation we have showed. Secondly it is by the ouerruling hand and spirit of
God, to show that he has the hearts of all men in his hand: and that he can as
well draw love, (or at least kindness) from the heart that naturally is
possessed with hatred, as he can fetch water out of the rock, and make the
ravenous ravens to be nursing mothers (as it were) to his children; and as he
can restrain the fire from burning so much as an hair of his children, being
cast into the mids thereof, or the woollie nappe of their garments. But
howsoever the Lord do this sometimes, yet there is in all the wicked such a
secret hatred against all the children of God, and against God himself, that
except God do restrain them, or force them to work against their nature, they
cannot but break forth into contempt, and into all wrongs and indignities
against the children of God, and God himself. And so they bewray, that albeit
they have some general and speculatiue knowledge of God himself, by his works
and word, and of his children, by those graces of God in them, whereby they do
resemble him, and show themselves to be his children, yet they have no true
knowledge either of God, or of his children, because they do not persorme
those duties to God and to his children, which do belong unto them.

And this is a common phrase amongst us, to say that a man knows not another,
when he performs not that duty which belongs to his place. Many times we
pass by great nobles, and other of high calling without any reverence unto
them, because indeed we know them not. If also we be brought before them, and
yet do not respect and honor them according to their places and authority, we
are and may be justly charged, that we do not know them: yea, often times we are
and may be justly threatened, to be taught to know them before we go. And
indeed if men knew Gods justice against sin, his mercy toward them that
love, fear and obey him; his reckoning that he makes of all his children; his
large promises (before spoken of) made to all that do show any kindness to
any of them: his contrary threatenings to them that do the contrary unto them:
his power and might to perform both all his promises, and also all his
threatenings: and lastly his faithfulness in performing of them to the full: if
(I say) the wicked knew these things of God, then certainly it could not be,
but that they would more respect his children, then they do.

For as much therefore as they do not respect them, but are as strange toward
them as if they had never known or seen them, and deal as hardly with them as
if they were their enemies (by whom notwithstanding they do daily enjoy many
great benefits, as has been before declared) therefore we may well conclude
with the Apostle, that they know them not: and that the cause why they know
them not, is, because they know not God himself: Though they know him so, that
they be able to speak of him, and to preach the knowledge of him to other, yet
they know him not in truth truly, and so as that themselves shall be any whit
the better by their knowledge. Yea, the more they know him without honoring of
him, according to their knowledge, with the more stripes they shall be beaten,
the greater shall be their condemnation; and therefore indeed they were better
in respect of themselves, to be altogether ignorant of him, then so only to
know him.

The wicked know the children of God as they are men: as they are of this or
that favor, stature, and complexion: as they are rich or poor: as they have
some place and authority in the world: but yet they know them not, neither
regard them, as they are the children of God; and that because they know not
God himself. They knew them before they were the children of God; they loved
them and respected them, whiles they were as themselves; natural men,
unregenerated men, wicked men: but as soon as there is a change made in them,
and that they do receive the spirit of adoption, presently they are also
changed. As it is with many, that whiles they were young, and in their youth
lived together, and were well acquainted one with another: but afterward by
long absence and many years being both changed, grown to be men, having hair
on their faces: yea perhaps being gray headed, they meet one another in the
face, and yet salute not one another, neither speak one to another, because
indeed they have forgotten one another, and do not know one another: so is it
betwixt the wicked and the children of God, being once taken from out of the
wicked, and adopted to be the children of God: In one day there is a greater
change made in the heart, then there is in the face, and in the stature by many
years. Greater (I say) because this change by grace is merely contrary: but
the other change before spoken of in nature, is only diverse.

Touching the cause of the change of the affections of the wicked toward the
children of God, viz. because they know not God himself, it may be fitly
illustrated by the like amongst men. For as it often falls out, that the
children of great persons in the world traveling or living in places where
their parents are not known, do meet with the harder measure, and are the more
roughly used, and receive the more wrongs and indignities, because such as do
so use them, (or rather abuse them,) do not know their parents; so is it with
the children of God in respect of the wicked. They live in this world as
strangers and pilgrims: 1. Pet. 2. 11. (and so they are indeed, their country
being above in heaven) and by this means they receive much wrong, and many
injuries from the wicked amongst whom they live; even because those that do
them these wrongs and injuries, do not know God himself, the father of the
godly. It was through ignorance of Paul's being a Roman, that he was bound to be
scourged, and therefore when he revealed himself to be a Roman, he escaped the
whip; and they that before had given commandment for the whipping of him,
began to fear, and to revoke their said commandment: Acts 22. 25. In like
manner therefore, it is not to be marvelled, that they which know not God
himself, do deal the more hardly with his children, according to that which
our Savior expressly says in this case: Ioh. 16. 2. 3. as before was alleged.

From this objection and first answer thereunto, we learn two points: First,
that whosoever will be the children of God, must prepare and arm themselves
for the hatred of the world: even to be contemned, despised, reproved, and
persecuted in the world, and of the men of the world. If we will be glorified
with Christ, we must also suffer with Christ as his members: Romans 8. 17.

Our Savior says, Whosoever will follow me (viz. so that he may come to my
glory) let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me: Mark.
8. 34. Yea Luke says, that such an one must take up his Cross daily: Luke 9.
23. Thereby noting that all the wicked that will be Christ's disciples, must not
look for some affliction, at the first entrance into that state, or now and
then, but continually, even every day. Paul says, If we suffer we shall reign
with him: 2. Tim. 2. 12. so insinuating, that the way to reign, is first to
suffer. Yea, he speaks more plainly, and more generally, saying, that All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: 2. Tim. 3. 12.
Therefore out of the Prophet he speaks in the person of all the godly, and
says, For thy sake are we killed all day long, we are counted as sheep for
the slaughter: Romans 8. 36. This was the way by which Christ Jesus himself
entered into his glory: Luke 24. 26. 1. Pet. 1 11. The servant is no greater
then his Master. If therefore the world have persecuted the master (Christ
himself) will they not persecute us that are his servants? Ioh. 15. 20. Shall
we (I say) go scotfree? and look to ascend into heaven with ease, and to be
translated thither (as it were) in our down beds? Shall the Captain only take
pains and fight, etc. and shall the common soldier sit still, eating and
drinking, and making merry? No, no, It never has been so: It never shall be
so. Though Christ were the Son, yet he learned obedience by the things which
he suffered: Hebr. 5. 8. Yea, It became him, for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things, seeing that he brought many children unto glory, that
he should consecrate the Prince of their Salvation, through afflictions:
Hebrew. 2. 10. Has our Prince gone by this way of afflictions, and shall we
seek to shift it, and look to go another way? What a shame were this for us,
to be so squamish, so nice, so dainty? especially we being so base, so vile,
and so contemptible as we are in respect of our Prince? Away therefore with
such sluggish fears, and fancies: Away with such softness and tenderness.
Let us make as full reckoning (if we will be christians indeed as well as in
name) to suffer persecutions, as we are sure of the coat of our backs. Let us
daily look for it: Let us daily buckle our selves unto it. And so the more
we look for it, and the better we are armed to it, the more easily we shall
overcome it: yea, we shall find more comfort and joy in such sufferings for
Christ's sake, then all the wicked in the world do, in all their ease, in all
their dainty fare, in all their riches and glory, in all their sports, delights
and pleasures.

Yea, the truth is, that we should so look for trouble in the world, and be
always so prepared to suffer for Christ's sake, that if the world laugh or
smile upon us, and favor us, we should the more fear our state, and doubt
whether yet we be the children of God or no: such as we have been accounted by
other; Note.
and such as we have taken our selves to be. Last of all (for this point) let
us understand, that as all the children of God must make reckning not to be
known in the world, that is, to undergo many troubles, even for that cause; so
says the Apostle here, for this cause (that is, because God has so loved us
as to make us his children) the wo^ld knows you not: and because we have
received the spirit of adoption, and show the same by the fruits thereof: as (I
say) all such must make reckoning of trouble in the world, so especially, the
more excellent that any of Gods children are, and the greater measure they have
received of the spirit of adoption, the more they must look to be molested,
and troubled in the world.

Mark the history of the old testament from the beginning to the ending, and
ye shall find, that always the greatest afflictions did follow the best of
Gods children: the best Patriarks: the best Prophets: the most holy men of
other sort.

The like is to be said of the new Testament. As the Apostles had received
greater gifts from God then other, so they were the more persecuted by men then
other. The Apostle Paul speaking of himself and of the rest of the Apostles
says, I think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed
to death: for we are made a gazing stock unto the world, and to the Angels,
and to men, etc. 1. Cor. 49. and again, We are made as the filth of the world,
the ofscouring of all things, etc. verse 13.

This cannot but be looked for in respect of the world. For if the world know
us not, that is, do hate us and envy us, for this cause, because we are Gods
children: then it cannot be but that the more we show ourselves to be the
children of God, the more the world will hate and envy us. Neither is any other
thing to be looked for in respect of God himself. For why should we think that
God gives some a greater measure of his spirit of adoption, the^ he gives to
other some? There is no more in one to win Gods love in that behalf, the^ in
another. For God has freely given this love to al his children alike, to be so
called, and to be indeed his children. It must therefore be in respect of the
end for which he does so: viz. that such may bear the more afflictions, and by
bearing such afflictions they may glorify God the more, that has so honored
them, not only above other men, but also above other of his children. It
stands also with great reason: for the highest cedars and the tallest and
greatest oaks are the more subject to storms and tempests.

This is the first point to be observed from this objection.

The second point to be observed from the first part of the answer to the said
objection, viz. from the cause why the world takes so little notice of Gods
children, etc. namely because they know not God himself, is this, that
although all the children of God must look for trouble and vexation in the
world, even as if the world had never known them, yet they have no cause to be
offended there with, or to think their state to be therefore the worse, but
that rather they have good cause well and patiently to bear the same, since as
the world knows not them, so also it knows not God himself. Hereby
appears that more plainly, which before has been handled more plentifully,
that all the world, that is, all the wicked and unregenerated in the world, are
fools, and little better then mad men. For how can they be wise, yea how can
they be other then fools, that know not him that is most wise, yea only wise,
and that is the giver and the only fountain of all wisdom?

If it be so, what cause have the children of God any whit to dislike their
state, or to think their dignity to be the less, because there is so little
reckoning made of them by the world, that is, by the men of the world, that are
all (so long as they do continue of the world) no better then a brood of
fools? For what wise man (such as all the children of God are before showed to
be) will care for the scoffs, or scorns, or any other indignities offered
unto him by a fool? Yea, will not every wise man think him to be a fool
himself, that will either contend with a fool about such indignities as by
such a fool are offered unto him; or think himself the worse in any respect
because of such indignities?

The most that can be made of the indignity which we receive from the world,
is that they do all that that they do in that behalf, of mere ignorance. Is
there then any cause why we should thereby be dismayed, or think the worse of
our condition?

Let the world therefore and all worldings, even all the wicked in the world
deride us, and wrong us that are the children of God, as they will. Let them
go with their follies. Let us show our wisdom in not contending with them:
but in bearing all things, and in winking at all things, as though we saw
nothing.

The greatest noble man of a kingdom, being where he is not known, to be so
noble, will never take it ill, that mean persons pass by him without any such
reverence as is due unto such nobility. In like manner therefore since we hear
that the world knows us not, let us the better bear all their indignities.

By such bearing their follies and wrongs, we shall either at the last win and
convert them (especially if with our patience, we shall also join earnest
prayers for them) to be of our number, and to turn the children of God as well
as we: or else we shall make their last judgment and condemnation the greater:
which will be revenge enough for whatsoever hurt they have done unto us.

To the former two points, let me yet add a third, arising from both the
former: viz. that all that do not know and regard the children of God, do
thereby be wray themselves to be of the world; and to be ignorant of God, and
so to have no communion with God. This has been proved before by those
Scriptures that have been alleged for the fourth signification of the word
world, especially by Ioh. 15. 20. and that of Ioh. 16. 3. But I do only name
this: let the reader further consider of it.

Thus much for the objection, and for the first part of the answer thereunto:
or for the first reason, why the world knows not the children of God: and so
also for this first verse of this text.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the second answer to the former objection: or of the second reason why the
world knows not the children of God.

IN this second verse is contained the second answer to the former objection,
and the second reason why the world does so little regard, and so much hate the
children of God.

I grant that some make these words the only objection, and answer thereto:
viz. the objection in the first words of the verse, Deerly beloved now are we
the children of God, but (or and) it does not appear what we shall be: and the
answer in the words following, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him. And this they make the meaning; You tell us that it is an
exceeding dignity to be called the children of God: but (alas) what avails it
us, or what are we the better for such titles, since whatsoever titles we have,
yet it does not appear what we shall be: no man knows what shall become of
us. Yes, says the Apostle (according to the interpretation of some men) we
are not only called the children of God, neither have we the bare titles of the
children of God, but we are indeed for the present the children of God, as well
as so called: and though it do not appear what we shall be, yet the time shall
come, when we shall be like to him.

Thus (I say) some interpret these words: but I rather think them (as I said
before) to be a further answer to the former objection, and to contain a
second reason, why the world makes no more reckoning of us, viz. because they
do not see our future state and condition.

This answer and second reason of the worlds hatred against the children of
God, is first propounded in these words, deerly beloved, now are we the
children of God, but (or rather and) it does not appear what we shall be.
Secondly it is amplified by an argument taken from diverse things, or rather the
worlds ignorance of our future state, is amplied by the contrary knowledge
thereof in our selves, in these words following, but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him.

To return to the proposition of the second answer to the former objection, or
to the second reason, why the world knows us not, let us first observe, that
as it is a sweet argument which now the Apostle handles, viz. of Gods
wonderful love in making us his children, so he prefixeth a sweet preface
before this second answer, namely, the sweet name of Deerly beloved: which
word, as it is usual with the other Apostles, so especially it is most used by
this Apostle, both in all this Epistle in every Chapter, and also in the other
two short Epistles following. The reason why this Apostle more abounds in
this lovely word then the rest, seems to be double. First because he was the
disciple whom Christ especially loved, and whom Christ used so familiarly, that
he suffered him to lean on his breast, and who is therefore called the disciple
whom Jesus loved: Ioh. 13. 23. and 21. 7. that is, whom Jesus loved in special
manner, and above the rest. Secondly because the chief subject of all these
three Epistles being love, it was the more suitable thereunto, that he should use
the more amiable words, for the better persuading thereof.

Hereby we learn, the more experience we have had of Christ's love toward us,
the more to abound in all words, and in the affection it self of love toward
other. For we must not think, that either this Apostle or the rest, used this
word or any other the like, of custom, or of course, or to fill up the
sentences, and to make them the smoother (as it is the manner of many in these
days, to have much Deerly beloved, in their mouths, but to be without love;
yea, to be full of hatred and malice in their hearts, as Ioah with his mouth
said unto Amasa, Art thou in health my brother, but with a spear in his hand
he smote him under the fifth rib, that he shed his bowels to the ground: 2.
Sam. 20. 10. and as Judas with his lips saluted our Savior saying, Hail
Master, and kissed him, and yet at the same instant betrayed him to the Jews:
Mat. 26. 49.) We must not (I say) think that the Apostles had much love in
their mouths and none in their hearts (as many now have) but that their
tongues spoke, and their pens did write from the abundance of love in their
hearts.

The more also we exhort other to love, the more must we our selves show our
love toward them; and use such words and phrases, as may be most suitable to
such exhortations, for the better enforcing of them. But these things being
common, and not so proper to this present theme of the dignity of Gods
children, it shall be sufficient, thus only to have touched them.

To return to the matter, as before the Apostle had answered the former
objection touching the small account the world makes of the children of God,
by their like account of God himself; yea, by their ignorance of God: so now
he does further answer it, by their like ignorance of the future state of the
children of God.

As these two things are the cause, why the sons of great men in the world in
strange countries meet often times with much hard measure, being perhaps
disgraced, ^ailed on, set in the stocks, and such like, viz: First because the
parents of such great men are not known: Secondly because it is not known,
what inheritances themselves shall have, nor what manner of men, of how great
authority and power they shall be: (for if they amongst whom they are strangers
knew these things, they would offer no indignity unto them, but would rather
honor them according to their parents, and according to that state that
themselves should afterward be of) so is it with the children of God. They are
the more disgraced, contemned, and every way most unworthily dealt with in the
world, and by the world, as first because the world knows not God himself
their Father (as has been showed;) so secondly, because they know not, neither
see, what the children of God shall be afterward: viz. how great, how
honorable, and how excellent with God, and with his holy Angels. If they did
see this, doubtless, as our Savior says, that if the great works that were
done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had
repented long agone in sackcloth and ashes: Mat 12. 21. so may I say, that the
world would more regard the children of God then they do.

Now touching this answer, let us understand that the Apostle speaks not of
that state that the children of God shall have in this life, but of that which
they shall have in the life to come, as appears by the amplification thereof
in the words following, from the contrary in the children of God, amplified by
the circumstance of time, viz. at the appearing of Jesus Christ. The meaning
therefore is, Dearly beloved, now (that is, in this life, and whiles we are
here in this world) it does not appear what we shall be, (that is, in the
world to come) when he shall appear: (that is, when God himself in the
second person, invested with the manhood, shall come in the glory of his
father to judge the quick and the dead.

True indeed, sometime the children of God are the less regarded, and the more
hardly dealt withal by the world, yea sometimes by them that are not of the
world, because it does not appear unto the world, and to some other not of the
world, what the children of God shall be even in this world, and in this life.

For if it had indeed appeared to the Egyptians what the Israelites should have
been, would they have dealt so hardly with them? If Saul and his Courtiers had
fully known that David should have been king, notwithstanding all that they
could have done to hinder him, would they so have persecuted him? If the
accusers of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abedneg^, as also of Daniel, had indeed
known how the Lord would have delivered the first three from the fire, and
Daniel from the Lions den, would they have pursued them so eagerly as they
did? The like may be said of Hamans malice against Mordecai, and for Mordecaies
sake against all the Jews, and of diverse other. So also if the brethren of
Joseph had certainly known that his dreams had been divine touching his
advancement, and that he should have been so great a man as afterward he was,
would they have done unto him as they did?

Yea the like may be said of our late most noble and blessed Queen. For if in
Queen Mary's time it had appeared indeed, and been clearly man^fest, that
she should have been Queen afterward, would diverse have abused her as they
did? I might proceed further: but I leave that to the consideration of the wise
and Christian Reader. By these things we see it evident, that sometimes it
does not appear unto other what the children of God shall be even in this
world, and in this life, and that therefore they receive the harder measure
from those other, from whom their future state in this life is so hidden.
Notwithstanding the opposition following of Gods childrens knowledge of their
similitude and likeness unto Christ at his appearing and last coming to
judgment, does manifestly show that the Apostle does not here speak of their
condition to come in this life, which is for the most part but of a few; but of
that which shall be in the world to come, which is a thing common to all the
children of God whatsoever.

To proceed further, when he says, it does not appear, he means not to
the children of God themselves, but to the world, and to the men of the world.
This is also manifest by the opposition following spoken in the first person,
and in the person of Gods children: But we know, etc.

These things being thus opened, let us now see the reasons why it appears
not unto the world, and why the world sees not what the children of God shall
be: viz. how worthy, how honorable, how excellent, and how glorious in the
world to come.

These reasons are many: but I will briefly and plainly lay them down.

The first is this, because there is the same substance (by creation) Reasons
why it does not appear what the children of God shall be.
of the godly that there is of the wicked. Howsoever by regeneration there is a
change made, and an alteration in qualities both inward and outward, yet still
they remain men as before they did; and that not touching their bodies only,
but also touching their souls. Some indeed have dreamed that the very essence
and substance of the soul in regeneration is taken away, and that a new soul
is created in stead thereof. But this is a most gross error: for so that
soul that had at the first sinned, should not be glorified; and so the
heretics that deny the resurrection, and say that we shall not have the same
bodies in the resurrection that here we have, but other newly created in their
stead, may be thought to speak also reason. It is therefore as certain that
the same souls do remain in the children of God after regeneration, as well
as the same bodies.

Yea the wicked do also see the godly to retain the same shape, the same
fashion, the same outward form, and the same countenance that they had before
regeneration, and whiles they were ungodly, as well as others. It may be
indeed, that after regeneration of the heart there is also some change in the
countenance and outward behavior: and so verily it ought to be in men and in
women. For Wisdom is in the face of him that has understanding: but the eyes
of a fool are in the corners of the world: Prou. 17. 24. And those men that
before regeneration had light countenances, wanton and adulterous eyes, and did
either wear long hair contrary to the decency of nature, 1. Cor. 11. 14. or
that otherwise did disfigure themselves, by setting up a foretop, starching
their beards, and such like, after regeneration do frame countenance, hair,
and all things to manly and Christian modesty and gravity. So likewise women
that before did paint their faces as lezabel, or that did lay forth or set up
their hair (top and top gallant) or wreath it in most uncomely sort, that did
likewise lay forth their naked breasts in most lascivious manner, that did wear
man's apparel, doublets and ierkins (as mine own eyes have lately seen)
directly contrary to the word of God (as has been before showed) and that did
every way conform themselves to those wanton wenches who are by the Prophet
described, to walk with streched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking
and mineing as they went, and making a tinkling with their feet, and whose
ornaments the Lord does threaten to take away, etc. Isa. 3. 16. etc. Such women
(I say) being newborn, and made daughters to God, do change their
countenance, attire, and gate, co^tenting themselves with that natural beauty
which God has given them, and which will not fall off with the steame of hot
broth, yea which need not daily be renewed, and arraying themselves in comely
apparel, with shamefastness, and modesti^, and with good works: 1. Tim. 2. 9
10 But howsoever there be a change in these things, yet the wicked seeing the
godly still to be of the same complexion and natural countenance that they
were of, they are therefore the blinder in seeing that great and glorious change
that afterward shall be in them, and whereof afterward we are to speak.

Secondly, forasmuch as they see the godly to be subject to the same
sicknesses, and to the same other outward calamities that themselves are
subject unto, yea that many times the afflictions of the righteous are greater
then of other men, Io^ 21. 6. Psalm. 34. 19. (as before we have declared, with
the differences notwithstanding betwixt the afflictions of the wicked and of
the children of God) therefore also they can the less see, and they are the
more hardly persuaded, that there is any difference betwixt the future state of
them and of other men. Yea this makes the children of God themselves many
times to doubt of their future state, and to say, yea in a manner to conclude
with themselves in their own hearts, (for a time, till they go into the
Sanctuary of God, and consult with God himself, and with his word) that
certainly they have cleansed their hearts in vain, and washed their hands in
innocence, since they are daily punished, and chastened every morning. David
himself had these thoughts, Psalm. 73. 13. 14. long after his regeneration. No
marvel therefore though the wicked be so blinded, that it does not appear
unto them what the children of God shall be in the life to come.

Thirdly, they do not only see the children of God for a time to be thus
subject to the same outward afflictions that other are subject unto, but also
sometime that such afflictions do continue all the days that the children of
God do live here; yea, that at the last also they die often times the common
death of men; yea, that they are taken away also in the same manner, and do
perish in the same sort that the wicked themselves do perish, viz. touching
their outward man, and touching outward appearance; yea, that sometimes (as
touching still their outward man) they perish somewhat extraordinarily, and are
taken away somewhat suddenly and strangely as well as the wicked.

As rebellious Hophni and Phinebas were slain in one day by the Philistines,
according to the word of the Lord in that behalf, 1. Sam. 2. 34. so their good
father El^ himself also when he heard thereof, and of the taking of the Ark of God, fell backward from his seat, and brake his neck^, 1 Samuel 4. 18.

As wicked Saul was hit and sore wounded by the Archers of the said
uncircumcised Philistines, and therefore fell upon his own sword, and thereby
hastened his own death; so good and virtuous Jonathan also was slain in the
same battle: 1. Sam. 31. 2. etc.

The Prophet, that being deceived by another old Prophet, did contrary to the
word of God before spoken unto him, in his return homeward was killed by a
Lion: 1. King. 13. 24.

That most worthy King Josiah, who has this high commendation by the spirit of
God that cannot lie: (Like unto him there was no King before him, that turned
to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might,
according to all the Law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him:
2. King. 23. 25.) even this most worthy King was slain by Pharao Necho King of
Egypt, verse 29. that is, he was so wounded, that he was carried away sick
out of the battle, and died of that wound: 2. Chron. 35. 23. etc. and that
because he would fight against the said Pharao Necho, though by him he were
advised to the contrary.

So for some abuse in the Supper of the Lord, it is said, not only that many in
the Church of Corinth were weak and sick, but that also many were asleep, 1.
Cor. 11. 30. that is, that the Lord had taken many of them away by death.

These things being so as well with the children of God as with the wicked, is
it any marvel though it do not appear unto the wicked what the children of
God shall be hereafter?

Fourthly, the children of God are never freed here from sin. Sin indeed
does not reign in them. They are freed from the bondage of it: yet still they
are subject to sin of infirmity, as before we have heard: yea they sometimes
fall into one and the same sin often: yea they do sometimes commit very
great sins, even such as whereby they do greatly scandalize and offend other,
and cause the glorious name of God to be evil spoken of. Such was the great
sin of David with Bathsheba, and against her husband Vrija: such was the
sin of Peter in denying his Lord and master with swearing and cursing: and
such offenses there are daily in the Church: yea sometimes the children of God
do lie and continue long in many sins, almost in all sins, even after
their regeneration, as Solomon did.

By these things their own future state is obscured, eclipsed, and hidden from
themselves. It does not appear to themselves what they shall be. God hides
his face from them, and they are sore troubled, as if they were reprobates, and
thinking themselves to be reprobates: yea so by such things are their good
minds tormented, that they cannot endure their said torments, but seek in
their weakness, and in the vehemency of their tentation, to make themselves
away, and to shorten their own days. Forasmuch therefore as by this means it
does not for the present appear to the children of God themselves what they
shall be, we may well conclude, that much less it does appear to the wicked.

Fifthly, many that have seemed to have been newborn as well as any other,
and to have received as plentiful a portion of the spirit of adoption as any
other, or at the least as many other that were indeed the children of God: many
such (I say) have wholly and finally fallen away from the grace of God: and
that has been utterly taken away from them which they seemed to have had; yea
those common graces also of Gods spirit which indeed they had.

When Saul was amongst the Prophets, who would not have thought him to have
been one of Gods children?

When Iehu was so forward and zealous for God, and did so great things
commanded him by the Lord, who would not have thought him to have been one of
Gods children?

When Judas was amongst the Apostles, and received the same commission and
power to preach and to work miracles that the rest did, who would not have
thought him to have been one of Gods children?

The like may be said of those of whom we have heard before out of Ioh. 6. 66.
Heb. 10. 25. and of diverse other.

Now although such indeed were never of us, for if they had been of us, they
would not (neither could) have gone from us, but would have continued with us:
1. Ioh. 2. 19. yet the wicked seeing such, do presently say, that all are
alike; there is no barrel better herring: and therefore they peremptorily
conclude, that the end of all shall be like.

Solomon himself judging according only to natural reason, so judged, and
said, All things come alike to all; and the same condition is to the just and
to the wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the
sinner; he that swears, and he that fears an oath: Eccles. 9. 2. Yea,
according to the same natural judgment, he had said before, I considered in
mine heart the state of the children of men, that God had purged them; yet to
see to they are in themselves as beasts: for the condition of the children of
men, and the condition of beasts, are even as one condition unto them. As the
one dies, so dies the other: for they have all one breath, and there is no
excellency of man above the beasts, for all is vanity, etc. Eccles. 3. 18.
19. If Solomon according to man's reason so judged, is it any marvel that they
that never had that spirit that Solomon had, do judge in like manner, and that
unto them it does not appear what the children of God shall be?

All these things together make a thick cloud of reasons, such as do so
hoodwinke and blindfold the wicked, that even at noone day they cannot see what
the children of God shall be.

And all these are external causes to the wicked of the not appearance unto
them of the future state of Gods children: such causes (I say) as are rather in
the children of God, then in the wicked.

Now besides these, there are also other lets and impediments of the foresaid
not appearance of the future condition of Gods children, even in the wicked
themselves: and these are three: one without them, yet theirs, and invested as
it were in them; and the other two within them.

The first of these (and the sixth in the whole number) is their own great
prosperity and flourishing state in outward things. For by this means the
wicked blesses himself, that he thinks there is no God: and therefore as
the judgments of God against himself are high above his sight, Psalm. 10. 3.
4. etc. so he says, It is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that
we have kept his Commandments, and that we walked humbly before the Lord of
hosts? etc. Malac. 3. 14. Job 21. 15. As they do thus speak of their own
hypocritical serving of God, that there is no reward of it, (as in truth there
is not;) so they judge the like of the children of God. How therefore can they
see what hereafter they shall be?

Secondly, (I mean for this second sort of reasons, but seventhly for the
whole) the general spiritual blindness that is in all the wicked, does also
hinder them, that they cannot see what the children of God shall be. For
without true knowledge there can be no judgment in them to discern things
that differ, belonging to their own salvation: Philip. 1. 9. 10. How then can
they see the things that belong to the salvation of other? Much less therefore
can they see the salvation it self of other.

As the Apostle speaks in general of all the things of the spirit of God,
that the natural man perceives them not, neither can know them, because they
are spiritually discerned: 1. Cor. 2. 14. so it may be said of this
particular, that it cannot be discerned by natural men. For it is a
spiritual thing as well as other. He that has not eyes to see any thing for
himself, how shall he see any thing for another man? He that cannot see
things present, how shall he see things to come?

Last of all, and most principally, it does not appear unto the wicked what
the children of God shall be, not only because of their spiritual
blindness, but also because of the spiritual hardness of their hearts, and
of that great infidelity and unbelief that is in them. For these go
together, and are therefore joined together, the cogitation darkened, ignorance
and hardness of heart: Ephesians. 4. 18.

Our Savior says to Martha, Said I not unto thee, that if thou did believe
thou should see the glory of God? Ioh. 11. 40.

If this might be said to Martha her self, that believed the general
resurrection of all flesh, (as she had acknowledged in verse 24.) because her
faith was weak in that particular of raising up her brother presently, how
much more may it it be said to them and of them that do not believe at all?

As the want of faith hinders us from seeing the glory of God, so also it
hinders from seeing the glory of his children, and any special work of God
toward them, for which he may be glorified by them.

As our Savior signifies, that the weakness of her faith might hinder her
from seeing the present resurrection of her brother Lazarus, and so
consequently from the sight of the glory of God which therein should be
showed: so it cannot be but that the nullitie of faith in the wicked must much
more hinder them from seeing the glory of the Saints at the last day, and in
the kingdom of Heaven.

The unbelief of men did sometimes hinder Christ himself from doing those
works which otherwise he would have done, and whereby he would have showed
his own glory, and the glory of his father: Matthew. 13. 58. Yea it is said,
that in some places he could do no great works, because of the marvelous
unbelief of them that dwelt in such places: Mark 6. 5. 6. If unbelief did so
hinder Christ, that he did not, neither could do any great works for the
bodily good of men, does not unbelief much more hinder men from the sight of
the everlasting salvation of his elect, for which they shall give glory unto
God, and unto the Lamb for evermore?

By this unbelief it has come to pass that men's eyes have been shut up in
such sort, that they have not seen the salvation of the children of God from
many dangers of this life, how apparent and manifest soever the same have
been. Consider the universal flood, and behold the manifold manifest tokens,
both thereof, and also of the preservation of all that believing the same
should either have repaired to Noah to go with him into the Arc which he had
made, or by true repentance have prevented it. Noah with many other busied
themselves for the space of one hundred and twenty years in building the Arc.
When the time of the flood it self approached, he provided all things fit for
preservation of himself, and of his company, and of all other creatures that
should resort unto him to be preserved by him. Who would not by these things
have thought that there had been some great work of God toward? Who would
not have seen the purpose of God for the glorious preservation of all those
that should believe the preaching of Noah, and do accordingly? Yet behold
more. When the time of the flood approached nearer, all creatures, as well wild
as tame, as well fierce as gentle, as well flying fowls as four footed
beasts, came to Noah, and offered themselves to be put into the Arc: Wolves,
Bears, Tigres, Elephants, Lions, Hawks of all sorts, Eagles, and such like:
All these (I say) came by the secret commandment of God for their so coming.
No man did fetch them: No man did call them: No man did drive them: No man used
any art to gather them together. Who would not have wondered at this? Who would
not have thought all the former preaching of Noah, touching the destruction of
the world by the flood, to have been true? Who would not have believed it? Who
would not have been persuaded of it? Who would not have seen the future
salvation of Noah and his family in the Arc? Notwithstanding, though they had
seen what Noah had been, yet it did not appear unto them what he and his
should be, as touching their safety from that great judgment, which he so
long had preached. This is the more admirable, because those creatures which
then came so willingly, neither before could, nor sithence can, either without
much force, or without great art and skill, be brought into subjection.

The like may be said of the deliverance of the people of Israel out of the
Land of Egypt. Who would not have thought, and seen by all the miracles that
the Lord did in the Land of Egypt, even before the Egyptians, by the turning of
Moses his rod into a serpent; by the changing of all the waters in Egypt into
blood, so that all the fish that was in the same water died, and stanke, Ex^d.
7. by the frogs, by the lice, by the noisome flies, Chap. 8. by the rot of
all sorts of beasts (all the beasts of Israel being in that time safely
preserved) by the like scabbe and blister upon all the people of Egypt
themselves, by the most fearful hail, thunder, and lightning, Chap. 9. by
the innumerable number of grasse-hoppers, by the dreadful darkness, Chap. 10.
and by the remove from time to time of all these judgments at the prayer of
Moses: lastly, by the death of all the first borne of Egypt, every house of
the Israelites being passed over, Chap. 12. Who (I say) by these things would
not have thought and seen what the Israelites should be, and how great
salvation the Lord had prepared for them? Come we a little further to the
coming of the Israelites to the red sea: when the Lord made the waters to
stand upon heaps, and to be as a wall of each side of them, what could be
more evident, then that the Lord would both save Israel, and also destroy the
Egyptians? A man would think that these two things (the salvation (I say) of
the Israelites, and the overthrow of the Egyptians) by all the former things
had been as plain as the nose (as men use to speak) of a man's face. Yet for
all this, so were the Egyptians blinded, so were their hearts through
infidelity and unbelief hardened, that it did not appear unto them, how
either the Israelites should be saved, or themselves destroyed.

The like may be said of the great miracles that our Savior wrought here upon
the earth; as also of the great signs that were done at the putting of him to
death: viz. of the renting of the veil of the Temple, of the general
darkness upon the whole Land from the sixth hour to the ninth, and the rising
and appearing of many of the Saints that slept. For who would not have thought,
but that by all these things it should have appeared what Christ was, and what
he should be? Yet such was their extreme infidelity and unbelief, that for
all that they could not see those things which were so evident: viz. neither
what Christ was, nor especially what Christ should be.

The same is to be said of those things whereby God manifested plainly what
Steven should be: especially that the whole Council did behold his face as
the face of an Angel of God: Act. 6. 15. Who would not have thought but that
they should have seen thereby in what grace and favor he was with God, and
what glory he should have likewise before God? Yet when he said, Behold I
see the heavens open, and the son of man standing at the right hand of God,
they were so far from seeing any such thing, that they shouted with a loud
voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out
of the city, and stoned him: Act. 7. 56. etc.

I might to the former add the daily most wonderful works of Gods gracious
providence for the true professors of the Gospel in these last days: as the
upholding of Luther many years in despite of all his most mighty adversaries:
the often and most miraculous preservation of our late most blessed Queen, and
of this whole kingdom, both from many most dangerous and secret conspiracies
of Popish Traitors at home, and also from the great intended invasion of the
Spaniards abroad: together with the like deliverance of our present dread
Sovereign, as from many former treasons in SCOTLAND, so also from many other
sithence his advancement here: and especially that more then wonderful
preservation of his Majesty, and of all his royal seed, and of the whole
state of the Land, from the most devilish plot of the powder treason here at
home. I might further remember the great preservation of little Geneua, being
so often assaulted by many most mighty adversaries: and the gracious provision
that God did make for Rochel in the great distress thereof by a long and
tedious, and no less lamentable siege. I might with these things join many
fearful judgments of God, not only upon many particular Papists that have
been most malicious against the truth and professors thereof; but also
against their Lord and master Antichrist himself (I mean the Pope) in
confounding all his devices from time to time, and in turning all his curses
into blessings: and blessing us so much the more, the more that he has cursed
us: and likewise the mighty overthrow of his mighty navy sent against us: I
might (I say) very fitly here remember all these things, and many other the
like, as very pertinent to our present purpose. For were not the Papists by
Gods most righteous judgment exceedingly blinded in their minds, and as
extremely hardened in their hearts, and fully possessed with infidelity and
unbelief, they could not but see the truth of our religion, and the future
glory and happiness of all them that do truly embrace and profess the same.
But because of their said blindness, hardness, and infidelity, it is, that
how manifest soever these things are in themselves, and to any that have any
sight, and the least measure of faith, yet they are hidden from them, and to
them it does not appear, either what our religion is, or what all the
true-hearted professors thereof shall be.

But howsoever I might add, and largely handle these things, yet having been
so plentiful in the premises, and somewhat yet remaining, it shall be
sufficient thus only to have named them. And this shall be enough for the
reasons why notwithstanding we be now already the children of God, yet it does
not appear (especially to the world) what hereafter we shall be. And this is
the second reason also why the world takes so little knowledge of us, and does
so little respect us, yea why they do so much hate and despise us. As the like
is often the cause (as before I said) why great persons are not regarded by
some, because these some do not see that future greatness of such persons:
for then they would honor them, and seek their favor, in hope of some
benefit by them: so is it touching the children of God.

The use of this point briefly and in one word is, that we judge not (either
persons or things) according to the outward appearance: but that we judge
righteous judgment. This our Savior expressly commands, Ioh. 7. 24. And to
judge according to outward appearance is reproved by God himself in Samuel:
for when Samuel was sent to anoint one of Ishai his sons for King of Israel
after Saul, and when he saw Eliab the son of Ishai before him, he judging
according to the tallness of his person, and goodlinesse of his countenance,
(it may be because Saul the first King of Israel whom by the commandment of
the Lord he had anointed, was higher then any of the people from the shoulders
upward: 1. Sam. 10. 23.) Samuel (I say) judging Eliab according to his goodly
person and countenance, said, Surely the Lords anointed is before me. But what
said the Lord? Look not on his countenance, nor on the height of his stature,
because I have refused him: for God sees not as man sees: for man looks on
the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart: 1. Sam. 16. 7.

We judge not our coins, nor many other things, according to their outward
appearance, nor according to that that for the present they are esteemed by
some ignorant persons: but we try them by the touch stone, and we esteem of
them according to that which afterward they will be. Therefore when there is
any base money in any kingdom allowed, and proclaimed for current money, no
man lays or hoordeth it up, but every man lays it out as fast as he
receives it. Why? Because he daily fears a fall. He esteems it not
according to that that it is, but according to that that it may be.

The like we do with cloth, both linen and woollen. For we esteem not of
the one or of the other according to the present gloss and appearance (for
many times by the slickstone, or pressing iron, or by other cunning means,
they appear better then they are) but we judge and esteem of them and give
for them according to their future proof, and (as near as we can) according
to that which afterward they will be.

The same we do with many other things. Shall we then be so foolish in our
judgment of the children of God, as to account of them only according to that
which presently they appear to be?

Thus much of this second answer briefly propounded touching the former
objection: or of the second answer why the world knows not the children of
God: viz. because that although they be not only in name called, but are also
indeed the children of God, yet it does not appear (especially to the world,
and to men unregenerate) what they shall be.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of that which the children of God shall be, viz. of their future similitude
and likeness unto Christ, and of the certainty thereof.

IT follows in the text, But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, etc. The first word here, in most of our English Bibles is ill
translated and: because thereby the opposition of these words to the former is
much obscured. It is in the original but: which plainly notes the opposition,
and teaches the judgment and knowledge of Gods children, to be contrary to
the judgment and knowledge of the world. This might be amplified, but that it
is not a thing very pertinent to the maine point in hand of the dignity of Gods
children.

In all the words following let us observe, first the proposition of our future
state, or of the future state of the children of God, which is, that they shall
be like to Christ himself: secondly the further handling thereof.

The proposition is this, We knew that when he shall appear we shall be like
him. The further handling thereof is in the words following.

In the proposition let us observe, first the future state itself of Gods
children. Secondly the arguments whereby in the very proposition it is set forth.

The future state it self of Gods children is, that they shall be like to
Christ himself.

The arguments whereby this is set forth in the very proposition, or which are
folded up and included within the proposition, are two. The first is from their
own testimony, noting the certainty of their similitude unto Christ, we know.
The second is from the circumstance of time when they shall be like him, when
he shall appear.

So in these words, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, to speak plainly, without any words of logic, and to the capacity of
every reader, there are three things offered to our consideration: first (not
in the order of the text, but in the nature of the things) our future
similitude and likeness to Christ, in these words we shall be like him: Secondly
the certainty of our said future similitude, and likeness to Christ in this
word we know: thirdly the time when we shall be like unto Christ, in these
words, when he shall appear.

Touching the further handling of the said proposition, first the latter part
thereof, namely both their similitude or likeness to Christ, and the time
thereof, is proved by an argument from the effect in this verse, and in these
words: For, or because we shall see him as he is: secondly the first part of
the said proposition, touching their own testimony, and their knowledge and
certainty of their similitude and likeness unto Christ at his coming, is
amplified by an effect also thereof in the third verse, and in these words;
Every one that has this hope in him purges himself: which is further
amplified by the pattern, according to which he purges himself, in these
words, as he is pure. Thus much for the logical resolution and plain laying
forth of all the words now remaining.

To return now to our similitude and likeness unto Christ, let this be first
observed, that the Apostle says not we shall be equal, but only like unto
Christ. The words equal and like do much differ. The first is used Mat. 20.
12. These last have labored but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto
us, that have borne the weight and the heat of the day. But the word (like) in
this place is far otherwise, and is used Mat. 11. 16. Whereunto shall I liken
this generation? It is like to little children, etc. and so in many other
places. Equality is not only a word of quantity for the most part, but also
when it is a note of quality, it is a comparison of all things, wherein the
things compared do fully match one another: but similitude, is only a
comparison of some things, wherein the things compared do but in part resemble
one another.

There is no reason, why the children of God should be equal to Christ:
because Christ is the head, and they are but the members: Christ is the eldest
brother, they but the second brethren: Christ is the proper and natural son
of God, by communication of the whole divine essence unto him as he is God; and
by the personal union of the Godhead to the manhood, and the miraculous and
immediate conception of him by the holy Ghost as he is man: (as before has
been showed) but we (of whom here the Apostle speaks) are but the children
of God by grace, by adoption, and by incorporation into Christ, etc. Christ is
anointed with the oil of gladness, with the spirit of wisdom, knowledge,
fortitude, etc. without measure: so that in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom, and knowledge, and the Godhead also dwells in him bodily; that is,
substantially: but we have every one received the spirit of God in our several
measure, according to our several places: and Gods spirit dwells in us, by
the effects thereof, even such graces, whereby we do here represent God, and
are said to be framed according to the likeness and similitude of God in
holiness and righteousness.

Christ is the King of his Church, and the lord of all things: we are but his
subjects: though in an higher degree of honor then the rest.

Christ is the chief corner stone, we the rest of the building, etc.

As by these things and other the like, we see that there is no reason why we
should be equal to Christ: so by many other things we may see greater reason;
yea diverse reasons, why we should be partaker of this similitude and likeness
unto Christ whereof the Apostle here speaks.

Moreover, let us well consider why the Apostle here speaks in the future
tence, and says, that we shall be like unto him. For some man may stumble at
this phrase, as gathering thereby that in this life the children of God are not
like unto Christ. But to remove this stumbling block, we must understand, first
that there is a double likeness unto Christ; one in grace, an other in glory.
Secondly, that our likeness unto Christ in grace is also two fold: one in
part, another in perfection; complete, and absolute. In grace we are in part
like unto Christ in this life. But our likeness unto Christ both perfectly in
grace, and also in glory, is only in the life to come. He that is not in grace
like unto Christ here in part in this life; that is, he that is not begun here
to be made like unto Christ in grace, shall never be like him in the world to
come, either perfectly in grace, or in glory. Of this our likeness therefore
unto Christ, both in perfection of grace, and also in glory is it, that here
the Apostle uses the future tence, saying, that we shall be like unto him. And
this phrase of our future likeness unto Christ in perfection of grace and in
glory, is so far from excluding or denying our present likeness unto him in
grace begun and in part, that it does rather necessarily import the same, as
both more largely before we have already showed, and shall again further show
in the next verse.

Now to return to this our future similitude and likeness unto Christ, even
some of those things before mentioned to prove the inequality betwixt Christ
and us, do also require this similitude and likeness unto him.

For as it is not meet that the members should be equal to the head in all
things; so it is very meet, that they should be like in many things: both of
the same substance with the head (otherwise if the head be of one substance and
nature, and the members of another (like to the image that Nebuchadnezar saw in
his dream: Dan. 2. 32.) it were a monster) and also in qualities that they may
be somewhat suitable, and answerable to their head.

The like may be said of the eldest brother, and of the second brethren: so of
a king and his subjects: so of the chief corner stone, and of the other stones
in the building.

As for other reasons of this our similitude and likeness unto Christ, they are
also many. Christ is the first fruits: we the other. Should not the first
fruits, and the other fruits be like?

Christ is the vine, we are the branches. Are not the branches like to the
vine? Christ is our husband; we are his spouse and wife. Is it not fit that the
spouse and wife should be somewhat suitable and answerable to her husband?
Otherwise certainly they will not draw well together in one yoke.

Moreover, as Christ was made like unto us in all things (sin only excepted)
so is it meet we should in some things be made like unto him.

As Christ was made base by taking upon him the form of a servant for us, and
in this respect was made like unto us in our baseness; so it is meet that we
should be made by him like unto him in glory: yea this is just and righteous,
because Christ by his baseness, and by those things which he did and suffered
for us in his baseness, did purchase this our likeness to himself in dignity
and glory. If he therefore have purchased it for us, and given the full price
thereof in our behalf, how can it be denied unto us?

As in this world we are made like unto Christ in ignominies, reproaches, and
suffering of other indignities: so in the world to come we shall be made like
unto him in glory: Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 12.

This similitude and likeness is in soul and in body: In soul, first, in the
perfection of the knowledge of God in the three persons, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: secondly, in the perfection of holiness and righteousness.
Notwithstanding this holiness and righteousness is not only of the soul and
inner man, but also of the body and outward man, as afterward we shall hear
in the next verse, yea as we have heard before.

Of this similitude of soul touching knowledge, the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor.
13. viz. first of it in this life, verse 9. We know in part, and we prophecy
in part: and secondly both of that and of the other which shall be in the life
to come: Now we see through a glass darkly: but then we shall see face to
face. Now I know in part: but then shall I know even as I am known. By the
same place also may be gathered our similitude to Christ inwardly in holiness
and righteousness, inasmuch as by distinguishing in that place love (which is
the perfection of the law) from faith and hope, he seems to insinuate that
our faith and hope shall in the resurrection have an end, but that our love
shall continue, and that therefore in this respect our love is greater then
either faith or hope.

Of our inward similitude and likeness unto Christ (or rather both of our
inward and outward likeness) in all holiness and righteousness the Apostle
speaks, saying, If we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death,
even so we shall be to the similitude of his resurrection: Romans 6. 5.

Of our likeness unto Christ in our bodies, the Apostle speaks briefly:
Philip 3. 21. where he says, that Christ shall change our vile bodies (vile
here by sin, by the natural frailty thereof, and by the manifold calamities
whereto it is subject by sin) and make it like to his glorious body, etc. and
more largely he speaks of it: 1. Cor. 15. 42. where most excellently he
lays it forth by comparing the several points of the likeness of our bodies
to the body of Christ, by opposition of the contrary properties of our bodies
in this life thereunto. It is sown (says he) in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body. Afterward he proceeds by similitude saying, The first man is
of the earth, earthly: the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the
earthly, such are they that are earthly: as is the heavenly such are they that
are heavenly: verse 47. 48. Then he concludes this point, As we have borne the
image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly: verse 49.
And afterward again, This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality: verse 53. So then, this is the likeness of
our body hereafter to the body of Christ, that as Christ's body is now
incorruptible, glorious, powerful, spiritual, heavenly, and immortal; so our
bodies shall be like: incorruptible, glorious, powerful spiritual, heavenly,
and immortal.

Of our likeness unto Christ, both in our bodies, and in our souls, Christ
seems to speak jointly, when he says The glory that thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in me etc. Ioh. 17. 22 23.

Although this place of the Apostle touching our future similitude to Christ,
may be understood of our through and perfect likeness both in soul and in body:
yet it seems the Apostle Note.
speaks especially of our likeness unto Christ in our bodies, because that
especially is most hidden from the world, and of that especially it may be
said, that it does not appear what we shall be. For our future likeness in
soul, and in our inner man touching the perfect knowledge of God, and touching
our holiness and righteousness begun here, and to be made absolute and
complete like to the knowledge and holiness of Christ himself in the
resurrection, is here much more eminent, perspicuous, and manifest, then the
foresaid future likeness of our bodies unto the body of Christ.

For that our likeness of knowledge and holiness and righteousness is apparently
begun in this life: so is not our likeness in body touching the properties
before mentioned, incorruptible glorious powerful, spiritual, heavenly, and
immortal. For our bodies seem no more qualified touching these things after
regeneration, then before: yea, rather the regenerate by years and sicknesses,
etc. seem to be, and do indeed grow daily more base, more weak, and impotent
bodies, as well as the unregenerate.

Again, that the Apostle here especially intends the similitude of Gods
children in body to the body of Christ, seems to be insinuated also by the
proof following from the effect, viz. that we shall see him as he is. For this
being spoken chiefly of the bodily sight, it follows likewise that our
likeness unto Christ confirmed thereby, does signify chiefly our bodily
likeness unto him.

This our future likeness unto Christ, Christ in part showed in the mountain;
when not only himself was transfigured before Peter, James, and John, his face
shining as the Sun, and his clothes being as bright as the light: Mat. 17. 2.
and as white as the snow, even so white, as no fuller can make upon the earth:
Mark. 9. 3. but Moses also and Elias appeared, and were talking with him: both
which likewise are said to have appeared in glory: Luk 9. 31. For that they
appeared not in soul only but also in body, it is clear, first by that that
they were visibly seen of those Apostles: Secondly, because it is further
said, that they talked with Christ. Thirdly, because Luke also expressly calls
them by the name, not of two spirits, but of two men.

This our likeness also unto Christ, Christ himself promises to those few
names in Sardi, which had not defiled their garments, saying of them that they
should walk with him in white: Revel. 4. 34. What is it to be clothed in
white, and to walk in white with Christ, but in glory to be made like unto
Christ, who before in his transfiguration had showed himself in white? And by
this color of white is the glory of Christ and of Gods children rather
described, then by any other color, because Princes and great potentates of
the earth when they would show themselves, in their greatest pomp and glory,
did use to cloth themselves in white: yea, so did our late most renowned
Queen oftentime, at the entertainment of some great Ambassadors, and other
great solemnities.

This our likeness likewise unto Christ, is further promised in the same
chapter, verse 21. to every one that over comes, namely in these words, that
to such Christ will give to sit, yea, to sit with him in his throne. What more?
as himself sits in the throne of his Father. So then as Christ is in glory
like to his Father, so shall the children of God also be like unto Christ.

This point of our likeness unto Christ, is a most sweet and heavenly point,
so full of comfort, that it is able to comfort us though never so much
compassed with sorrows and laden with griefs. It is able to recover us,
though never so sick of sin. It is able to revive and restore us, though not
only half dead, but also altogether dead in sins and trespasses.

It is much that we shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as
the stars for ever: Dan. 12. as also that we shall shine as the Sun it
self in the kingdom of our Father: Mat. 13. 34.

It is more that we shall be like to the Angels of God in heaven: Mat. 22. 30.
of whose great glory we have heard before. Who therefore can express or
conceive this that is here spoken, that we shall be like unto Christ himself?
For what is the brightness of the firmament; what is the glistering of the
stars; what is the light of the Sun, in the greatest and cleerest height
thereof; what is the glory of the Angels in respect of Christ Jesus?

When he was in the shape of a servant, he taught with such power and
authority, that all that heard him, were astonished at his doctrine: Mat. 7. 28.
29. and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth: Luk 4.
22.

Yea, the very officers of the high Priests and Pharisees that were sent to
take him, being ravished with his words, returned without him, and being asked
why they had not brought him, they answered, Never man spoke like this man:
John 7. 32. 45.

Afterward also, his adversaries that came out to apprehend him, with one word
of his mouth were turned back, and fell to the ground: Ioh. 18. 6. I omit
here the amplification of this point by the glory of Moses his face coming
from receiving the law (which Moses was but a servant) as also by the
rauishment of Peter, James, and John with the transfiguration of Christ in the
mount, to give them a taste of his glory. These things (I say) I do omit, as
having spoken of them before.

Neither also is it to any great purpose, to compare the glory of Christ, with
the glory of the Monarchs of the world: and so thereby to amplify our glory,
in regard that we shall be like unto Christ. For, alas, all the glory of
earthly Princes, is not so much as a picture, or a shadow of the glory of
Christ, who is the first begotten of the dead, the Prince of the kings of the
earth: Reu. 1. 5. and who walks in mids of the seven candlestickes, is
clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girded about the pappes with a
golden girdle, whose head and hair are white, as white as wool, and as snow,
and his eyes as a flame of fire: and his feet like unto fi^e brass, burning
as in a furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters: having in his right
hand seven stars, and a sharp two-edged sword going out of his mouth: and
whose face shines as the Sun in his strength: Revel. 1. 13. etc. To whom
also being newly borne, certain wise men did not only come out of the East,
but also fell down and worshipped him, opening their treasures and presenting
unto him gifts of gold, and incense, and myrrh: Mat. 2. 1. and 11.

Yea, who is so excellent, that not only a multitude of heavenly soldiers,
sang at his birth (though he were borne in a stable, and laid in a manger)
Glory to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men good
will: Luke 2. 14. but also that afterward the four and twenty Elders did sing
unto him a new song saying, Thou art worthy to take the book (viz. which
before John had seen in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne,
written within, and on the backeside sealed with seven seals, and which none
in heaven and in earth, or under the earth, was worthy to open) and to open
the seals thereof, because thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have
made us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc. Reuelat. 5. 9. 10.

Yea, whose excellency, and glory, and worthiness is such, that not only
they did so sing, but that also John did hear many other Angels, round about
the throne, etc. even thousand thousands to sing with a loud voice, saying,
Worthy is the lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise. Yea, concerning whom
also he heard all creatures in heaven, on earth, and under the earth, and in
the sea, etc. saying, Praise, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him, that
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore: verse 11. etc.

If Christ himself be thus excellent, shall not we also be excellent that
shall be like unto him? Why then should we be dismayed? why should we fear?
why should any affliction, any disgrace with men, any threatening of men, any
poverty, any banishment, any imprisonment, any losses, or any other calamities
make us to hang down our head? yea, why should any thing take away our joy from
us? why should we not always in the pangs of the most violent and cruel
death, rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious?

Verily in respect of this our likeness unto Christ at his coming to judgment,
all our likeness unto him here, is but as an earnest penny. As therefore the
earnest of a man given upon a purchase, is the least part of the payment: and
nothing in a manner in respect of that which remains to be paid: and as the
first fruits were but an handful in respect of other fruits afterward to be
reaped; so all the graces of God here, and all our similitude unto Christ in
this life, is but a corner, and a pittance (as it were) of this our future
likeness unto him here spoken of.

All the perfection that here the best of us all do atteine unto, is but as a
crust of bread, in respect of an whole loaf: at least, but as a little
breakfast, to stay our stomachs till the supper of the Lamb, when our
likeness unto him shall be complete in all the delineaments and proportion
thereof: that so we may not think the time too long till the supper it self
do come.

All the graces of God likewise in this life, and all the beginnings of our
regeneration and sanctification in this life, are but love tokens, (like to the
jewels of silver and of gold, and the raiment that Abraham's servant gave to
Rebecca, before her parents, and her brother Laban, as testimonies of Isaacks
love toward her: Genesis 24. 53) given by Jesus Christ unto us, against the
solemnization of the marriage it self.

This likeness of the children of God unto Christ Jesus being God and man, and
so excellent every way, as before we heard him to be, does exceedingly increase
and amplify that their dignity, which I have so largely laid forth in handling
the maine proposition of the former verse: even as we see the creation of the
first man in the similitude and likeness of God, does exceedingly commend and
set forth the excellent state and condition of the said first man, so long as
he continued therein.

This is the more, because this similitude once attained in that perfection
that is here spoken, shall never be lost, as that image of God was, wherein at
the first we were created: yea it shall never any more be defaced, or any whit
blemished. Neither Satan, nor the world, nor our own flesh shall ever any more
prevail in us to draw us to any sin, for a season. All these, and all other
the enemies of our salvation included in these, shall then be fully overcome,
and subdued: and so far shall they be from doing us any harm in any thing,
that they shall never come near us, neither ever be able to lift up their
least finger against us. Then as Moses said of the Egyptians to the
Israelites, The Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see
them again: So shall we find it true of all the spiritual enemies of our
salvation, after this our perfect likeness unto Christ thus obtained, The
enemies which we have seen, by whom we have been much molested and troubled:
yea, who did often foil and wound us most dangerously, we shall never see them
any more: yea (as we speak in our common proverb) we shall never hear or see
hide nor hair of them.

Thus much of our future likeness it self unto Christ. Now follows the second
point here to be considered, viz. our knowledge and certainty thereof. For the
Apostle says not, that howsoever it appear not unto other, yet we hope or
expect and look to be made like unto him, but he says we know that we shall
be like unto him.

This word know, is not a word of doubting, but of most certainty. For it is
not spoken only of the creatures, men and Angels, but also of God himself. Our
Savior says twice in one Chapter, that Our father even in heaven knows what
we need: Mat. 6. 8. and 32. where is the very same word in the original, that
is in this place.

So it is attributed to Christ, Jesus knew from the beginning, which they were
that believed not: John 6. 64. and again. The world has not known thee, but
I have known thee, etc. Ioh 17. 25. in both which places is the very same
word. Many other the like places there are, where this very word is attributed
to God and to Christ Jesus. Shall we think, that their knowledge is not
certain?

There is therefore no question, but that the Apostle means our future
knowledge of our likeness unto Christ, to be a thing most certain and undoubted.
From whence also follows, that they that are the children of God are sure
they shall never wholly and finally fall away from God; and from that excellent
state of the children of God before spoken of, and whereunto they are called in
Christ Jesus. For if they might so fall away, then the Apostle could not speak
of their future likeness unto Christ with that certainty that he does: neither
could he say, we know that we shall be like him. For they that are in danger of
final falling without recovery, do not certainly know that they shall be like
unto Christ.

Now as here the Apostle says we know, so afterward verse. 14. of this present
chapter he uses the same phrase and the same word again in the same matter,
We know that we are translated from death to life, if we love the brethren;
and again another word of the same signification verse 19, Hereby we know
that we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our hearts.

I have spoken of this certainty of our likeness unto Christ, before in speaking
of the certainty of our inheritance: therefore the less shall need in this
place; notwithstanding something here also will be expected by the reader,
because I referred him in the former place for further matter of this
certainty, to the handling of these words.

For better performance of my said promise, and for the better satisfaction of
the readers expectation in this behalf, let us first here in a word remember
my former four arguments (besides some things spoken of this point in handling
the attributes of that inheritance mentioned 1. Pet. 1. 4) for demonstration of
this certainty. Those arguments therefore in one word were these. The first was
from diverse express places of Scripture. The second from the immutable
constancy of God. The third from the righteousness of God. The fourth from
this attribute of all the children of GOD, that they are the members of Christ.
These are handled before in Chapter 26. and shall not need now to be otherwise
repeated.

Only for amplification a little of the second former argument from the
immutable constancy of God, let us remember the constant speech of Isaac, when
he had unawares, yet according to Gods appointment blessed his son Jacob,
whereas he had thought to have blessed Esau, yea, and did think that he had so
done; and when Esa^ returning home entreated his father Isaac to bless him,
according to his former promise. For this patriarch Isaac having so blessed
Iaacob, when his son Esa^ returned from hunting, and brought Venison ready
dressed unto him, and craved his blessing; this Izhaack (I say) told his son
Esau what had fallen out in his absence, and says plainly, I have blessed him,
therefore he shall be blessed: Genes. 27. 33. As if he should have said, My
blessing is past already: Thou come now too late: I have given my blessing to
him to whom by the appointment of God at the first it did belong: and therefore
whatsoever thou have done at my commandment, and howsoever I promised indeed
to bless thee, yet having now spoken the word for the blessing him that came
before thee, I neither will, nor can revoke it.

David seeming to allude to the former words of Isaac, in his prayer for the
blessing of God upon his house, uses the very same words almost, (if not
altogether) speaking thus, Now it has pleased thee to bless the house of thy
servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou O Lord, have blessed
it, and it shall be blessed for ever: 1 Chronicles. 17. 27.

The like constancy we read of that heathen, and wicked man Pilate. For when
he had written this title upon the head of Christ on the Cross, Jesus of
Nazaret the King of the Jews, and when the high Priests of the Jews being
offended with the said title, persuaded him to alter it, and said, Write not,
The king of the Jews, but that he said, I am the king of the Jews: what
answered Pilate? Was he content to alter his former writing? Not so: but he
answered, What I have written, I have written: John 19. 19. 21. 22.

Did these men, the one an elect of God and a good man the other a reprobate
and most wicked; did these (I say) thus hold themselves to their own,
notwithstanding earnest requests to the contrary? Shall we think that God will
shrink, and go back of his word for the casheering of any, whom once he has
enrolled and written in the book of life? No, no, though all the world should
solicit him to the contrary: yea, though it were possible that the Angels of
heaven should so do, yet will not God go one inch back of his word, touching any
of his children whom he has determined to make like unto his own son: He
will not flinch a whit, or start aside an heirs breadth: but to all such as
shall plead for the cutting of the names of any of his, out of the table or
book of life, he will answer as Isaac did to Esau, I have blessed them,
therefore they shall be blessed: and as Pilat answered the high priests of the
Jews, whom I have written, I have written. To leave this argument, and to
proceed unto other: If they be blessed that walk not in the counsel of the
wicked, etc. that trust in the Lord etc. that fear the Lord, etc. then are
they certain of their future likeness unto Christ. For where there is no
certainty thereof, there ca^ be no blessedness. But such are pronounced blessed
in the Psalms, and in the other scriptures: therefore they are certain of this
their future likeness to Christ.

The like may be said of the commandment of the Apostle given to all that are
in Christ for reioicing in the Lord: yea, for reioicing always: Philip. 44.
For what joy can there be, where there is continual doubting of ^his future
likeness unto Christ?

Again, by so many arguments as whereby before we have laid forth the dignity
of Gods children, we may also be assured of this our future likeness unto
Christ, viz. by Gods love in making us his children: because whom he loves, he
loves to the end: by the difficulty and greatness of that work: For would he
do so difficult, so great, and so admirable a work, and not bring it to
perfection? or what perfection has it, without this likeness to Christ? by the
means whereby he works it: viz. by the immortal seed. For how is that seed
immortal, if they perish, that are begotten again by it? I mean touching the
spiritual life, whereby they are so begotten again? Or how do they continue,
if they never attain unto, but come short of this likeness unto Christ? by
their union with Christ, and communion with the Father, and the holy ghost,
which we heard to be indissoluble; once made and never dissolved: by their
liberty and free access to God in prayer, with assurance to be heard; as in
other things, so also in asking of this their future likeness unto Christ: by
the forgiveness of their sins, the only let of their likeness unto him. Gods
covenant therein, being a covenant of salt, even an everlasting covenant: by
the working of all things together for their good: by their freedom from
condemnation: by the blessed inheritance before spoken of: and almost by all
the other arguments.

Last of all, all that are in heaven may be sure without doubting of their
future likeness unto Christ: But all the children of God that are regenerated by
the word of truth, are in heaven. Therefore they may be sure without doubting of
their future likeness in grace and in glory unto Christ.

The first part of this reason, that all in heaven may be sure without
doubting of their future likeness to Christ, etc. is so evident, that no man
will deny the same: since there is no fetching any thing from thence. That which
our Savior says, as a reason to provoke men to lay up treasures in heaven,
viz. that There, neither the moth nor canker does corrupt, nor thieues dig
through and steal: Mat. 6. 30. may be said of all persons in heaven, that they
are out of all danger, etc.

The second part of the former reason, that the children of God regenerated and
newborn by the holy ghost, are already (from the first hour of their
regeneration) in heaven, is expressly affirmed by the Apostle: Ephesians. 2. 6.

Most men understanding those words as spoken only of the children of God in
respect of their certainty of heaven, not in respect of their present
possession, do notwithstanding justify my present purpose. Notwithstanding I
do understand with some other much more: even the present possession it self
of heaven: present (I say) not full possession: and that because Christ Jesus
having taken possession of heaven, not as one alone, but as the head of many,
even of all his members; not to his own vsealone, but to theirs; not in his own
name alone, but in theirs; it must needs be granted that all they also are in
present possession, whose head Christ is: to whose use and in whose name,
Christ has taken possession of heaven. I will illustrate this by a law case,
common amongst us.

A man's wife of Kent or Essex, has copy hold land purchased by her, or given
unto her by some friends, in Yorkshire, in Cumberland, in Westmo^land, or some
other country two hundred miles from the place, where the said wife dwells.
The wife therefore goes not her self to take possession of the said lands:
but the husband goes; makes it manifest to the Lord, to whom such lands are
customary, that he is the lawful husband of such a woman, and therefore craves
to be admitted, and to take up the land in her name, and to her use. He is so
admitted. Is not the woman from that time forward, in as good and real
possession by her husbands admission, as if she her self had been there
present, though she still remain in the place where she dwells, and never
come foot nearer? It cannot be denied. The like is to be said, touching the
present possession of heaven by all the children of God: who then shall
dispossess them thereof? If none can dispossess them, why should they doubt?
where is the uncertainty?

The objections against this doctrine are of no moment.

It is no doctrine of pride nor presumption, because I showed before, that the
consideration of the great dignity of the children of God (whereof this is one
special point) should make men the more to deck themselves inwardly with all
lowliness of mind, and outwardly with all behavior suitable to such inward
lowliness.

It is no doctrine of security, because the Apostle Paul exhorts the
Corinthians, touching their judgment, to be steadfast and immovable; and
touching their practice, to be abundant always in the work of the Lord, for
as much (not as they hoped, or uncertainly expected, but) as they knew their
labor of their work was not in vain in the Lord: 1. Cor. 15. 58.

In this Chapter also this our Apostle afterward provoke to brotherly love,
even to love not only in word and tongue, but also in deed and in truth, from
their knowledge of being translated from death unto life, and of being of the
truth, and of assuring their hearts before God: verse 14. and 18. and 19. Yea
in this very place it follows (as we shall hear) Every one that has this
hope in him, purges himself as he is pure.

How then can this doctrine of our certainty of salvation, and of our likeness
unto Christ, be called by the Papists, a doctrine of security, being so often
laid for a foundation of good works, and used for a spur to good works?

The great place to the Hebrews, Chap 6. 4 the chief bulwark of the Papists
for defense of their doubting and uncertainty, as if they that are regenerated
might utterly and finally fall away from the grace of God, and as if
consequently none could here be sure of this future likeness unto Christ, is
of no force at all: the walls thereof are but paper walls: yea the truth is,
it makes mainly against them, and plainly and unanswerably proves, that none
that once have true faith, etc. can possibly altogether and finally fall away.
For in the ninth verse following the Apostle fearing that some of them to whom
he did write might take hold of his former doctrine, and applying it to
themselves, might think themselves in that fearful state of relapse which
before he had spoken of, preuenteth this objection, and says,
Notwithstanding, we are persuaded better things of you, and such as accompany
salvation. So he shows, that there were better things then so to be once
enlightened, so to have tasted of the heavenly gift, so to have been made
partaker of the holy Ghost, so to have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the power of the world to come, as before he had spoken. So also he teaches,
that those better things only, which he means in the ninth verse, did
accompany salvation, and that therefore he had not before meant a true,
lively, and justifying faith, and that unfeigned and pure Christian love,
whereby faith works: for what better things can there be, then this faith and
love?

If yet any reply, that that ninth verse is not to be understood in respect
of the things mentioned in the 4. 5. and 6. verses, but only of that which is
said in the 7. and 8. verses: I answer, that this is but an heartlesse,
pithlesse, and strengthlesse objection, yea indeed foolish and ridiculous. For
the 7. and 8. verses being the confirmation of that which was said in the 4. 5.
and 6. verses, how can the 9. verse be referred only to the 7. and 8. verses,
and not also to the 4. 5. and 6?

In this point of the certainty of our future likeness unto Christ, let us
observe the first person, We know, and that we shall be like. Thereby he
teaches, that only they, and all they shall be like unto Christ, which before
he had said were the children of God. All they indeed have not always the
like knowledge, or the like feeling of this knowledge of their likeness to
Christ, because of some afflictions, and because of too much liberty given to
their sins, which by the said liberty do grow up to be a thick grove to
stand before their windows, and to eclipse, obscure, and hide the light of the
sun of righteousness from shining into the house of their inner man so
clearly as in former time it has done.

As men also, though never so learned, in their sleep have no more use of
their learning then men altogether unlearned, and yet for all that they still
have that learning which they had waking; so is it with the children of God
touching this their knowledge of their likeness unto Christ. Being sometime
overtaken with the sleep of some or of many sins, for a time they are
deprived of the use of the former knowledge: viz. so long as their said sleep
in sin continues. Notwithstanding they still have their former knowledge,
and shall recover the use of it again, when they shall be awakened out of
their sleep of sin. But to this point, many things may be referred, that
have been spoken in the former part of this treatise: therefore I shall not
need to speak any more thereof in this place.

The more excellent that the subject of this knowledge is, viz. our likeness
unto Christ, the more let all, both Scholars and other, be provoked to study
this knowledge: yea let all other studies, and all other learning, give place
to this, and be referred to this. Neither let any other knowledge and learning
be in any account, but for this, and as it may help and further us unto this.

Thus much for the knowledge and certainty of our future likeness unto Christ.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the time when the children of God shall be so like unto Christ, as before
we heard: and of the reason of the said likeness, by an effect thereof.

IT follows now to speak of the time when the children of God shall be like
to Christ. This is said to be at his appearing. This time is also noted,
Coloss. 3. 4. Tit. 2. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 5. and 7. I do but name the places, not
expressing the words, because I hasten.

By his appearing he means his second coming, in glory and all majesty,
accompanied with his holy Angels, and coming to judge the quick and the dead;
as at his former coming in the form of a servant, he came to be judged, and
not to judge.

This is called his appearing, because as the Gospel or grace of God, which
brings salvation unto all men, is said, now to have appeared, Tit. 2. 11. in
respect it had been kept secret before since the world began, and had not
been so opened as it is now revealed unto the sons of men, etc. Romans 16. 25.
Ephesians. 3. 5. so Christ Jesus being ascended into heaven, and there sitting at
the right hand of his father, is not now so manifested, at least to the bodily
sight, as he shall manifest himself at his second coming.

This time of this his appearing is his marriage day, whereas all time before is
but as it were the time of his and our betrothing, and of the preparing of us
for that marriage day, to be the fitter spouse for him.

All this sentence of our certainty and knowledge of our being Note.
made like unto Christ at his appearing, is not to be taken as spoken in the
person of the Apostle only, and of them to whom he did write, but of all other
the children of God whatsoever. None must look for this perfection and
likeness unto Christ before this time of his appearing.

What then (will some man ask) do you say of Enoch and Elias? Of the one it
is said, that he walked with God, and was no more seen, for God took him
away: Genes. 5. 24. And again, that By faith Enoch was translated, that he
should not see death: neither was he found, for God had translated him: Heb.
11. 5. Of the other (of Elias) that he went up by a whirlewinde into Heaven: 2.
King 2. 11.

Concerning therefore the two former examples of whom the question is moved,
whatsoever men have thought, or do think, and whatsoever the former words may
seem to insinuate (which their insinuated sense shall be opened afterward)
this I think, that they are not yet bodily in heaven Enoch and Elias not
bodily yet in heaven.
neither shall be till the resurrection of all flesh, when all the rest of Gods
elect shall receive their consummation and perfect bliss.

My reasons for this opinion are briefly these:

First, Heb. 11. 13. after the mention as well of Enoch as of 1. Reason.
Noah, Abraham. and Sara, it is expressly said, All these died in faith. It were
absurd to restrain the general word all only to the three last, and not to
extend it also unto Enoch and Abel. Therefore it is manifest, that these two
died as well as the other three.

If it be objected, that it is said before, that Enoch was translated that he
might not see death, and that therefore, if here this verb died be as well
understood of him as of the rest, then there shall be contrarieties in one and
the same place. I answer, that the reconciliation of this doubt is very easy:
namely by interpreting the former phrase, that he might not see death, of not
feeling death after the common painful manner of men. And so the word to see,
for to feel, or to discern, or by experience to perceive, is often taken in
the Scripture. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, etc. that is,
they did as it were feel, and by experience perceived thy power, Psalm. 77. 16.
So the Apostle says, I see another Law in my members, etc. that is, I feel,
Romans 7. 23. There might be many other the like places alleged: but these are
sufficient.

That also of being translated, signifies nothing else, but he was taken away
in an extraordinary manner, not seen of men, but so secretly, that no man knew,
or by any outward thing could judge otherwise of him, but as if God took him
immediately into heaven: And so would God in that evil and sinful age take him
away so gently, and extraordinarily dissoluing the soul and the body, that men
might think him, to go body and soul into heaven, for the better honoring
that holy life, which he then lived: the rather because all other lived so
wickedly. To any but very meanly exercised in the Scripture it is well known,
that many things are spoken according to the opinion of men; according to that
which they seemed unto men. So Samuel is said to have been raised (after death)
by the witch, and to have spoken unto Saul: 1. Sam 28. 11. etc. Not that it was
Samuel (For they that die in the Lord rest from their labors: Reu. 14. 13. and
are not therefore at the call or command of witches) but only because he
appeared in the likeness of Samuel (as Satan can change himself into the
likeness of an Angel of light: 2. Cor. 11. 14) and because Saul and his
company took him so to be.

My second reason is out of the same Chapter. For of all the former, and of
diverse other examples afterward mentioned, it is written thus, All these
through faith obtained good report, and received not the promise, God providing
a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect. verse
39. 40. If Enoch had been taken up in body into heaven, then had he been
made perfect without us.

My third reason is out of the same Epistle also, Chapt. 9. 8. where the
Apostle, by the entrance or going once yee^ely of the high Priest alone into
Sanctum Sanctorum, into the most holy place, does teach, that under the Law,
and whiles the first Tabernacle was standing, the way into the holiest of all
was not yet opened. What means the Apostle by the holiest of all, but heaven,
especially for the bodies of men to enter thereinto? For howsoever God had
prepared heaven to be the common receptacle of the souls of the righteous
after death, yet Christ was the first that entered in body.

And this seems to be the stronger argument, because in the description of
heaven in the same epistle afterward, Chap. 12. 23. it is called the city of
the living God the celestial Jerusalem, which has the company of innumerable
Angels, the assembly of the congregation of the first borne, which are written
in heaven, and God the judge of all, and the spirits of just and perfect men,
and Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament. Here therefore is mention of
Angels, of God, of the spirits of just men, and of Jesus the Mediator: here is
no mention at all of any bodies, or of any men altogether in heaven. If any
will reply, that this is a description of the whole Church in heaven and in
earth, both governors, children, and servants; I answer, that then the words
[the congregation of the first borne] must comprehend the Church militant in
earth, and so there will be none found in heaven, but God, Jesus Christ, the
spirits of just and perfect men, and the Angels. So all bodies, beside the body
of Christ, are yet excluded.

Fourthly, in the description of the resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. 52. there is no
other sort mentioned, but the dead to be raised, and the living at that time
upon the earth to be changed: The trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be
raised up incorruptible, and we (viz all which at that day shall be living)
shall be changed. The like is, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. 16. 17. This say we unto you by
the word of the Lord, that we which live and are remaining in the coming of
the Lord shall not prevent them which sleep: for the Lord himself shall
descend down from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of an Archangell,
and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then
shall we which live and remain be caught up with them also in the clouds,
etc. In neither of both these places is there any mention of any but of the
dead, and of the living and remaining here upon the earth. Enoch therefore and
Elias must be reckned with the dead, and accounted as dead; though they died in
an extraordinary manner, neither violent or painful to themselves, or discerned
by other.

Fifthly, all the elect being compared to a body, and it being contrary to the
nature of a body, that any one member should be perfected, till the body have
all the members belonging thereunto, how can it be, that one or two of the
members of Christ's body should be perfected and wholly glorified in heaven,
Christ wanting many members, and not being complete in his said body, till the
very last age of the world, and till the last point of the said age? For who
can deny, but that there are many of the elect yet unborn? When also they
shall be all borne, who can deny, but that they shall be called one after
another? Till all be borne, and all be called, Christ's body is not perfect.

Sixthly, who can deny the Ministers of the Gospel to be more excellent
(especially the Apostles and Evangelists, who first planted the Churches among
the Gentiles) who (I say) can deny these to be more honorable then any
Ministers under the Law? Much more then any before the Law. This has been
showed before: therefore I do not now stand upon it. This only I add, that it
is said of the Apostles (as an honorable thing, and as a dignity and
prerogative of them above all other) namely, that they should sit upon twelve
seats (or thrones) and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: Matthew. 19. 28. It is
likewise to be acknowledged, that as the calling was more honorable then the
calling of any of the Prophets, so also they had more excellent graces, not
only special for discharge of their special places, but also generally of
sanctification. Is this so? How unlikely then is it, that any, especially under
the Law, or before the Law, should have any degree of glory, and be perfectly
glorified before them?

Seventhly, there were some as wicked in their time, before their time, and
after their time, and daily are, as they (now in question) were godly: yea
former times, and these last times do afford many much more wicked then they
then were, or any other are godly.

Such was Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, Ahab, and many other of the
kings of Israel. So Judas that betrayed our Savior: the Pharisees that sinned
against the holy Ghost: the man of sin, called likewise the son of
perdition, the adversary that exalts himself against all that is called
God, etc. and many other contemners of the Gospel. Yet none of these do go
bodily into the place of all the damned, till the day of judgment. Why then
should we think that they before named (Enoch and Elias) went bodily into
heaven, the place of the blessed?

This that I have hitherto written of Enoch and Elias, is the judgment of
diverse other that must be acknowledged to have been glorious lights, and
worthy of much praise in the Churches.

Calvin indeed writes herein somewhat obseurely, and (I confess) somewhat
above my reach and capacity: for first thus he writes upon Genes. 5. 24.
even word for word: (the Latin turned into English) In sum (says he,
speaking of Enochs taking away) such a rapture (or taking away) was but a
gentle and ioifull passage out of this world. Yet he was not received into the
heavens to glory, but was only released of the miseries of this present life,
until Christ the first fruits of them that rise again should come. And since
be was one of the members of the Church, it was necessary that he should
wait till all (the members) together should come forth to meet Christ, that
the whole body might be united to the head. Notwithstanding, in the very next
words he does much obscure that which before he had written, adding, If any
shall object that of the Apostle, It is appointed all men to die once; the
solution is easy, namely, that death does not always make a divorce of the
soul and body: but they are said to die, which put off the corruptible nature;
in which manner they shall die whom the last day shall find remaining. These
last words (I confess) I cannot conceive: namely, how any may be said to die,
whose souls and bodies are not separated: and how they that shall be living at
the last day, may be said to die, whom the Apostle expressly says shall not
die, but only be changed.

Peter Martyr (according to his manner) writes very largely, and somewhat (I
confess) different from something before written by me: namely, in his
Commentary upon 2. King. 2. 11. Notwithstanding, in another place he comes
nearer unto me, and agrees more with me.

In the former place first he writes, that it is not probable or Consent^^eum.
like, that these two (Enoch and Elias) should be taken to the places of
blessedness, before Christ himself, which is the first fruits of all, had
advanced himself thither. The words also of our Lord may seem to persuade
this, who in John says, No man has ascended into heaven, but the son of man
that descended from heaven. He therefore denies any man to have ascended into
heaven before himself, etc. Yet afterward he says, that they went body and
soul into Abraham's bosom: and he makes Abraham's bosom a place above, yet
distinct from the glorious place where Christ, and all his Saints departed this
life, are. How sound this is, I leave to other of sound judgment. For my part,
I know no such distinction as he there makes.

After this he proceeds further, denying them to have died, opposing himself
to them that said as I have written, viz. that they died, but yet an
extraordinary kind of death, neither by any defect or decay of nature, nor by
any force and violence, but after some other sort with ease and delight, etc.

Notwithstanding, in the other place before insinuated, he differs from that
which himself had before written, and agrees with me. For writing of the
Eucharist against Steven Gardener, Loc. 1. and answering the 11. objection of
Gardener, thus he writes: If you do believe that Enoch and Elias do yetliue,
you do believe it without the Scripture. Elias was taken away after an
admirable sort, and withdrawn from Elizeus in a fiery chariot: but that his
spirit was not stripped from his body, by what testimony of Scripture will you
prove it?

Then immediately concerning Enoch, he acknowledging that which is written,
Heb. 11. 5. to have been done, that God might testify, by his said
extraordinary kind of translating, his love toward him, for the better
provocation of other to the imitation of his goodness, he demands of
Gardener, But how know you, that afterward (viz. after his taking from the
Common sight of men) he dyed not when he was safe, and out of danger of sin?
you will say, that the epistle to the Hebrews bath, that he might not see
death: A man may understand that, that he might not feel death, whiles he was
in the world; that he might not die a common, and an ordinary death. But that
he died not after his translation, how will you make us believe? And there
want no: Hebrew writers, which expounding the second book of the Kings do
say, that Elias his body and all his garments, (except his cloak or mantle)
were consumed in the whirlweinge: but that the Spirit of the Prophet went unto
God.

Oecolampadius in Heb. 11. 5. citing the words of Genesis translated by the
Septuagints, And Enoch pleased God, and was not found because God translated
him. Notwithstanding (says he) by these words it is not proved, that he did
not die: Because if he were of the seed of Adam, it must be, that he was
mortal. And truly this is most agreeable to truth, and consonant to the
analogy of faith. For Christ alone is the first begotten of the dead, and has
opened paradise to them that believe. And that which moves me more, so long
time as Christ had not paid the price of our redemption, so long also a long
sword, or a fierce and shaken sword, did stop all passage into paradise. If
also he were translated into paradise, how did Christ bold safe his dignity?
But if you will make here a miracle, then he must yet look for death, and a
change. But if any will observe the manner of the Apostle, be will not
marvel, that he has said, that he did not see death. For as we have seen
him to do before touching Melchisedech, he would affirm nothing besides the
testimony of the Scripture, and because that he says not expressly that he
died, therefore he did not endeavor to set down so much. In the mean time
notwithstanding he denies him not to have died, as likewise he does not
Melchisedeth. etc. Thus much Occolampadius. Martinus Borrhaus, a learned writer
about the year 1539. in his commentaries upon Genesis, Chap. 5. 24. does so
interpret that place as I do. That worthy and famous man M. Doctor Fulke also,
is most plainly of my side, and agrees fully with me. For confuting the
marginall note of the Rhemish translators of the new testament upon Heb. 9 8.
he says, that heaven was not opened by the sacrifices of the first tabernacle,
etc. and that our Savior was the first that entered into perfect glory of
heaven.

So to their marginall note upon Heb. 11. 5. that there it appeared that Enoch
yet lives and is not dead, against the Caluinists, he briefly answers thus,
It appears not that Enoch yet lives in body, more then Moses or Elias, but
that he was translated by God out of the world, and died not after the common
manner of men. So he insinuates that he died, but not after the common manner of
men. To their notes at large upon Reu. 11. 3. he answers thus, You will
(says he) prove that they (that is, Enoch and Elias) are alive in paradise.
But what place is paradise but heaven? as the Apostle declares. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
and 4. for earthly paradise either by the flood, or before was defaced. Now
what doctrine it is to affirm^ that men in mortal bodies ascended into heaven,
I leave to the learned to consider. And presently after, It is evident indeed
(says he) that Elias was taken up alive but not that he continues alive.
Yea, because it is said expressly that he was taken up into heaven, it is
certain, that his body was not carried into heaven, for Christ was the first,
that in whole humanity ascended into heaven.

Master Samuel Bird likewise (a learned and godly minister late of Ipswich in
Suffolk) writing upon Heb. 11. 5. says thus: It is said, that he was taken
up, that he might not see death: the meaning is that he did not die after the
common manner of men: he was exempted from the violent separation of the soul
from the body, which nature does abhor: not but that his bodi^ did wast away,
and did not ascend into heaven. For Christ is the first, that entered in his
body into heaven, to take possession of it for us. Heb. 9. 12.

With the former testimonies affirming that Enoch and Elias are not bodily, yet
in heaven, but that their bodies were dissolved, as well as the bodies of other
(though after an extraordinary manner) I may join the testimony of Doctor
Downam. For in his second book of Antichrist, chap. 6. page 59. though he do
not plainly affirm as much as the former Authors have done, yet he makes it
so doubtful of their bodies yet being in heaven, that a man may easily
perceive, that he rather inclines to the former writers then otherwise.

The objections to the contrary, are of no moment, and be answered before.

Only where it is said, that Elias was carried up in a whirlewinde into
heaven, first we must understand, that some read this word heaven, in the
geniti^e case thus, carried up in a whirlewinde of heaven. Secondly, the word
heaven, in the scripture, is often used for the air; or for all above the
earth. Let the foul fly upon the earth, in the open firmament of the heaven.
Genesis 1. 20. so, the fowls of the heaven. verse 26. and in diverse other places.

And that it is so here to be taken, it is the more probable, because it is not
to be thought, but that Elias had other garments besides his mantle. Except
therefore his said other garments were carried up into the high heaven, we must
grant that the word heaven does only signify the air: in the which his body
might as well waste, as his other garments (besides his mantle which fell from
him) did consume.

Some man (perhaps) may think all this discourse of Enoch and Elias, to be
altogether idle, and impertinent unto my present treatise of the dignity of
Gods children, and a mere digression from the same. But if it be well
considered, it makes much for it; as much amplifying the said dignity of Gods
children. For since Enoch and Elias were so rare and excellent men for their
times, as the Scriptures commend them to be: and for further testifying of
their rareness and excellency, were honored with so rare and extraordinary a
translation out of this world, and yet are not in their bodies glorified,
neither shall be, till all the rest of Gods children shall be glorified and
made like unto Christ, at his second coming in all pomp and majesty; does not
the Lord thereby testify unto all the world, that all his children are in so
high regard and account with him, that he will not have the first and the
greatest (as it were) to be advanced to the perfection of happiness, till the
whole number be accomplished, and till the last and the meanest be borne, and
made fit for the like perfection and happiness, that all and every one may
receive their crowns together?

If a King or some other great person, make a great feast, and inuit many
thereunto: and some come betimes, some that dwell further of, tarry somewhat
longer: and the master of the feast, will not have them that first come, to sit
down, till all the rest be come, is it not a great gracing and countenancing
of all the guests, so to prolong the time of sitting down, till the rest be
come? Though some may think that the first are somewhat disgraced and wronged
by staying for the last; yet the matter well weighed, they may consider, that
even so the Lord of the feast, would have stayed the rest for them, if the rest
had come first, and the first had tarried to be last. Yea, all men may well see
the said Lord of the feast to be well persuaded of their love and patience, in
staying them for the coming of them that remain. It is the chief honor of
any guest, invited by one much greater then himself, to be openly graced with
testimony of the good opinion of the Lord of such a feast. For so all men may
see, that the Lord of such a feast, has good regard, as well of them that come
late, as of them that came first: and of them that came first, as of them that
come after.

By all hitherto spoken of this time when we shall be made like unto Christ,
let us learn, first to be patient till that time come. Secondly, the longer it
is ere it do come, the more earnestly to pray for that day of Christ's coming,
and the oftener in all zeal to say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. I do but
briefly note, or rather name things, leaving the larger discourse of them to
other: and ever to the meditation of the godly reader.

Thus much of our similitude and likeness unto Christ: of our certainty
thereof: and of the time when we shall enjoy it. The confirmation of our said
similitude or likeness unto Christ follows; which is, that we shall see him
as he is.

Here let us first observe the causall conjunction whereby this reason is
^oined with the former proposition. This is commonly translated for: but it is
in the original because. It is the same word that is used, Luke 7. 47. I say
unto thee, Many sins are forgiven her, for (say our English translations, but
because says the original) she loved much. This I do the rather note,
because the Rhemists, and other Papists, in that place of Luke, do urge the
original word signifying because, as there noting the love of the woman to
have been the cause of the forgiveness of our sins: whereas our Savior
reasons not from the cause to the effect, but from the effect to the cause,
assuring her (and other then and there present) not for that love which before
she had showed, but by that love which then she did show so abundantly toward
him, that many sins were forgiven her. As the same (viz. that much love of
man toward God and Christ, are not the cause, but an effect of the
forgiveness of many sins, and do not go before, but follow the
forgiveness of sins:) As this (I say) is plain by the parable of two
debtors (before in that Chapter mentioned) to one of which were forgiven but
50. pence, and to the other 500. and concerning whom our Savior had asked the
Pharisee (with whom he then dined) not which had loved, but which would love
the Creditor most: so it is the more plain by this place, where the same
conjunction is taken for a note of an effect, not of a cause of our former
similitude and likeness unto Christ.

It is so also taken, Ioh. 8. 44. where our Savior says of the devil, He
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Here the same word
[because] is a note of an effect. For Christ proves the devil not to have
abidden in the truth, not because before his fall there had been no truth in
him (for he was created an Angel of light as well as. other) but because now
there is no truth in him.

So Ioh. 15. 15. I have called you my friends, for (or because) all things that
I have heard of my father I have made known unto you. Here the same word also
notes an effect, not a cause. Thus then the Apostle proves that we shall
be made like unto Christ at his appearing, by an effect of this likeness,
that is, because we shall see him as he is. This to see Christ as he is, is
not the cause of our being like unto him; but our being like unto him shall be
the cause of our seeing him as he is. For we cannot see him as he is, except
first we be made like unto him. The effect is not before the cause, but the
cause before the effect.

By seeing here he means seeing with our bodily eyes: and by seeing him as he
is, the seeing of him plainly, not obscurely: fully, not in part: face to
face, not on his back parts, as Moses is said to have seen God: Exodus 33. 23.
not as a mighty God alone, but also as a Savior: and therefore not in his
divine nature alone, but under the veil (as it were) of this humanity: and yet
also in so great glory, as no flesh living did ever see the like.

This seeing of him in this manner, is opposed to seeing him through a glass
darkely, and to knowing of him in part. 1. Cor. 13. 12. Where these two words,
seeing and knowing, seem to import, that there we shall both see him more
plainly with our bodily eyes, and also know him more perfectly in our
understanding, then here we do or can do. For here we see him but by pictures
and images: I mean not by dead pictures and images, made by men, but by the
living pictures and images, of our selves and of other Gods children,
representing him in holiness and righteousness, and made only, (as before
we heard) by God himself: as also we see him by outward signs and elements,
with the actions belonging unto them, (that is, the sacraments) ordained by him
self. And here we know him by his word, even by hearing such things of him,
as therein he has revealed: but then we shall see him in his own person, and
in that glory where unto now he is advanced. Ioh. 17. 24. Father I will, that
they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may
behold my glory: viz. the glory of his mercy, grace and goodness (more then
ever before they had done) as well as the glory of his person and justice. The
wicked and reprobate shall behold the glory of his person, and hear and feel
the glory of his justice (that is, his glorious justice) not to their comfort,
but to their woe: and no otherwise, then as malefactors behold the faces of the
Judges and all their solemnity wherein they sit at our assizes, and hear there
sentences: and finally so shall they see and hear these things, that they
shall wish (as we have heard) the hills and mountains to fall upon them, to
hide them from his presence.

But the children of God shall behold him as their Savior, to their
unspeakable joy and comfort. Yea, how great their joy and comfort shall be by
this sight, appears by that delight, that men take in the sight of mortal
Princes; by that desire and joy that many had to see Christ in his baseness:
(the wise men. Mat. 2. the shepherds and Simeon, Luc. 2. Zacheus, Luke 19. and
the Grecians, Ioh. 12.) as also by that before spoken in Chap. 26. of Peter,
James and John, being so ravished with the sight of the glorious
transfiguration of Christ in the mountain, that forgetting themselves to have
been then clothed with their natural, mortal, and vile bodies, they could
have been contented, and did indeed desire to have dwelt there for ever.

If all these took such delight in these sights, how comfortable, how sweet,
how pleasant, how joyful shall this sight of Christ Jesus be, thus to see him,
not as sometime he was in his baseness, but as now he is in his glory?

In respect of this sight, all the sight that we have here, is not so much as
the sight of the blindman, when Christ had begun so to open his eyes, that he
said be did see men walk like trees. Mark. 8. 24.

Our sight here touching this object thereof, is no better then the sight of
Isaak, Jacob, and Eli, when they were old, and when their eyes were so dim,
that they took (as we say) hob for nob, one for another: yea, that they could
not discern any man, but either by his speech, or by asking who he was.

What shall I say more? Touching this sight, let us remember what the Queen of
Sheba said of the report she had heard of Salomons wisdom in her own Country,
and of that which she found by her own experience. For when she had seen all
Salomons wisdom, and the house that be had built, and the meat of his table,
and the sitting of his servants, and the order of his Ministers, and their
apparel, and his drinking vessels, and his burnt offerings that he offered in
the house of the Lord, she was greatly astonished, and said unto the King. It
was a true word that I heard in my own Land of thy sayings, and of thy
wisdom. Howbeit, I believed not this report, till I came and had seen it with
mine eyes. But lo the one half was not told me, etc. 1. King. 10 45. 6. 7.

In like sort it may be said of this sight, and of all the rest of our future
state and condition, which we shall enjoy, when we shall at his appearing be
made like unto him, and see him as he is. For flesh and blood does not believe,
neither can believe, that that is said in the written word of these things,
yea, he that has the most faith does hardly believe all that is written: at
least, though he believe at sometimes, yet at other times this faith is much
exercised with doubts, especially for applying these things to himself; yet
all is most true that we hear in this land of our pilgrimage of these things:
of our likeness unto Christ, and of our seeing him as he is: but lo, the one
half of them is not told us, neither in the Scriptures (because indeed we are
not capable thereof) neither much less by our ministers, not only because of
the negligence of many: but also because of want of understanding in the most;
yea, even in the best concerning these things. For if Paul concerning these
things, as well as concerning other mysteries, could say of himself, as well
as of other, we know in part, and see through a glass darkely; And again,
Now I know in part: how much more (alas) may we poor and silly ministers (in
respect of him) make the like confession, of our seeing and knowing these high
and future mysteries but in part?

O Christian readers, let these things comfort us in all our troubles. In the
mids of our afflictions, let us so consider of these things, that as Peter
speaks of those to whom he did write, so we may feel our hearts to leap
for joy within us (so the word does signify) and to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious. 1. Pet. 1. 6. and 8. When the virgin newly conceived
with Christ, visited her cousin Elizabeth the wife of Zachariah, (about 6
months gone with John Baptist) it is said that the babe (viz. John Baptist)
did leap, or spring in the womb of Elizabeth at the salutation of the virgin,
Luke 1. 41. and 44. As that babe by the secret work of Gods spirit, did so
leap and spring at the salutation of the virgin so newly conceived with
Christ, afterward, to be borne in the form of a servant, yet a redeemer of
the elect: so and much more let our hearts leap and skippe (as it were) in us,
so often as we hear of this last warning of Christ in glory, for perfecting of
the whole work of man's redemptions, and of this our seeing him as he is.

Yea, let us the more rejoice, because this sight is not for a day, or for a
year, or sor many years, but for ever and ever. As this world passes away, so
also does every lust thereof; even the lust of the eyes, as well as the lust of
any other member: 1. Ioh. 2. 17. yea, much sooner. But this sight now spoken
of, is an everlasting sight. Lest us therefore account of all worldly sights in
respect of this, but as of toies and bables: more fit for children then for
men: yea, for fools, then for them that are wise, and of any understanding.

Thus much of the confirmation of our former future likeness unto Christ, by
this our seeing him as he is.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of every man's purging himself, in whom there is the former hope.

THe words remaining are these, Every one that has this hope in him, purges
himself as he is pure. This (as I said) is an effect of our knowledge of our
future likeness unto Christ, (viz. that every one that so certainly hops for
those things, purges himself) illustrated by the pattern, according to
which, every one that has the said hope, does purge himself.

Tonching this effect, let this be the first observation, that the Apostle
changes the former word of knowing, into an other; viz. into hope: what
teaches he thereby? that the former knowledge is but an uncertain hope? Not
so: but that this hope is a certain knowledge: and that therefore it far
differs from the hope of worldly men of their worldly commodities: as of the
merchant, of the return of his stock with gain: of the husbandman, of the
recovery of his seed with increase, etc. For all such hope, is but uncertain,
depending upon many uncertainties. The merchants goods come often hard to the
havens mouth most safely: and yet even there, ship and all are cast away. The
husbandman has often goodly corn in the blade, and yet by hail, or by
cattle, or by some other means, it is smitten, and clean destroyed before it
come to earing: oftentimes it eareth well, and yet at the time of blowing, it
is blasted, that it never sets well: oftentimes it sets well at the
first, and yet afterward it is smitten with mildew, and so pinked, that it is
little worth. Many times also, it sets well at the first; thriueth well
afterward, continues well till the very harvest; and yet then, either by fire
from heaven, or by fire through the malice of men (as Absolon fired I^abs
corn: 2. Sam. 14. 30.) or by some other means, it is altogether spoiled. The
like may be said of the hope of other things of this life. All is uncertain,
and nothing but uncertain. As Solomon says, Vanity of vanities: vanity of
vanities: and all is vanity: Eccles. 1. 2. so may I say, ^ncertainty of
uncertainties: uncertainty of uncertainties: and all is uncertainty.

But this hope of the children of God, is joined with certain knowledge: and is
the expectation of those things, which we know most certainly: and for which we
have Gods promise confirmed with an oath, and many other assurances. But of
this, we have spoken so largely before in Chap. 14 that we shall not need to
speak any more in this place. Let the Papists therefore go with their
uncertainty, and let their life still be miserable, by uncertainty altogether
disquieted and full of fears: but let us hold our certainty, and labor daily
more and more to increase the same, by purging every man himself, as it now
follows to be further considered. Thus much for our first observation upon
these words.

The second is the universality of this sentence: Every one (says the Apostle)
that has this hope in him, purges himself. He speaks generally: He
exempteth and excepteth none: neither young nor old: neither poor, nor rich:
neither unlearned, nor learned: neither base, nor noble: neither woman, nor
man: neither him that is in adversity, nor him that is in most prosperity:
neither subject, nor King. Whosoever he be that has this hope, purges
himself: whosoever he be that has not this hope, does not purge himself,
neither can purge himself.

The grace of God, that brings salvation unto all men (says the Apostle)
has appeared, and teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
etc. and so to look for the blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13. Mark here,
first he says, that the Gospel described to be the grace of God (because it
comes from the free grace and favor of God; teaches the free grace and favor
of God; and is the means, whereby we both know the free grace and favor of
God, and are also partaker thereof, or be brought thereinto) does bring
salvation to all men (that is, to all sorts of men; young and old, masters and
servants, etc. mentioned in the former part of the Chapter) and that then he
says, the said Gospel or free grace of God does teach us to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. and so to look for the blessed hope, etc.
who then are to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to look for the
blessed hope? Even all sorts of men; because the Gospel brings salvation
unto all men, and teaches as many to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
etc. and to look for the blessed hope, etc. as it brings salvation unto. And
indeed, so to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. is a part and the
first degree of salvation: without which it is not possible, to have the other
degrees of salvation. A man may be master in the arts in the University, that
was never bacheler in the arts: yea, a man may be bacheler in divinity, that
never had any of the former degrees: but no man can have salvation in the world
to come, that is not commenced, and has not taken the first degree of
salvation in this world, for the denying of all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
etc. yea, no man can look for that blessed hope, which has not first denied
all ungodliness. No no, what is that to deny all godliness, and worldly lusts,
etc. but to purge himself, as here the Apostle speaks? And what is that, to
look for the blessed hope, etc. but to have that hope in him, whereof the
Apostle here also speaks? I conclude therefore from the former place, the same
which here the Apostle sets down, viz. that as all must deny all ungodliness
and worldly lust that look for salvation by the grace of God, so all must
look for salvation, and for that blessed hope there spoken of, that do deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts: and conuersiuely, that all that do look
for that blessed hope, must also deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts: that
is, that every one that has this hope in him, (as this Apostle speaks) must
purge himself. This is the second observation.

The third is, that he speaks of that hope that is in a man. He says not,
Every one that makes profession of this hope, or that has this hope in his
mouth or in his tongue: but he says, Every one that has this hope in him,
that is, within him in his heart. Many that make profession of this hope, and
that say, they hope and look to be saved, and to be made like unto Christ at
his appearing, as well as the best, do notwithstanding live in their sins,
and not purge themselves: yea, many do declare Gods ordinance to other, and
do talk of the covenant of God. which yet hate to be reformed, and cast his
words behind them, whereby they should be reformed and purged: Psalm. 50 16. 17.
The Apostle speaks not of such, but of them that indeed have this hope in
them: which is a virtue of the inner man, as well as the other two, faith and
love, wherewith it is joined: 1 Cor. 13. 13.

Fourthly, let us observe the word purges, and that in a double respect: first
as touching the signification thereof: secondly, as touching the tence whereof
it is: viz. of the present tence.

Touching the first, this word is derived of a word, that most properly
signifies chaste; as the Apostle would have the younger women to be chaste: Tit.
2. 5. Notwithstanding by the figure synecdoche (that puts the special for
the general) this word is used for all virtues: and in this very place, here is
not only the verb, but also the primitive whereof it is derived, in the words
following, as he is pure: which being spoken of Christ, notes all the virtues
that were in him: even his perfect holiness and righteousness, without any
sin at all. This verb in the general signification thereof, is borrowed (as
now it is used) from the manner of the law for purifying themselves according
to the ceremonies of the law: either after they had any ways defiled
themselves: or before they were to come to the passover, or to be employed in
any other holy work. So it is used: John. 11. 55. Acts 21. 24. and 24. 18.

The law being abrogated, when the Apostle wrote this, it cannot be taken for
any ceremonial purging, but for a moral purging from sin. So also it is
taken: James 48. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye
wavering minded men. So also 1. Pet. 1. 22. Seeing your souls are purified in
obeying the truth.

This word therefore in this signification of it, notes all sin to be a
filthy thing: and not only adultery, fornication, and other such bodily
uncleanness, (which every man accounts filthy) to be filthy: but every other
sin also. The wicked do account of some sins as special ornaments. Pride
is unto them as a cbaine: and cruelty as a garment: Psalm. 73. 6. So we see,
that many in these days, think themselves the trimmer, and the gaier, for
going in strange apparel, fet from other countries, and contrary to their sex
(the man wearing woman's apparel, especially the woman wearing man's apparel)
and contrary to their kind men and women conforming themselves rather to beasts
then to any sobriety: and the men wearing long hair, even long locks behind,
contrary to nature; and not only like to women, but also like to some
unreasonable creatures: and women wearing such kinds of periwigs, that if a
man should come out of the land of the living, where he had not seen any such
thing, he would hardly know what kind of creatures they be, but would take
them to be some strange monsters, only bred in this country.

These things have been proved before to be condemned in the word, and to be
grievous sins: yet in these things, diverse take a great pride, esteeming of
them as of goodly ornaments: yea, so far are some gone in impiety, that they
think it a great ornament ^o swear great and fearful oaths: and that they
do not account of him for a gentleman, but rather for a clown and a fool,
that cannot and does not ordinarily in his common speech, most wickedly and
profanely rap out all manner of oaths. The like do some account of that
foul, and more then beastly sin of drunkenness. But howsoever these and
other the like sins be accounted as ornaments, yet the holy Ghost does
account them as foul things: and does often call all sin by the name of
filthiness: 2. Cor. 7. 1. James 1. 21. or of uncleanness: Rom 1. 24. and 6.
19. 2. pet 2. 10.

And it is not to be neglected, that in cuery one of these places, there is in
the original a several word: though they be all interpreted, either
filthiness or uncleanness. For 2. Cor. 7. 1. is one word, Ian^es 1. 21.
another: the primative whereof signifies most properly such filthiness as is
gathered in the top of the fingers, betwixt the nails and the flesh: Romans 1.
24. and 6. 19. is another word: and another in 2 Pet. 2. 10. what does all this
variety of words teach us? Truly this, that such is the foulness, and
filthiness of all sin, that no one word is sufficient to express or set
forth the same. Let men therefore please themselves as much as they will in it;
it is but a foul and filthy thing: yea, so foul, filthy, and loathsome, that
they that having been delivered from it, do return again unto it, are
compared to the dog that returns to his vemit: and to the sow, that being
washed, does also return to her mire again, wherein before she had wallowed:
2. Pet. 2. 22. Can any thing be more loathsome then such mire, and then the
vomit of a dog? Let no man blame me for writing so homely. I use the words and
phrase of the Apostle: yea, it is the cloquence of most wise King Salemon, Pro.
26. 11. and in both places of the holy ghost himself, to make all sin the
more odious unto all men. But (alas) is it not a strange thing that many base
persons should be so squaimish, nice and dainty, that they should condemn^ that
for rudeness, and think much to hear it spoken, which that great and mighty
King Salomen, and God himself have used for eloquence? Is it not much more
strange, that men (even of the greatest sort) should daily defile themselves
with that, and tumble and wallow in it over head and cares, soul and body,
which is a thousand times more filthy and beastly, then either the mire of a
sow, or the vomit of a dog? and reprove those that set forth such filthiness
by the words of King Salomen, of the Apostle, and of the holy ghost? Thus much
touching the first respect of my observation of this word; viz. concerning the
signification thereof.

Touching the tence, the Apostle speaks not in the time past, or in the time
to come, saying either he has purged himself, or he will purge himself: but
in the time present, saying, purges, or does purge. This teaches that this
is, and must be a continual work: because sin, whereof this purging is,
does always remain, touching the blot, stame, and blemish thereof. Though
they that once be regenerated to be the children of God, be iustisied and
discharged from the guilt of all their sins: as also freed from the bondage
of them, yet touching the stain of sin, that does and shall always remain,
as along as we be clothed with corruption. For who can say, I have made my
heart clean? I am clean from my sin? Pro. 20. 9. There is no man that
sins not: 1. Kings 8. 46. In many things we sin all: James 3. 2. And who
needs not daily to pray for forgiveness of trespasses? What man also lineth,
and shall not see death?

There are certain times of the year, fitter for purging of the body for
bodily health, then other: as the spring is best of all: and the fall of the
lease next to that. So also in those times that are sit, there are some days
fitter to purge, either with pills, or with potions, or by vomits, or by
clysters, or by letting of blood. But for this spiritual purging of our selves
from sin, all times are like: all days ahke: none better then other: except
only, when there is fitter opportunity in respect of fitter means, as also in
respect of some judgment and calamity, either general or special, whereby
the Lord calls us to search and try our ways, and to turn unto him: Lam. 3.
40. Joel 2. 12. that is, to purge our selves of such things as wherewith we
have before defiled our selves: and provoked the Lords wrath against us. This
observation, in one word plainly condemns the superstition of the Papists,
that are very precise in purging themselves in the time of Lent, and in
abstaining then from such things, as they foolishly think will defile
themselves; yea, from the state of marriage, which God himself has pronounced
honorable, without any exceotion of time to the contrary: as also at some other
times of the year, which they as unwisely imagine to be more holy then other:
whereas at other times, they are altogether secure, careless, and licentious:
in hope at the return of the foresaid holy time and times, to purge and cleanse
themselves once for all. Thus much touching the fourth observation, of the word
purges, in respect both of the signification, and also of the present tense
thereof.

Fifthly, let us observe the next word, himself. This teaches, that he that
has this hope in him, is not only curious in purging other, and in teaching
and admonishing other how they should be purged: but that especially he
laboreth upon himself, and with himself, for the purging of himself. So Paul
exhorts the Colossians, to teach and admonish their own selves: Coloss. 3.
16. and Jude them to whom he did write, to edisie themselves in their most
holy faith: and to keep themselves in the love of God: Jude 21. So Paul says
to Timoth^e, Study to show thy self approved unto God: 2. Tim. 2. 15. He would
not have him to study only for the good of other, but also, and in the first
place for his own good: that so he might be the fitter and more able to do
good unto other.

This is a necessary point; because many are very curious about other, that do
altogether neglect themselves. They reprooae other: they censure other: they
teach other, etc. but touching themselves they are altogether careless: by
which means they do thelesse good unto other. For who will not be ready to
say unto such, Physician, heal thy self: Luk 423. and, Thou which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? etc. Romans 2. 21. Truly there is nothing
that in all ages has more hindered, and now does more hinder, the public
ministry of the word, and the private profession and exhortations (etc.) of
others, then the practice that has been and is contrary to such public
teaching, and to such private profession and exhortations.

But what does the Apostle mean by this kind of speech, Every one that has
this hope in him purges himself? does he teach freewill: and that every one
that hops at the appearing of Christ to be like unto Christ, has power to
purge himself? Nothing less. The Rhemists indeed, and other Papists, upon
this place gather, and infer that doctrine. But they gather that which is not
sown: and they infer conclusions without premises: The holy Ghost teaches
no such thing, either here, or any where else: yea, he teaches the clean
contrary. For we have plentifully heard before, that our whole regeneration is
the work of GOD. To purge our selves, is an effect of our regeneration:
therefore to purge our selves, is likewise the work of God. To purge our
selves and to sanctify our selves is all one: but sanctification is the work
of God only, (as before also has been showed) and as appears, by the
prayer of Christ generally for the Church: John 17. 17. and of the Apostle
particularly for the Thessalonians: 1. Thessalonians 5. 23.

Our Savior also expresselie ascribes this word of purging to his Father,
saying, Every plant that brings forth fruit, he (that is, God the Father)
purges, that it may bring forth more fruit: John 15. 2. Where it is to be
observed, that he speaks not of purging men at the first, which are not
engraffed into Christ, that they may bring forth the first fruits of
righteousness: but that he speaks of them that already are ingraffed into
Christ, and says, that his Father purges them, that they may bring forth
more fruit. In the same place also he says, that without himself (as he was
the mediator God and man) even such (so ingraffed into him) can do nothing;
without me (says he) ye can do nothing: verse 5. If such as the disciples
of Christ were, so long ingraffed into him, so long instructed by him, and so
well acquainted with all his doctrine, miracles, and whole conversation, could
do nothing without Christ, how much less can any other do any thing? But
what then is the meaning of the Apostle? Even this: first (as I said before)
that every one that has that hope (already spoken of) does most of all busy
himself in this work of purging, about himself: and not altogether imploie
his time about other. It is true in deed, that every one that has that hope,
does regard also other (under his government especially) and according to his
place does labor the purging of other, that are so committed to his charge. And
certainly he that does not so regard other, has never been purged himself:
For indeed so to do, is in some sort to purge himself: because every
governor being in some sort the head of those to whom he is gouenor: they also
that are under his government, cannot but in like sort be his members: at least
members of that body, whereof he is the head. Every governor of a family, being
(as he is the governor) the head also of the family, all the rest of the same
fam^ly, are (as it were) his members. Especially as the husband is called the
head of the wife: 1. Cor. 11. 3. so the wife is said to be bone of his bones,
and flesh of his flesh: Genes. 2. 23. The children likewise are branches, (and
so in like manner members) of the parents, as being taken out of their loins.
So in like manner, the King, or any other having kingly and supreme and
sovereign authority, is in that respect the head of his people; and his people
are in the same respect his members. Therefore if such do not labor to purge
those that do so belong unto them (even as Job is said to have sanctified his
children: Job 1. 5. and as Abraham is commended by God himself, that he would
command his sons and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord,
etc. Genes 18. 19) if (I say) such as are in any authority over other do not
labor so to purge them that are under their government, they may in some sort
be said, not to purge themselves. Notwithstanding all such do first of all,
and must first of all look to themselves, even to their own persons: because
otherwise their care for other, shall either be altogether in vain, or else it
shall be with little success.

Secondly, for further answer touching the meaning of these words, the Apostle
here speaks of those, that already had this hope in them: and which were
therefore already sanctified, and in whom Christ did dwell by faith. In this
respect therefore, he might the better say, that every one that had that hope in
him, did purge himself, as Christ himself is pure: because such an one being
united to Christ, and Christ being made one with him, and he with Christ,
whatsoever Christ does in him, the same by the communion betwixt Christ and
him, is attributed as well to him, as to Christ.

As by the communion betwixt the two natures in Christ (the divine, and the
humane) that is often attributed to the one that belongs to the other: and
that is said of the whole person that is proper to one nature: viz. that to the
divine nature, which belongs to the humane: Acts 20. 28. 1. Cor. 2. 8. 1.
John 1 1. and that to the humane which is proper to the divine: John 3. 13. and
that of whole Christ which is proper either to the humanity only: Mark 13. 32.
Luke 2 52. and 24. 39. John 6 38. and 8. 50. and 14. 10. or to the divinity
only: John 8. 58. and 17. 5. Coloss 1. 15 as (I say) it is thus in Christ by
the communion betwixt his two natures, so by that communion that is betwixt
Christ and every such child of God as before I have spoken of, that is sometime
attributed to the child of God himself, that is proper only to Christ, and
which is the only work of Christ: and that which belongs to the children of
God, is spoken of Christ, and attributed unto Christ, etc.

As Christ himself is said to suffer persecution when the children of God are
persecuted: Acts 94. Coloss. 1. 24. because they are his members, although
Christ in his own person being now in heaven suffers nothing but is out of
all danger of persecution: Romans 69. so every child of God, that has that hope
in him before spoken of, is said to purge himself, although this work of
purging, or clensing, or sanctifying be only the work of Christ himself.

As the Apostle speaking of himself as he was regenerated; and of sin
remaining in him, says, that it was no more he that did evil (viz. as he was
a regenerate man, according to that of the Apostle John, He that is borne of
God, sins not) but that it was sin that dwelled in him: Romans 9. 17. and
20. so he speaking of his laboring for the purging of other (which was also
one particular point of the purging himself) he says, that he labored more
abundantly then they all: but presently he adds this correction, yet not I
(says he) but the grace of God which is with me. 1. Cor. 15. 10. In like
manner, though the Apostle here speaking of the children of God by regeneration
says, that every one of them purges himself: yet if he should speak of
such, as they are still in part natural men, and unregenerate (or at least
unsanctified) he would say, that such do not purge themselves, but that it is
Christ which dwells in them that does purge them, or the grace of God that is
with them.

Thirdly, for further answer of the former question, and for a morefull opening
of the Apostles meaning of these words, as Job is said to have sanctified his
children (as before we heard) because he exhorted them to sanctification,
prayed and offered other sacrifices according to those times for their
sanctification, and used all other means that they might be sanctified; so the
Apostle says here, that every one that has this hope in him purges himself,
because every one that has this hope, will and does use all means for the
purging of himself.

What are these means? Surely, hearing of the word read and preached, with
reading and meditation thereof privately: Job. 17. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. 20. 1.
Pet. 1. 23. and 2. 1. 2. John 5. 39. Listening to private exhortations: Prou 10.
8. and 11. 32. and 15. 31. 32. Hebr. 3. 12. etc. and 10. 25. Praying in the
holy Ghost: Jude 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. craving also the prayers of other in that
behalf: 1. Thessa 5. 25. Hebrews 13. 18. using the company of the godly, by
whose words and example they may be the more provoked (as has been before
often showed) to more godliness: Proverb. 13. 20. avoiding also all evil
company, and all other means of the contrary, namely of defiling themselves:
Prou. 1. 10. etc. and 4. 14. and 22. 24. 25. Canti^. 1. 8. 1. Cor. 5. 6. and
11. and Chap 15. 30. so likewise the turning away their eyes that they behold
not vanity: Psalm. 119. 37. Yea, making a covenant with their eyes not to behold
any object of uncleanness: Job 31. 1. because by this means, many have been
overtaken and defiled with diverse sins: As Ahaz with idolatry, by seeing the
altar of Damascus: 2. Kings 16. 10. Achan with covetousness, and taking of the
excommunicate things of Jericho, By seeing among the spoil, a goodly
Babylonish garment, and two hundred she^els of silver, and a wedge of gold,
etc. Josh. 7. 21. David with adultery by seeing a woman washing her self: 2.
Sam. 11. 2. and diverse other with other sins. And lastly taking heed to all
their ways, that they do not offend with their tongue: Psalm. 39. 1.

Because (I say) every one that has that hope in him will and does use all
those foresaid means of sanctification, and shun and avoid all means of
pollution and of being defiled, therefore also does the Apostle say in this
place, that every such one does purge himself.

Now that every one that has this hope, does thus purge himself, it is
evident, because hope can not be separated from faith. Where there is hope,
there also is faith, where by the heart is purified: Acts 15. 9. as by which
Christ himself dwells in our hearts (as we have heard) who has his fan in
his hand, to pu^ge his floor: Mat. 3. 12. and to make clean his wheat not
only from chafe without it, (that is, to separate the elect from the reprobate
that may defile them) but also from all dross within it, and from all
corruption cleaving unto it: that is, from all filthiness of the flesh and of
the spirit: 2. Cor. 7. 1.

Christ also being the head, and they that have the former hope being the
members, as the natural head communicates virtue to every natural member, so
it cannot be, but that Christ will communicate his virtue of purging to every
member of his mystical body.

The like is to be said of him as he is the root, and they that have the
foresaid hope are boughs and branches coming out of the said root. For if the
root be holy, the branches also are holy: Romans 11. 16.

This purging must not be only of one part, neither of the body only, nor of
the soul only; nor of one power of the soul, nor of one member of the body:
but of both and of all; of soul and body: and of every power of the one, and
of every member of the other. All is comprehended in the word himself. Hither
belong the places before alleged: 2. Cor. 7. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 23. Heb. 10. 22.
James 4. 8. and many other.

Neither must this purging be of some things only, but of every evil. 2. Cor.
7. 1. Tit. 2. 12. James. 1. 21. 1. Pet. 2. 1.

The like may be said of conforming our selves to every good work, and to all
that God requires of every one, either as he is a Christian, or is of any
special calling. God will not have some sins only purged, but all. God will
not have some good duties performed, but all. These things are common, and
have been partly handled before. Therefore I do but name them.

This also (as has been noted before) must be a daily work, 1. Because there
is always some sin remaining of the old store, which needs daily purging.
2. Because as the nails of our hands, though never so well cleansed one day,
do yet gather such new filth, that they have need of new clensing the next
day: so it is with us; we daily so gather corruption, that we have need daily
to purge ourselves.

Our whole hands and face also need daily washing: yea, the more they are used
in any business, the oftener they need to be washed. So is it with our linen
for often washing: and with our woollen apparel for often brushing, according
to our often wearing of one or of the other. Our houses likewise must be the
oftener swept, not in the week only, but also every day, the more, that they
are used. The like is to be said of any vessel that we occupy, touching
scouring and other clensing thereof. As it is with these things, so is it with
us, touching the cleansing and purging of our whole man from spiritual
uncleanness.

As also our bodies (for the better preservation of our bodily health) need the
oftener to be purged, the corrupter the air is where we do live: likewise our
souls and whole man, (for the better preserving of spiritual health) are the
oftener to be purged, because generally the air of this nether world where we
do live, is very corrupt and infectious, sithence the first fall of mankind,
whereby not only the breath (as it were) of all men is putrified and made
infectious, but also all other creatures likewise, are in some sort defiled,
and made the more dangerous and pernicious unto us.

The more likewise that men live with sick persons, sick especially of some
infectious and contagious disease, the more needful it is for them, not only
to take daily preservatives, but also some daily purge (mithridate or such
like) to expel whatsoever noisome breath they have received from them with
whom they do live. The like is necessary (in this work of purging) for all
men, according to the company with who they have to deal: namely, that the
more they converse with the wicked, the more careful they be, not only to
carry about them continually the better preservatives against all spiritual
infections (viz. the more knowledge of the word, which as a precious savor
they may often smell unto: and the more watchful eye over all their behavior,
and always be the more in all private meditation and in private prayer, etc)
but also to take daily some spiritual purge, by examining their daily
conversation by the word, by praying both forgiveness and also reformation of
whatsoever where with they have been overtaken contrary to the word, that so
they may the better expel whatsoever spiritual infection they have any ways
taken.

This world generally is like a flax-dressers shop, or some other such house,
where it cannot be but any man shall receive some soil. In this respect
therefore the children of God need daily the more carefully to brush (as it
were) the garments of their Christian profession, the more that they are
conversant in the world, and deal with worldly affairs.

Though I spoke briefly before of this point, in my fourth observation upon
this verse, viz. upon the word purges especially upon the present tence
thereof: yet considering the great necessity of this matter, in this secure and
careless age, I thought it not amiss to take occasion to add thus much, for
the better application of it.

But let the Christian reader with patience give me lcaue to return a little
more back. To that therefore, that every one that has this hope in him
pu^geth himself. that only does not belong that before we heard out of Paul
to Titus, chap. 2. 11. 12. 13. but also diverse other scriptures.

The Apostle having commended the goodness of God (2. Cor. 6.) in promising to
dwell with men, and to be their God, and their father, and to make them his
people, and his sons and daughters, he begins the seventh Chapter, with an
exhortation to this purging of our selves, saying, Seeing then we have these
promises, deerly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthnesse of the
flesh, and of the spirit, and finish our salvation in the fear of God. So he
teaches all that hope for the performance of the former promises, with the
appurtenances of them, to purge themselves in that manner, even from all
filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit, etc.

To the Philippians also he ioineth these two together, viz. to have our
conversation in heaven, (that is, to purge our selves as here the Apostle
speaks, from all earthly corruption, and to live after an heavenly manner)
and from heaven to look likewise for the Savior, even our Lord Jesus Christ:
Philip. 3. 20. 21. So he teaches us, that whosoever do look for the Lord
Jesus Christ from heaven, to change their vile body, and to make it like to his
glorious body (according to that which our Apostle has before written) do also
behave themselves here in earth, after the foresaid heavenly manner.

To the Colossians likewise, having said when Christ which is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory (here is the hope in
this pla^^ mentioned) presently he infers an exhortation, of mortifying
therefore our earthly members, etc. that is, of purging our selves. Must not
all therefore, that have that hope in them, so purge themselves, and mortify
their earthly members?

The Apostle Peter also upon the like premises makes the like conclusion,
Wherefore beloved (says he) seeing that ye look^ for such things, be diligent
that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless: 2. Pet. 3.
14. What is that, to look for such things, but to have this hope that here
the Apostle speaks of? what is this to be found in peace without spot and
blameless, but to purge our selves in that sort, that here the Apostle
commends? yea, the same Apostle, in the same place, and in the verses
immediately before had joined holy conversation and godliness with looking for
and hasting unto the coming of that day of God, etc.

Jude. like wise ioineth these 4 together. 1. to edify our selves in our most
holy faith. 2. to pray in the holy Ghost. 3. to keep our selves in the love of
God. 4. to look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life. Iud.
20. and 21. The first 3 pertain to the purging of our selves: the last is a
plain description of this hope.

Finally for conclusion of all, let us remember that the Apostle Paul having
plentifully proved the doctrine of the resurrection, and no less eloquently
laid forth the manner thereof, and the future similitude and likeness of our
bodies to the body of Christ, does from the expectation thereof shut up all
with this gra^e exhortation, tending to this purging of our selves, Therefore
my beloved brethren, be steadfast and immovable, abounding always in the work
of the Lord: knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15.
58. Here the first word, therefore, secretly insinuates, and the last sentence
added for confirmation plainly expresses this hope, that hither to we have
spoken of: and the exhortation it self betwixt both inserted, does as
evidently intimate this purging of our selves (in regard of that hope) which
here also the Apostle commends.

I shall not need to enlarge this point any further. Only let us consider
thereof by this familiar similitude, that every one prepares himself, and
house and all, according to the person whom he looks for. What servant that
is in continual expectation of his masters return home, but will prepare
himself and all things belonging unto him accordingly? what mean man looks
for the coming of a Noble man: especialle, what subject looks for the
coming of his Prince, but that he will prepare himself for apparel and for
all other things beseeming the entertainment of such a person? Shall we then
look for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, and at his appearing to be
made like unto him, and so to see him in all his glory and majesty, and shall
we not purge our selves and cast away al filthiness of the flesh, and of the
spirit, and put on the robes of he lines and righteousness, that so we may be
the fitter to intertain him, and to be entertained of him into his glory?

Let no man deceive us with vain words, neither let us deceive our selves. It
is not possible for us to have this hope, and to look for these things, but
that we will thus purge our selves. If we do not thus purge our selves, then
certainly we have not this hope: neither do we look to be made like unto
Christ Jesus at his appearing, and to see him as he is. Would we be like unto
him in glory, and will we not be like unto him in holiness? Would we see him
as he is now in heaven with our bodily eyes, and will we not see him as he
offers himself to be seen in earth, in his word and sacraments, with the
eyes of our mind, and by faith? Let us remember and let us not forget what the
Apostle says follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord: Heb. 12. 14. Yea* let us consider what our Savior says, Blessed are the
pure in heart for they shall see God: Mat. 5. 8. For do not these sentences
plainly show, that without the former holiness and purity of heart, none shall
see the Lord? But since many things before spoken may be referred to this
argument, I will therefore insist no longer thereupon.

If we do thus purge our selves as here the Apostle speaks, then let us
assure our selves, that our hope of being made like unto him, and seeing him as
he is; shall not by any thing whatsoever be frustrated. Earthly Princes may
shake us out of their Courts, as Mordecai might not enter within King
Ahashueros^ his gates, because he was clothed with sackcloth: Ester 4 2. but
Jehovah the Lord of Lords, and King of heaven and earth, will receive us into
his everlasting palace of heaven, there to behold all his glory and riches.
Heaven and earth shall rather perish, then Gods word in this behalf shall fall
to the ground. But if we do not so purge our selves, our hope^s altogether a
vain hope, and shall deceive us in the end. The devils themselves shall as
soon be made like to Christ, and see him as he is, as that man or woman, that
is not here purged.

But in what measure must every one that has this hope in him purge himself?
First, according to his measure of the said hope. For this purging being an
effect of that hope, it cannot be, but that the more the hope is, the more he
that has that hope will purge himself.

Secondly, according to the means before mentioned of purging himself: viz.
according to his hearing, reading of the word, meditation, company of the
godly, prayers etc.

For all these means being the ordinances of God for a man to purge himself,
it cannot be but that the more any man does in truth use the said means, the
more blessing God will give unto them for effecting this purging.

Thirdly, according to other means that God himself does use toward them
that have the said hope for the purging of them, viz. according to the mercies
which he bestows upon them, and according to the chastisements wherewith he
does exercise them. For these does the Lord use (as before has been
mentioned) to kill the weeds of sin in men, and to make them the more
plentiful in the fruits of righteousness. What is this but to purge them as
here the Apostle speaks, and as our Savior himself speaks in the very same
case? Ioh. 15. 2.

Gods mercies are (as it were) the marling and manuring, or (to speak more
plainly) as the mucking and dunging of our barren hearts: and Gods
chastisements and corrections, are as it were the ploughing of them, after they
are so marled, manured, mucked and dunged: or as the harrowing of them to
break their hard clods: and both are to make them the more fruitful in all
goodness.

As men therefore do look that their grounds should be the more freed from
weeds, and bring forth the better crops of good corn, the more they dung,
plough, and harrow them; so the more that God does multiply his mercies upon
his children, and exercise them with his corrections, the more he looks they
should be purged of sin, and bring forth the fruits of righteousness.

Under this (...) comprehend the purging of our selves, according to any
dignity whereunto God has advanced us. As we do more wash our face then the
inferior parts of our body, so the more eminent that any is in Church or
common wealth, the more he ought to be purged from all vice, and the more also
to shine in all virtue.

Moreover, ^uery child of God is to purge himself, and to be so much the more
holy, by how much the more impure, filthy and unholy he sees other to be.
Therefore the holy ghost by the examples of such as have been idolaters,
fornicators, tempters of God, murmurers, profane persons, and otherwise
wicked, does provoke the children of God, the more to take heed of such sins:
and the more to abound in the contrary virtues: 1 Cor. 10. 6. 7 etc. Heb. 12.
16 17. Jude 3. and 4. and 20. This is necessary, first in respect of God, that
the more he is dishonored by other, the more glory he may have by his children.
Secondly, in respect of such wicked men themselves, for their better
conversion: Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2 12.

The like is to be said of purging our selves according to the care that we
see of other for purging themselves. The more we see other to purge themselves,
the more also must we purge our selves. Therefore does God let us see and hear
of good examples, that we should imitate them: Heb. 13. 8. James 5. 16. 17. 3.
John 11. 1. Cor. 11. 1. 2. Cor. 8. 1. etc. Philip. 3 17.

Last of all, the more unclean and polluted that we our selves have been, the
more we have given our members as servants unto uncleanness and to iniquity,
before we had this hope in us. the more the Lord does require that we should
give our m^mbers servants unto righteousness, when we come to have this hope
in us. This the Apostle Paul expressly commands in the very words before set
down: Romans 6 19. And this is plain by the doctrine of our Savior himself.
For from the particular experience of the abundant love of the woman toward
him, that had found abundant mercy in the forgiveness of her abundant sins:
from (I say) his particular experience of her abundant love, for his abundant
mercy in forgiving her abundant sins, testified by abundant fruits thereof:
viz. first by her bringing a box of precious ointment: Secondly, by her washing
Christ's feet with her tears: Thirdly, by her wiping them with the hair of her
head: Fourthly, by her kissing of them* Fifthly, by her anointing them with the
foresaid ointment (that so they might not be clean with her washing, but also
sweet with her ointment) by all these things our Savior pronounces, that
many sins were forgiven her: and from all these things in her particular
example, he insinuates this general doctrine, that to whom much is forgiven,
he loves much: as contrarily, to whom a little is forgiven, he loves a
little. Luke 7. 47.

This we have seen by the example of Peter before. The more he had fallen and
defiled himself by denying and forswearing of Christ, the more Christ
afterward charge him to love him, and to declare his love by feeding his
sheep the more diligently. Ioh. 21. 15. yea, before this charge, the more we
have heard Peter to have testified his love toward Christ himself, by casting
himself into the sea, as soon as ever he heard Christ to be on the shore, and
by swimming unto Christ when the rest of the disciples (even John himself not
excepted, who was the disciple whom Christ had specially loved) made no more
have, then to come by ship unto him.

The more that Paul before his calling had blasphemed and persecuted Christ,
the more being called he purged himself, and showed himself zealous of the
glory of God, according to his former blasphemy: as also by more abundant
labor for the Church: 1. Cor. 15. 10. and 2. Cor. 11. 23. He showed himself
the more loving to the Church, according to his former persecution thereof.

As the Scripture records Bathsheba the wife of Vriah to have been a greater
sinner by yielding to the adulterous lust of David, then Abigail: so when they
were both the wives of David, it appears that she went further in purging of
her self then Abigail. This (I say) appears as by many other testimonies of
her greater godliness, so especially by those golden precepts of piety and
virtue given to her son Solomon. Pro. 31. 1. etc. and often else where.

Thus much of this effect of our hope; viz. of purging our selves.

The pattern according to which we are to purge our selves, is Christ himself:
as he is pure. This word as, is not a note of equality or parity, but only of
similitude or likeness. As at the appearing of Christ, we shall not be equal
unto him in glory, but only like him: so much less in this life can we be
equal in lines, but only like him. This pattern is the most perfect pattern
of all other: we are indeed sometimes exhorted to imitate and to resemble men;
but they are no otherwise to be imitated and resembled, then only as they do
imitate and resemble Christ: 1. Cor. 11. 1. Therefore John says not, follow
Note.
them which are good. (For even the best have their faults, wherein they are
not to be followed) but he says, follow that which is good. 3. John. 11.

That all that have the former hope must purge themselves, as he is pure, it is
manifest, because we have heard before, that he is our King. Now we know and
see by daily experience, that subjects for the most part do compose and frame
themselves according to the example of their Princes. We have likewise heard,
that Christ is the head, we the members: Christ is the husband, we the wife:
Christ is the vine, we the branches. Must we not therefore purge our selves,
as he is pure? Are not the members of like nature with the head? Must not the
wife frame her self (as near as can be) to her husband? And have not the
branches, the same virtue and qualities that the vine?

This condemns the folly and madness of the Papists that have so many
patterns of imitation as they have orders amongst them.

Some are Dominicans, some are Franciscans, some are Benedictines, some are
Augustines.

Some are black Friars, some white, some gray. I marvel also they had not
some tawnie, some russet, some green, some yellow, some blew: some of all
other colors.

If Paul condemned the Corinthians for holding some of Paul, some of Apollos,
some of Cephas some of Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 12. etc. would he justify the folly
and madness of the Papists, in their foresaid multiplying of orders, and in
propounding to themselves so many patterns of imitation, so different and
diverse every one from another?

Christ is not to be imitated in those things that he did as God only: viz.
in his miracles, whereby he declared himself to be God: nor in those things
which were proper and peculiar to the office of his Mediation: but in those
things which he did in the common form of a servant. Therefore the Papists are
as foolish and mad for imitation of Christ in their lent fast, as they should
be, if because he walked on the sea, therefore also they should take upon them
to do the like.

This pattern is not special for some, but general for all the children of
God. For the Apostle says, that every one that has this hope in him, purges
himself, as he is pure. As therefore not some, but every one that has this
hope in him, of being like unto Christ in glory at his appearing, and of
seeing him as he is, must purge himself; so also not some, but every one that
has the said hope, must purge himself, according to this pattern. This
therefore especially condemns that strict sect of the Papists, called
Jesuits: which in a kind of extreme pride, in name, and in a more precise
kind of imitation of Christ, as they pretend, do both single themselves from
all other, and also advance themselves above all other. For does not the
Apostle in the place before alleged reprove the Corinthians, as well for
holding some of Christ in a special manner, as for holding some of Paul, some
of Apollos, some of Cephas? And does he not also thereby teach, that as
albaptized into Christ, are Christians alike; so all (if any) must be also
Jesuits alike? Though in Cambridge, Christ College, and Jesus College be two
distinct colleges, yet in profession the names Christ and Jesus are not so to
be distinguished.

To conclude this point touching this pattern according to which we are to
purge our selves. Let us remember what Jacob did to have black and white
spotted lambs, yea, what he did in that behalf, not of his own head, but by
direction of God himself: as also let us consider the success thereof.
Co^cer^ing this, it is said, that Jacob took rods of green poplar, and of
hasell, and of the chestnut tree, and pilled white strokes in them, and made the
white appear in the rods, and then put the rods which he had pilled into the
gutters and wairing troughs, when the sheep came to drink before the sheep,
because they were then in heat when they came to drink. Wherefore did he all
this? Because before he had made a covenant with Laban to have no other wages,
then the party colored sheep with great and little spots; all that were so
spotted before, being first taken out of the flocks, and committed to the
other sons of Laban to be kept by themselves three days journey from those
that remained in the keeping of Jacob.

What was the success of this practice? It is further said, that the sheep
being then in heat, (because it was then ramming time) and seeing those reds
so pilled with white strokes lying before them, by the impression of them (but
chiefly by the special providence of God) brought forth young of party
color and with small and great spots. Genes. 30. 37. etc.

To apply this to our present purpose, as those sheep by beholding those rods
so pilled with white strokes amongst the natural green that was left on them,
through the special providence of God, did bring forth young party colored,
like to those said pilled rods in that manner laid before them: so if every one
that has that former hope in him of being at the appearing of Christ like unto
him in glory, and of seeing him as he is, for the purging of himself would
always lay before his eyes this excellent pattern of Christ himself here
commended unto us, and seriously mark and observe the same, it could not be,
but that through the gracious working of God, the sight of this pattern would
make so deep an impression in the heart of such a man, that he should purge
himself as Christ is pure: and be made like unto him in holiness and
righteousness, for his better assurance of his future likeness unto him in
glory.

But therefore indeed do men continue the longer in their spiritual
filthiness, and be not transformed into the likeness of Christ in the
foresaid holiness and righteousness, because they do not so behold and
consider this excellent pattern, as they should do. And this is a manifest
argument, that whatsoever some men speak of their knowing Christ, and of
seeing Christ, as also of their hope of being made like unto Christ at his
appearing as well as any other, yet indeed all these are but words, because
they do not purge themselves as he is pure. For if they had that hope they
speak of, if they did so know Christ, and behold Christ as they boast they do,
then doubtless they would purge themselves as he is pure.

This must be applied to particular virtues, wherein Christ's purity does
specially consist: as to walking in love, as he has loved us: Ephesians 5.
2. To running with patience the race that is set before us: looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross and despised the shame: Hebrews 12. 1. 2. and suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, etc. 1. Pet. 2.
21. so likewise to humility, that in meekness of mind every man esteem
other better then himself: not looking only on his own things (that is, on
his own gifts, that himself has received) but also on the things of other
men: as having the same mind, that was even in Christ Jesus; who being in the
form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal to God, made himself of
no reputation, but took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto
man, and was found in the shape of a man, and humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross, etc. Phil. 2. 3. etc.
The like may be said of other special virtues, and particular branches, of
that purity that was in Christ Jesus.

All these things that I have now written of the dignity of the children of
GOD, God himself write in the hearts of all, that shall read them thus written
in paper. And he that has loved them with such admirable and incomprehensible
love, as to advance them to this unspeakable dignity, continue this his love
in them, unto the end: and so purge and transform them into the holiness of
Christ Jesus in this world, that as hereby they do already know, that
howsoever they be here of the world contemned, and made the offscouring, and
(as it were) the skumme of the world, yet at the appearing of Christ, they
shall be made like unto him, and see him as he is: so indeed they may be so
made like unto him, and so see him and his glory, and enioie the same for ever
and ever:

Amen.
FINIS.
Faults escaped partly at the Press, partly by the default of him that copied
out part of the Book.
Page 5. l. 25. put out, unto p. 18. l. 5. after not, r. only. and after but,
r. also. p. 19. l. 32. r. all. p. 20. l. 21. r. always. p. 22. l. 19. r.
mediatly. p. 24. l. 3. r. even us. p. 29. l. 2. r. taking only. p. 41, l 15. r.
alone. p. 64. l. 30. r. clear. p. 69. l. 6. r. to believe it. p. 76. l. 30. r.
1. Cor. 12. 3. p. 108. l 32. r. gesture. p. 129. l. 21. after abiding r. or. p.
167. l. 23. r from. p. 169. l. 13. r. from some. p. 187. l. 3. r. Gad. p. 194.
l. 4. r. give. p. 198. l. 14. r. as. p. 208. l. 28. r. Ps. 19. 7, p. 221. l.
14. r. inueh reading p. 223. l 5. r. Romans 6. 3. 4 p. 236. l. 22. r. other. p.
238. l. 33. r. James 1. 18. p. 260. l. 11. r. high Priest. p. 271. l. 8. r.
Psalm. 94. p. 306. l. 34. r. even. p. 308. l. 17. 18. r. unspeakable. p. 312. l.
10. r. means. p. 324. l. 36. r. smack p. 325. l. 2. r. whom. p. 326. l. 21. r.
beheld. p. 328. l. 1. r. we heard. l. 10. r. oppress. l. 28. r. collowed. p.
335. l. 7. r. viz p. 339. l 32. r. Ps. 102. 2. p. 348. l. 33. r. Melas. 34.
Rhinocurura. p. 368. l. 21. r. children of God. p. 387. l. 29. put out, one. p.
408. l. 25. r. and therefore. p. 412. l. 35. put out, the wicked. p. 436. l. 24.
r. great. p. 467. l. 3. read coming. p. 469. l. 32. r. Now. p. 475. l. 15. r.
work. p. 488. l. 30. r. so likewise.


