Anthropophagus: OR, A CAVTION For the Credulous. A Moral Discourse upon the
25. Verse of the 26. Chapter of the Proverbs of SOLOMON.

PROVE. 26.25. Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

WRITTEN By E.S. B. of D. and sometimes Fellow of S. I. C. in C.

Decipies alios verbis, vultuque benigno,
Sed mihi iam notus, dissimulator eris.
Mart. Printed for John Marriot. 1623.

A CAVTION FOR THE CREDVLOVS.
PROVE. 26.25. Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.


HEre I have undertaken one that has overtaken many, a Machiuilian, (or rather
a matchlesse-villaine) one that professes himself to be a Friend, when he is
indeed a Fiend; pretending Love, intending Mischief; for he maskes his
villainy with the vizard of kindness, Psalm. 55.21.
having words as soft as butter or oil, when his heart is full of bitterness,
envy, spite and malice. His greatest Amity is but dissembled Emnitie.
Adulator amicus in obsequio, hostis in animo, co^plus in verbo, turple in
facto, laetus ad prospera, fragilis ad aduersa, in flalus ad obsequia, anxius
ad approbria, immoderatus ad gaudia, facilis ad humana, difficilis ad honesta.
Hugo de sanct. Vict.
He has two faces under one hood, like Ianus; two tongues in a head, like
Judas; and two hearts in a breast, like Magus. His Aue threatens a Vae, and
therefore listen not to his treacherous Aue, but hearken unto Salomons Cave, and
Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

Whilst I have taken some pains (yet pleasure in the pains) in anatomizing of
this Monster, I find his heart such an intricate Labyrinth, so full of angles,
by passages, and cross, conueiances, that I have almost lost my self in
seeking out the Center; neither do I know any more what to call him, than how
to find him: for he has as many names as Garnet had, and as many Protean
shapes as the Seminaries have; Multor^ nominum, non boni nominis.
He is one of many names, but never a good one: for though I call him but a
plain Flatterer (for I mean to deal very plainly with him, whatsoever he do
by other men:) yet Bion compares him to a Beast, Plato to a Witch, all to a
Thief, Adul^tores sun^ hoste^, and scintillae Diaboli. Hieron. super Isa.
some to a Devil; (if he be one) these words of Solomon are a spell to expel
this Devil; and a Charm which if thou wearest about thee, (I mean if thou
keep it in mind and memory) it will chase him from thee, or at least he
shall never hurt thee; for if thou meanest not to be deceived by him, the best
counsel that the wisest man can give thee, is not to trust him; for he that
trusts not, can hardly be deceived: and therefore, Though he speaks
favorably, believe him not.

This Traitor may be quartered, or rather these words divided into 4. parts,
The Subject. The Object. The Project. The Protect.










Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

Though, who? The Flatterer?

Though he speaks, to whom? To thee?

Though he speaks to thee, how? Favorably?

Yet believe him not; for there are seven abominations in his heart.

So that there is 1 The Agent. 2 The Patient. 3 The Malady. 4 The Remedy.


Wickedness in the Agent, weakness in the Patient; Subtlety in the one, and
Simplicity in the other: but that his Subtlety may no longer abuse thy
Innocent Credulity, hereafter remember these words, and for the cure of this
malady, apply this caution for a remedy: and Though he speaks favorably,
believe him not.

Whilst I handle these parts in order, I am to begin with the Agent who brings
all to disorder; but because he stands first in my way (though he be much out
of every man's way that meddle with him) I must needs salute him. God bless you
sir, and me from you. This is he that like the Hangman, will embrace a man with
the one hand, and rip up his bowels with the other; Sibi natus, multis notus,
omnibus nocuu^, mundi nothus.
one that is borne to himself, known to many, hurtful to all, the Worlds
bastard, and Hels trueborne child.

Wring not my words to wrong my meaning: I aim at no particulars; for there
are many of these Agents, and too many of these Flatterers in both the houses
of Israel and Aaron, in Foro and in Choro, in Church and Commonwealth; I can
tax no man's person, if I could, I would abhor it, or were well worthy to be
abhorred for it. No, no, I go not about to crucify the Sons, but Sins of men.
There are therefore three sorts of Flatterers, which I mean to arraigne,
testify against, condemn, and would have executed, so that their souls might
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Treacherous companion shall be first, because he is worst, one that flatters a
man to circumuent him, that he may more easily effect his malicious proiects: 2 Samuel 3.
thus Ioab dealt with Abner, and thus does this flattering Butcher claw a man
like an Ox, that he may the more securely knock him on the head.

Aes in praesenti perfectum format amorem.
for if thou can find in thy purse to give him presently, he will find in
his heart to love thee everlastingly.

Tale-bearing Flatterers, who for the pleasing of some will detract from
others, and will swear to a falsehood to please a Foelix.

This three-headed Cerberus, this threefold Agent, this double-tongu'd
double-hearted Flatterer, is the subject of my ensuing discourse. The first of
this ^inde aims at thy life: The second sort shootes at thy goods: And the
third hits and wounds thy good name.

Aut conuertantur ne per^ant, aut cons^ndantur ne no^cant.
The Lord of his mercy convert them, lest they perish themselves; or of his
justice confound them, for hurting of others.

Which have glozing tongues and bloody minds, which speak friendly to their
neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts.

Antigonus in his prayers was wont to desire the Gods, Psalm. 28.3. Mage cauenda
^mico^ i^ inuidi q^am ins^di^ h^ stiu^n. S^^.
that they would defend him against his Friends; for them that professed
themselves his enemies, he could easily beware of, As there is no grief to
that of the mind, no loss to that of the life, no fear to that of
destruction; so there is no enemy to a dissembling friend, no treachery to
that which one of a man's own may practice. Take Judas for an example, one of
Christ's Apostles, and one of his hous-hold (as I may say) one that asked,
Master is it I? one Odia a^^a sub vul^u. (...) latent. Sea.
that kissed him, and seemed as trusty as any of the rest, yet for all that he
was but a Judas a hanlter, a cloaker, a dissembler, and a traitor: for behold
Infoelix Mercator Ju^^s.
Seruies Dominum, Discipulus Magistrum, Homo Deum, Creatura Creatorem,
tradidit, vendidit, vilissime vendidit. The servant betrayed, sold, most basely
sold his Lord, the Disciple his Master, Man, God, the Creature his Creator.

Thus could the Herodians and Pharisees servants come to their Lora and Master
with many fawning insinuations, calling him good Master, and could tell him
that he was plain truth, and Fistula dul^e cani^ (...) dum d^^^pit ^^ceps.
that he taught the word of God truly, and that he regarded no man's person,
when indeed they meant but to trip him in his words, and to entrap him in his
speeches.

Luke 10 2^.
, Thus came the Lawyer with his (...), and saluteth him by the name of Master,
as if he had been one of his disciples; though he came with a bad mind, yet
does he use good words, that he might deceive him with less suspicion. And
this has been always the practice of the perfidious, to use the Adulator
S^^rpio est: qui palpandoin^edit, sed cauda ferit. Greg. sup. Ezeth. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
smoothest speech, when they intend most mischief, and under color of
friendship and amity, to practice their villainy and treachery. For where is
there greater deceit practiced, then where courtesy is most tendered? where
more falsehood tried, then where trust is most reposed?

Who murdered Plutar. vit. caes.
Caesar that worthy Emperor, in the Senatehouse at Rome? Brutus and Cassius
those Flatterers whom he loved most. Pompeius imagi^e pac^^: Laepidus specie
amicitiae dec^p^us. Tac. an. 1. Quint. Car. Justin.
Who poisoned that mighty Conqueror Alexander in the midst of his triumphs at
Babylon? those that flattered him most, his own Cup Bearer and kinsman
Antipater. And finally, who betrayed Christ, both God and M^n, unto the Scrihes
and Pharisees? his own purse-bearer, that flattering Judas, embracing and
kissing him, as Flatterers use to do. The Prophet David was sore troubled with
such dissemblers, as he complains in many places of his Psalms: Psalm. 41.9.
Ps 55.12, 13, 14.
That it was even his own familiar friend, whom he trusted, and which did eat
at his table, that had laid great wait for him. And that it was not an open
enemy which had dishonored him, for then he could have borne it; neither was
it his adversary which had lift up himself against him, for then peradventure
he would have hid himself from him; but it was even Per maximans amiciti^m
maxima fallend^ copia. Sal. Iug.
his companion, his guide, and his own familiar friend, which took sweet
counsel with him, and walked in the house of God as friends. Malum sub specie
boni celatum, dum non cognosciturno^ cauetur. Chrysest.
Of all kind of cattle, these are the worst, because they do most hurt where
they are least mistrusted.

Tuta frequensque via est, per amici fallere nomen.
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
A safe and easy thing it is by friendship to deceive.
As safe and easy as it is, it is knauerie by your leave.
For as Tyranny is hid in the secret bowels of Envy, so is Envy often cloaked
under the filed phrase of Flattery; and therefore by one very fitly compared
to the Crocodiles of Nilus, or to the Sirens of the Seas, the one weeping and
mourning, the other singing and laughing; the one with moan, the other with
mirth, study to annoy us, conforming themselves to that which they take to be
most pleasing unto us.

Whereas it is the speech of the Spouse in the Canticles: Cant. 2 15.
Take us the Foxes which destroy the Vines. Bernard upon those words says, Duo
sunt vuipium genera. There are two kind of Foxes, Na^ front politi, Assutam
vapid^ servant sub pectore vulpem.
the Slaunderer, and the Flatterer, these destroy the Vines, and bring
destruction to the sons of men. For as the Fox faineth himself dead, that
he may catch the birds to devour them; so the Flatterer faineth himself to be
harmless, and honest, and conscionable, and religious, and holy, that Rom
16.18.
he may deceive the hearts of the simple. Remember therefore this Caution, for
he is thy friend for his own occasion, and Though he speaks favorably
believe him not.

The nature of deep dissimulation is to hide it self under certain vailes and
filmes, like the Multis Simulationum inuolucris, and quasi velis qu^buslam
obtenditur vniuscuinsque natura. Frons, o^ul, vnltus, persaepe menti^ntur,
oration vero quam saei issime. Cic ad Frat.
Optic virtue in the eye, that it may see all things, and not be seen it
self; but the most frequent and safest covert (though the most dishonest)
under which it lies tapized and harbored, is fained Friendship. And therefore
every fair look is not to be liked, every smooth tale Clarissima est
sententia confidere paucis. sed clarior est altera, co^fidere nulli.
is not to be believed, and every glozing tongue is not to be trusted: but as 1
John 4.1.
we must try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no: So we must try the
words, whether they come from the heart or no; and we must try the deeds,
whether they be answerable to the words or no. For these Flatterers are so
subtle, that they are compared to the wily Fox, for their crafty fetches: and
Herod is termed a Fox for his dissembling. Now the readiest way how to
vnkennell this kind of Fox, and vn-earth him out of his den of fained
protestation, Nil magis hic cauendum quam ne dissidere videaris. Lip. pol. l 4.
is by a false fire of fained Credulity (for many have taught others to
deceive, while they have appeared too fearful and jealous of being deceived)
thou may seem therefore to believe him, yet Prodilori fas bonorem habere,
sed fidem nefas. Ecclus. 12.17.
do not trust him. For though he speaks sweetly with his lips, yet in his
heart he imagines how to throw thee into a pit, though he weeps with his
eyes, yet if he find opportunity he will not be satisfied with blood: and
therefore, Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

There are a generation of men that carry fire in the one hand and water in the
other, whose conversation mingles (humentia siccis) wet and dry together, like
the Cyriphian Frogs in Pliny, whose challenge was, mihi terra lacusque. I
have Land and Sea for my walk. Eccles. 2.31.
But woe unto him (says the wiseman) that has a double heart, wicked lips,
and mischievous hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways. Yea a
foul shame is upon the thief, Eccles. 5.15.
and an evil condemnation upon the double tongue. The Hermit turned his guest
out of doors for this trick, that he could warm his cold hands with the same
breath wherewith he coold his pottage. For seeing the Lord has given but one
heart, and one tongue, and one face to one man, why should he carry a double
heart in his breast, two tongues in his head, and two faces under one hood? yet
such there are (as David speaks) That can flatter with their lips, and
dissemble with their double heart, Ps. 12.2. For Nomen inane, crimen immane.
there Ecc^us 37.1.
is a friend which is only a friend in name (says the son of Syrach. And if
adversity come upon thee, thou shall find him there first, and Chap. 12. v.
17.
though he pretend to help thee, yet shall he supplant and undermine thee. And
therefore, Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

Ira quo plu^ tegitur, co m gis nocet (et sibi et alys) Sen. de ira.
A will to do hurt is never less in the close, then in the professed enemy,
but the means is always greater: Because he that suspecteth least, is easiest
overtaken and ouerthrown, like the unskillful Fencer, who while he wardeth the
head, is hit at the heart which lay out of guard.

Take heed therefore that thou give not too much Credulity either to One of
notorious perfidie, and noted duplicitie. Or A reconciled enemy.


Iustitia virtutes in se continet omnes.
justice and injustice are the most general of all other moral and political
habits, Iniustitia non pars est vity sed toth. Arist. Eth. lib. 5.
and there is no vercue or vice which they do not comprehend. He therefore
which is untrue in his word, and unjust in his actions, is apt to perpetrate
all other nefarious villainies, and if thy Credulity bring thee within compass
and distance of his reach, and that he see thy life lie open without good
guard, his malice and revenge straight take the advantage, and play their
parts, making the Act Tragical, and the Scene bloody. A man therefore had
need to look before him, lest he stumble; Passus damna semelcautior esse
solet.
behind him, lest he be overtaken; and on either side, to meet danger which
way soever she comes: Citius venit periculum cum contemnitur. Sen.
For no man is in greater peril then he that fears it least.

Praeuisa iacul^ minus feriunt. Senec.
Neglected danger lights soonest, and heauiest. Whilst the Plin. Not. hist.
lib. 8 c. 25.
Crocodile sleeps gaping with open mouth; the Indian Rat shoots himself into
his belly, and gnawes his guts asunder. So enters mischief at the open gates
of security. Inter scopulos quibus illidi at frangi Reip. Nauis solet, prima
mihi fidu^ia occurrit. Lip. Pol. lib. 3.
Selfe-conceited confidence in our own strength, and ouer-weening Credulity
of another honesty, begets in men this supine negligence. Fisores perijt,
diffiso salua remansit.
But a watchful providence preuents an imminent danger.

In Schools of Art, doubt begets knowledge; Is qui nil dubita^, nil capit
inde boni.
for he that doubts much, asks often, and learneth much. In the School of
Policy, she is the mother of good success; for Si nil vis timere, metuas
omnia. Sen. sent.
he that fears the worst, preuenteth it soonest. Nemo cauenda timet, qui
metuenda cauet. I will close up this with that of Seneca, Sen. O^d.
Quae posse fieri non putes, metuas tamen: Fear the worst, and the best will
mend it self.

Vt Christalli fragmenta sar^irinullo modo possunt, ita difficilimum eos
reconciliare, qui ex a^^tissima familiaritate in mutuum odium venerint. Plutar.
Friendship once broken is hardly peeced, and peeced Emnitie never surely
sodred; yea, the very guilt of having done a wrong, has such deep impression
in the iniurer, as he never after affieth in the party injured, nor treats
with him in any sincerity. Guic. Aph.
Reconcilement among such is like the supple ointment, which only eases the
present smart, and skins the sore, but searches not at the root, to eat out
the rank flesh, and draw out the malign humor. It is therefore impossible
to cure this exulcerate wound, and Cum inimico nemo in gratiam tuto redit. Sen.
sent.
establish a sound and sincere friendship between them, because the old rancor
of malice, is never well purged from the dregs of diffidence and desire of
revenge. Ita habeas amicum, posse vt fieri inimicu^ putes. Sen. sent.
I here is no security against such an one, but diffidence, and holding him
out at the swords point. Sooner may one prevent then cure a deadly sickness;
and Turpius eijcitur quam non admittitur bospes. Ovid.
easilier keep out, then thrust out an unwelcome guest. For when he has once
gotten within thee, where Justice and Equity restraines him, his power and
pleasure shall prevail; For what he may not do, he will list to do, because
he may do what he list. And therefore, Set him not by thee, lest he destroy
thee, and stand in thy place (says the son of Syrach) Neither set him at thy
right hand, lest he seek thy room, and thou at the last remember my words,
and be pricked with my sayings, Ecclus. 12.12, 13. I should be more troubled to
keep measure, then to be furnished with matter, if I had a desire to enlarge
my discourse about this first kind of Flatterer, this Iudas-like Traitor. And
the ground which I have undertaken to descant upon, would indeed require more
variety and Division to be run upon it, being one that Solomon aims at (as
this perfidious Traiter aims at thee) but without any great hope of his
repentance and amendment, i will leave this Judas to hang himself, and come to
speak of the second sort of Flatterers, which flatter a man for their own
private benefit. As the first aims at thy Life, so the Parasiticall Sycophant
shootes at thy Estate. Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

The Hebrew word for Flattery (as those that are skillful in the Language have
observed) signifies either Blandus, Smooth, and Mollis, Soft; because the
Flatterer uses smooth and soft speeches, ( Diog. Laert. in vit. Diog.
And therefore not unwisely did a Wiseman compare a flattering language to a
silken halter, which is soft because silken, but strangling because a halter.)
Or it signifies Diuidere to divide, because in Flatterers the Tongue is divided
from the Heart. So that what is Flattery but a framing of the tongue to soft
speeches against the conscience to curry favor with a man in some worldly
respect.

Of this second sort of Flatterers, I am to entreat of two sorts.

The first is the very bane of Courts. The second is a very Pickpocket to the
Nobility and Gentry.
Whilst I speak of these, let no captious Caueller with sharper nails then
wit, claw at what I write. I go not about to blame others merit, for herein I
should merit others blame, and God forbid that I should so far forget my
self, as that I should lay a general aspersion upon Courtiers; for (let me
speak without Flattery) I know so many religious, honest, worthy, noble-minded
Gentlemen about the Court, that it were a great fault in me, to find the least
fault with them; yet I think that even these will confess, that there are
some among them, that are a great grief and shame unto them, as well as there
are amongst us some, that are a scandal to our Profession; of these, and none
but these I write: and therefore let your understandings keep an even pace
with me, while I handle them in order. And first, of the first.

A D. Hall.
Reverend and Judicious Divine, and our best Characterer, says, that a
Flatterer is the Eare-wigge of the Mighty, and the very bane of Courts. And
indeed, it is a disputable question, and well worthy a canuase and discussion in
the Schools, whether Blandientes or Saeuientes, Flatterers or privy
Murderers, do the greatest injuries to noble personages. For some wisemen
have been persuaded that the Pestilence, the rigor of the Law, Famine,
Sickness, or War, have not devoured more great ones, then Flattery and
Envy.

-- Non s^ mise^um fortuna Sinonem Finxit, vanu^ etia^ mendacemque improba
finget. verba Sinonis ^pud Virg.
The City Troy which Agamemnon in 10. whole years could not subdue, yet Sinon
with his Flattery allured the mind of K. Priamus, deceived the Nobles, and
enticed the Citizens by his adulation to their utter ruin and confusion.

Who could move Caesar so much to any thing, as Curio the Parasite, not
Pompeius his son in law, nor his daughter Iulia, nor all the Senators of Rome
might make Caesar friend or so, so much as Curio. It is reported that K. Lewis
the eleventh said once, That his Kingdom abounded with all things but one, And
as one of his Favorites asked him what that was. The Truth answered he. For
(as a Q. Curtius lib. 8. of the Hist of Alex.
certain wise Historian says) Pernicious Flattery ( the ordinary disease of
Kings, Leuius non debet putari quod gladio minante, quam quod lingua insidiante
committitur. Aug. de Baptism^ cont. Donat.
to whom their favorites and tale-bearers do greater harm by whisperings
then the enemy by weapons) does always bear the sway in their Courts. And
therefore Carneades said very well, that Princes children learned nothing
aright but to manage and ride horses, for as much as in all other exercises,
every man yields and gives them the victory, but a Horse, who is neither a
Flatterer nor a Courtier, will as soon throw the child of a King, as the
son of a Cobbler. His Courtiers one day commended Julian the Emperor for
ministering of right, and doing of Justice. I should easily have grown proud
(said he) for these praises, if they came from such as durst either accuse or
discommend my contrary actions should I commit any: Non est tutum in tales
s^ribere, qui possunt proscri^cre. Ou^d.
and indeed who dare prescribe to him who can proscribe. An nescis longas
Regibus esse manus?

All Alexanders followers bare their heads aside as he did, and such as
flattered Dionysius, in his own presence did run and iustle one another, and
either stumble at, or overthrow what ever stood before their seet, to infer,
that they were as short-sighted and pur-blinde as he. And of this kind was
Carisophus, who seeing Dionysius laughing and merry, he laughed too though he
knew not the cause: Dionysius perceiving, asked him why he laughed, because
(said he) I think that which moves you to laughter is worth laughing at. For
the Nam adulati^ est peruersa laudatio, and videtur no^en sumptum a sono. Vel
dicatur, qui^ adulor verbum (quod est voce vel ^^s^u fauorem ca^io) dicitur
quasi adaulor, quod hoc in aulis maxim fieri soleat.
Flatterer knows no more how to discommend then to speak true. Hence it came,
that a certain Prince of Germany said, he was feign to counterfeit the Clown,
and to learn the truth from the mouths of poor Shepherds and Husbandmen,
for my Courtiers (quoth he) are all Flatterers and claw-backes, soruing for
naught else but to please and tickle mine ears.

All the arrows that men shoot, fly to two marks only, either Pleasure or
Profit; It is no marvel then if Princes have need of other men (besides
those that are daily with them) that would admonish them frankly, gravely, and
sincerely, and that would counsel them faithfully; for as much as there is
scarce any one in their Courts, that do not run after the splendour of their
prosperity, and regard his own particular profit. Isti adsimiles sunt
abacorum calculis, qui and secundum voluntatem calculatoris, modo obulum
aereum, modo talentum valent. Ita aulici ad nutum Principis, modo beati, modo
miseri fiunt.
In themselves they are nothing but what may please their great Ones. They are
poison to Princes, and oftentimes a bane to the best disposed. O Flattery thou
base creeping sin! thou seducer of Princes and obseruer of Nods! thou
impudency clad in modesty! thou fawning Devil! when shall thy dominion have
an end? Those Courts are as happy that want thee, as those are cursed and
unhappy that have thee.

I have read that King Zerxes marching toward the Greeks with a huge army of
Soldiers, called some of these kind of Parasites unto him, and demanded what
thing was most to be feared in his journey.

One says, I do fear that when the Greeks do hear of your power, they
will fly and not abide your band.

Another said, he doubted all Greece was not able to lodge or receive them into
their Cities.

A third said, that he feared most, that the Ocean was not enough for them to
pass over.

A fourth feared, the Air had not room enough for the arrows which they
should shoot off.

The King by this being extremely pussed up with pride, demanded at last of a
certain Philosopher named Damascerus, what he doubted most in that War. The
thing that I most fear (says he) is this, that these Flatterers will deceive
you.

So with reverence, let me tell ye, you great Ones: You that are the
Master-pilots, and sit at the stern to guide the Commonwealth; the greatest
thing I fear, is this, that if Habet assenatio principia iucunda, eadem exitus
amarissimos affert. Cic. Rhet. nou. lib 1.
you sail too much by these Flatterers Compass, that in the end they will
deceive you, and therefore take this Caution along with you: Though they speak
favorably believe them not.

Plutarch.
For he is like the subtle fish Polipus, that will turn himself into the
colors of every stone for a booty. I call him a Adulationis vnctio, domorum
est emunctio, co^mendationis allusio, eorum delusio; laudis arisio, eorum
derisio.
Pick-pocket to Greatness, because as Acteon was worried of his own Dogs, so
many Noble, brave, worthy-minded men's estates have not only been sore bitten,
but themselves even worryed out of all means to do themselves or others good,
and all by these fawning kind of Curs. For, Prou. 26.28.
a flattering mouth causes ruin.

For thy better understanding, and my easier proceeding, I will likewise
propound unto thee two sorts more of these:

These are therefore Imitatores, and Corruptores. Mimickes, and Misleaders.

For, first the Flatterer is like your shadow, which does imitate the action
and gesture of your body, which stands when you stand, and walks when you
walk, and sits when you sit, and rises when you rise: So, O Imitatores s^^^^m
pecus. Hor.
the Flatterer does praise when you praise, and finds fault when you find
fault, and smiles when you smile, and frowns when you frown. He will carowse
with Alexander, abstain with Romulus; eat with the Epicures, fast with the
Stoics; laugh with Democritus, and weep with Heraclitus. What should I say of
him? he is one that daunceth altogether to the tune of Fortune, and studies for
nothing but to keep Time. But still he looks what language your purse
speaks: for he is like a windmill that will still grind, let the wind blow
where it will. His base mind is well matched with a mercinary tongue, for he
will stoop to any villainy for preferment; a very slave to six pence, and good
for nothing but to be a factor for the devil.

He is like the reflection of a Looking-glass, that does imitate any Rides?
maiori cachinno concutitur. Iuv. Sat 3.
action that thou use. If thou say it is hot, he wipes his forehead; if
cold, he quakes of an ague. His tongue is still a willing slave to another
man's ear, for he never cares how true, but how pleasingly he speaks: but Si
veli^ esse Thraso nunqua^ d^erit tibi Gnatho.
like Gnatho in the Comedy, he will swear it to be true that Thraso says, how
false soever: and herein he out-runs the devil, for though he be the father of
lies, yet we shall never find that he swore to a lie; for he that swears
acknowledges the Being that he swears by greater then himself, which the
Devil scorns to do. The Flatterer therefore in auouching a lie, and swearing
to it, has a trick beyond the devil.

This Aiis? aio. Negas? nego.
is he that denies with the negative, and affirms with the affirmative;
weepeth with him that is sad, and laugheth with him that is merry.

Ovid.
Vtque levis Proteus modo se tenuabat in vndas:
Nunc Leo, nunc Arbor, nunc erat hirtus Aper.
They say he has some pretty sight in Music, and is very apt to play a base
part, and although he may sometimes fail in the Note, yet he will be sure to
keep the Time. For he Amici hirundin's sunt amici hirud^is.
is like the Swallow that changes his habitation with the season: for where
comfort fails him in one place, he repayreth presently to another; so, if any
Sort patet miser. quae sit dilelect^^ vera.
storm of affliction blow upon thee, this Summer-bird sings no more. The (...)
E^bl. v^d. (...) mysieria.
Ass which carried the Egyptian Goddess, had many bared heads and bended
knees; yet none to the beast, but all to the burden. If there be no honey in
the gally-pot, these waspes will houer no longer about it, but fly and run
from it, as Mice from an empty barn, or Lice from a dead body which has
neither heat nor moisture. Such a one was Vis experiri amicum? calamitosus
f^a^. Varr.
Crotto's Mouse, for whilst he was in prosperity, it fed continually with
him, but his house being set on fire, it fled immediately from him: upon which
occasion he made this Disticke: Vixisti mecum Fortuna matre; nouerca
Me fugis: at poteras aequa ac iniqua pati.


These ambi-dexter Gibeonites, are like the Sea-calfes, Crocodiles, Otters, and
Sea-colts, Aristotle and Pliny speak of, which are one while in the water,
other-while aland for their greater booties: (...).
justly termed Dubia by Isodore, in that being Natatilia and Gressabilia, men
know not where to find them: for they are like Hamlets ghost, hic and vbique,
here and there, and every where, for their own occasion. These trencher-flyes
wait more for lucre then for love. Though they speak favorably, believe them
not.

This contagious quality of Adulation and Flattery has so perverted the
nature of man in this age, and has taken such habit in his affections, that it
is in most men altera natura. and very hard to be removed; yea, the very
sucking babes have a kind of flattery toward their Nurses for the Dug, which
(as some think) comes unto them by corruption of nature; and as they grow in
reason, so they increase therein, until in time it is turned from green and
tender adulation, to ripe and perfect dissimulation, except it be prevented by
their better education. Seneca.
Vitium fuit, nunc mos est Assentatio: for alas, who cannot see (that has an
eye to see) this sawning hypocrisy, this dishonest civility, this base
merchandise of words, Tam grauis ille mihi, nigri quam limina Ditis, Ore aliud
qui fert, aliud sub pe^tore celat. Fissgef. Epig.
this plausible discord of heart and lips, this hollow-hearted flattery both in
rich and poor, old and young, Priest and people, one with another: Yet let me
tell you as Diogenes did Aristippus, quod Diuitum sunt asseclae, that these
kind of Mag^ates sunt ^ag^^^^s.
Horseleaches are soonest found in great men's waters: for they that have wealth
shall never want them, and they that have most store, are best (or rather
worst) stored with them, and live most in danger of them. For, as no vermin
will breed where they find no warmth, no Vultu^ sleep where there is no prey,
no flies swarm where there is no flesh, no pilgrim creep where there is no
Cross: so Te bona dum splend^^ fortuna, s^qu^ntur amici, Vt te dum lucet sol,
solet vmbra sequ ^. Quam primu^ liqaidus neb^lis off^^di^^^ aer, Ecce repent
tu^m descrit vmbr^ latus. Owen Epig.
there is no Parasite will lurk or crouch where he finds no gain: but do
but Praemium est solatium laboris.
reward him, and respect him, and with this bridle and saddle, (the beast is so
tame) Patitur dum potitur.
a man may get upon him as he list, and ride him to the denill. Committitur
caedes lucri gratia, spoliantur Templa, violatur amicitia, fides negligitur,
patria pro ditur, summa nihil non mal^rum patratur.
This Judas his purse is drawn with two strings, made of silk and silver,
Favor and Reward. For as in the Delphicke Oracle. Pythias did never prophecy,
but when sh^e was set on a Trener, and the wind blew intelligence into her, so
this devils prophet (being altogether for his own profit) is dumb, till you
set him on the Tripode of Haec tria pro trino numine mu^dus habet.
E^se, Credit, Gain^, and stroke him on the head like a Spaniell, and then he
will lick your hand, and fill your ears with the cracles of hell.

This is he that the Wife-man speaks of that is Cuicunque hemini res paratae
est, firmi ^mici sunt, si res lassae l^bant, itidem amici colla^ascunt. Plaut.
a friend for his own occasion: but (says he) he will not abide in the day
of thy trouble, Ecclus 6 8. For he is like the Swallow, which in the
Summertime creepes under every house, but in the Winter leaves nothing but
dirt behind her: So, Eccl 37 ^ 5.
There is a companion which helps his friend for the belly, (says the Son
of Syrach) but in the time of trouble will be against him. For Tam diu quis in
praeti^ est, qua^diu est vsui.
when the Covetous or Ambitious man has his turn served by others, either for
his advancing or aduantaging, for gain or glory; he puts them off with neglect
and contempt. Nay, it is well if he help him not down that helped him up.

Alphonsus King of Arragon sailing upon the Sea from Sicilia, beheld certain
fowls soaring about his Galley, and looking for meat of the Mariners; and when
he had cast them meat, he observed how greedily they contended for it, and
ever as E^^lis domus est vbin^a and multa supersunt. Hor.
they had gotten their prey away they would fly, and return no more: Some of
my Courtiers (quoth the King, turning to his company) are like these chattering
birds, for as soon as they have gotten any Office or reward at my hands, that
they gape after, and contend for one with another, they fly away, and return
not again, until necessity compels them to sue for more.

These Nemo alterum nisi causa dili^it sua. Lact Divine. Hist. lib 3. cap. 17
are such as use their friends and acquaintance like ladders only to climb
by, which when they have occasion to use, they lay them on their shoulders, and
embrace them with both their hands; but when they have done with them, they
cast them into some corner, or hang them up against the walls: and dealing by
their friends as they do by their apparel when they go to bed, lay them
aside while they have occasion to use them again: or, as vermin do by
poultrey, suck the best blood, and leave the rest for all comers.

Though these Mimickes imitate thee, do not thou animate them, neither give
them any countenance; for Stat nulla diu morta^ib^s vsquam fortuna tituba^te
fides.
they are friends of no long continuance: they sooth thee, and flatter thee,
and claw thee, to claw something out of thee, Though they speak favorably,
believe them not.

corruptores, corrupters, hurters, misleaders.

These rob many a Gentleman of his goodness, and make them rob the
Commonwealth of her happiness. For a Flatterer is the only pestilent bawd to
great men's shames, the nurse to their wantonness, the fuel of their lusts;
and with his poison of artificial villainy, most time do set an edge unto
their riot, which otherwise would be blunted and rebated in the detestation of
their own violent poasting to a violent confusion. The tongue of a Flatterer
says Aug.) Plus persequitur lingua adulatoris, quam manus perseque^tis. Aug.
super Psalm. 96.
wounds more then the hand of a murderer, for the one kills but the body,
the other both body and soul. Plutarch.
Antisthenes said truly of them, Praestat (...) quam (...) incidere: For Ravens
feed only upon dead carcasses, but Flatterers upon living men: These are the
Moathes that eat so deeply into liberal men's coats; these are they that live
of gentle minds, honorable personages, and worshipful Gentlemen, like Apes and
Parats, by showing feats of actiuity, piping, wanton discoursing, and
magnifying all that is done. Of all wild beasts the Tyrant is the worst, of
all tame beasts the Flatterer, said Diogenes; for his greatest enemies are his
greatest praysers: yet the words wherewith these Panders of vice do persuade,
are not so lovely, as the matters they dawbe over are abominable.

For, is such a mighty man enticed to overrule his reason, Pessimi sunt
consult^res cupido and ira.
nay ouer-beare it by giving scope to his licentious eye, first to see, then to
delight in, and lastly to covet a chaste beauty; Om^e vitium s^mp^r b^bet
patro^inium suum. Sen.
you shall have swarms of dependants, being creatures to his greatness, will
be ready to harden him in his wickedness, and to tell him what a courtly thing
love is, and that women were in their very creation ordained to be wooed, and
to be won; yea and they will panderize it (rather then fail) to force a
rape on virtue, and adulterate the chaste bosom of spotless simplicity.

Is the folly committed? is the lewdness of his great ones desire effected?
how slight is he ready to make it? nay how damnably disposed to make it
nothing? and what is this Viper of humanity better, or how can I term him
fitter, then the man's whore, and the woman's knave?

Is such a mighty one desirous to advance a Court-Ape, and oppress a
desertfull hope? it were too tedious to tell you what vilde aspersions, and
incessant exprobations will be repeated by this same Anthropophagus, this
man-eater, to make a golden Calfe an idol, and a neglected merit a laughter.

Does his Lord want money? he puts into his head, such fines to be levied, such
grounds enclosed, such rents improued. He would feign raise himself by his
great one, and he cannot tell how to contriue it, but by the disgrace, if not
the ruin of others. What should I say of these kind of Flatterers? they are
Dominis arrisores, reip. arrosores; their masters Spaniels, and the
Commonwealths Wolves: put them in your Paternoster, let them never come in
your Creed; pray for them, but do not trust them. Though they speak
favorably believe them not.

and wounds thy good name, and this is a Claw-backe, a Pick-thanke, a
Whisperer, Vitium est homini alios vilos facere, and qui suo merito placere non
possunt, placere velle alioru^ comparatione.
one that for the pleasing of some, will back-bite and detract from others:
this sort do Famam ex infamia comparare; climb to merit praise by the stayres
of others disgrace: Though they speak favorably believe them not.

The old Romans built two Temples, the one of which they dedicated to Virtue,
the other to Honor, and joined them so artificially together, that no man
could come into that of Honor, but he must first come through Virtue.
Considering how men are inclined to honor, they did it to incite their young
men to virtuous actions.

But now the Temple of Virtue is so little frequented, that whereas the path
that led to it was wont to be well trodden, is now grown green, and another
way found to that of Honor, by some back-doore, not so well known in Virtutem
Genii duo semper in orb sequuntur, Hic bonus, ille malus, gloria and inuidia.
Owen. Epig.
the elder time; the other door is fast shut up by a Porter called Envy, and
her servant Detraction, that hardly one among a thousand can come to Honor
that way.

This made Plato commend the law of the Lidians, that punished Detractors with
the like punishment as they did Murderers; for one takes away the life of a
man, and the other his name and reputation, Pro. 22.1.
which are more worth (says Solomon) then any worldly wealth. For what is so
precious to a man as his fame? which to good men is above all his goods, and
life it self. For riches and life are things brittle and flitting; our goods
going often away before us, and our lives always with us, but our Fame is that
which always does eternize us, that Virtus post sunera viuit.
only remains when we are rotten: why this Fame, this Treasure of the wise,
this life-enlightning Gemme, Calumniating Flattery does daily seek to obscure,
and utterly to deface.

A man's Eye and his Honor are two tender parts, the one cannot abide the rough
touch of the hand, nor the other endure the smart ierke of the tongue As
therefore by the owners they are carefully preserved; so by others that deal
with them, they should be tenderly used.

Cum actum est de nomine, actu^ est de homine.
He that has an ill name (we say) is half hanged, for when a man's good name
is done, himself is undone: the back-biter therefore that raises an ill name,
is half a hangman to his neighbor, poisoning (as with dead Cantharides) with
his venomous tongue, the box of precious ointment of his neighbor, which is
his chief treasure; and with the sharp Rasor of his tongue cutteth his
throat, and pierces his sides (as it were) with swords and spears, Pro. 26.22.
for they go down into the bowels of the belly, as Solomon speaks.

In the body of man the most necessary member is the Heart, the goodliest
instruments are the Eyes, the parts most delicate are the Ears; but the Humano
membrum non est in corpore lingua Nobiliusue bona, mobiliusue mala. Owen. Ep.
thing where most danger is, is the tongue: for if it cannot prevail ad
interitum hominis, yet will it spend it self ad interitum nominis, if not
murder yet murmur. If these bandogs of hell cannot come to bite, they will
bark; and if their stings cannot reach, yet their mouth shall sputter out
their venom; and to please one, they will soil and black the reputation of
another, with the filthy slime of their malicious and viperous tongues.

It is a good rule that S. Bernard gives us to govern our Tongues by: Let
Sint verba tua rara, vera, ponderosa; para contra mul iloquium, vera contra
falsiloquium, ponderosa contra vaniloquium. Bern.
thy words (says he) be few, true, substantial; many words, false words,
vain words, become not a Christians lips.

Inuectiues De inimico uc loquaris, malum si cogites.
against other men are ever evil, but the worst when they are false. The first
murderer of all mankind was also the first liar: Two horrible vices and alike
bloody. For a man had better be murdered then belyed; have his person slain,
then his fame. Fly therefore from lying thy self, and fly from
lying-flattery in another, as from an Aspe, the poison of whose sting is
mortal.

For I would have thee understand, that a man may sin even in speaking the
truth when just circumstances forbid it, but he that tells a lie cannot but
sin, and there is no circumstance can clear him. For Cor lingua foederat
naturae sanctio, veluti in quodam certo connubio; ergo cum dissonent cor and
locutio, sermo concipitur in Adulterio.
Nature has knit the Heart and the Tongue together in the bands of marriage:
that which the Tongue brings forth without, (or contrary) to the Heart, is the
birth of adultery. Speak then the truth from thy heart, but wrong not thy
brother with a needless truth.

There are many of these 1 Samuel 23.19.
Ziphims that to curry favor with Saul, betray David: but let such know, that 1 Samuel 22.9.
Doegs truth was worse then Joshua 2.5.
Rahabs lie: and Genesis 9.22.25.
Ham is cursed for declaring his fathers nakedness though true: take heed much
more of slander.

And yet this is a common practice in these miserable days, out of the same
fountain, as to send forth the sweet water of blessing God, so the brackish
water of malediction, or speaking evil of our neighbors. But so much as thou
falsely detractest from thy brothers good name before men, to please men, so
much is detracted from thine before God in heaven, to the razing of it out of
the book of life which he has written.

Calumny is so called a Caluendo, Just. Lips.
which (being an old and obsolete word) employed as much as to abuse, or
deceive. The Grecians named her (...), and that very properly, because she
pierces, sticks, and strikes through with the all-harming dart of her venom
tongue. (And therefore the Spartan being demanded whether his sword was sharp
enough or no, replied, More keen then Calumny: intimating thereby, that no
edge of iron and steel, could compare in keenness with the edge of the
tongue.) So that Calumny has two proposed ends, the one to deceive, which the
Latins considered; the other to hurt, which the Grecians often observed. For did
you never see Quibusdam canibus hoc innatum est, vt non pro f ^ritate, sed pro
consuetudine latrent. Sen. de rem fort. Canes timidi vehementius latrant. Curt.
little cowardly dogs bark at guests, that durst not bite beasts? why such are
the worser sort of men, who are borne only to hurt and vex the harmless. I
say they are borne to that end, because they do so lean and incline to that
vice, that they are never quiet, but when they have made others unquiet: but I
would he would detract only, for oftentimes he adds, and reports those things
to have been done and spoken by us, which we never so much as dreamed of.

This is he that uses to frequent other men's tables, and can make sauce to
every dish as it comes to the board, with other men's disgrace: And if there be
any news at all stirring, he pockets up that for his own provision, and he
never vents it but for his own advantage. For Est natura hominum nonitatis
auida.
he knows that men are so well inclined to have Novelties, that they are as
good payment for a dinner or a Supper, as eighteen pence to go to an
Ordinary. Nay, Anglica veridicos dicunt proverbia stultos: Er^o Anglis verum
dicere stultitia est. Owen. Epig.
sometimes he can spread a lie that is of his own coining. And again
sometimes by a pretty skill that he has in Arithmeticke, he can both multiply
and divide lies that be of other men's making, and all to wimble and insinuate
himself into the bosom of him to whom he tells them, that he may Adulatores
lact^nt eos quos laudant, quasi praemio laudis. Greg. mor. lib. 4. sup. Ioh.
lick his lips with the sweernes which this baby (or rather Booby) has sucked
from him. Take heed of him, he has no more truth in him then an Almanacke, and
no more conscience in him then there is in a Tauerne-faggot, and therefore
Though he speaks favorably believe him not.

Detractor vno verbo tres simul ingulat homines, seipsum, auscultantem, and cum
cui detrahit.
He that thus felloniously robs a man of this Jewel (his good name) wounds
three at one blow, vno ictu, vno nictu.

First, the Receiver, impoysoning his heart with an uncharitable conceit.

Secondly, the Reputation of the Slandered: for a Fama semel depressa, vix
restituitur Sen.
man's name is like glass, if it be once cracked, it is soon broken.

Thirdly, the worst blow lights on his own soul: for the arrow will rebound.
Maledixit sibi. The Slandered scapes best: for Psalm. 37.6.
God shall bring forth his righteousness as the light. For though that some
mischievous and malicious villain, or some Arch glozing Parasite level right
at him, to hit and to hurt him with their harmfull shaft, yet do they come
short of their aim, for either they hit him not, or if they do, they hurt him
not at all. For, an inviolable thing is not simply that which cannot be hit,
but rather that which being hit, receives thereby no hurt, or at least cares
not at all for it. And thus does it fare with the virtuous man, who of himself
offers no occasion of offering him any wrong. And if it fall out, that a man
out of a proud and haughty stomach, or rather out of a malicious disposition,
set upon him; or any viperous slanderer, or rather lowse-like companion,
backbite and detract from him, he is then in that case like a brazen wall,
which the darts of this infernal crew cannot pierce through.

It is most true which Seneca says, In iudicando criminosa est celeritas, yet
there is many a squint-eyed Laudas Gaure nihil, reprendis cuncta; videto Ne
placeas nulli, dum tibi nemo placet. Owen. Ep.
Zoylus that can look aright on no man's actions, but if he can hereby
collogue with another for his own advantage: like Augustus Caesar he is ready
to tax all the world. But he whose soul looks upon others through the dim
spectacles of Sense, does oftentimes take a Judas for a Nathaniel, and
(contrarily) a Simon Peter for a Simon Magus. Let us therefore spare to judge,
lest we be judged to be unjust by that just Judge, at the dreadful day of
Judgment. Grata est enim spina ex qua spectatur rosa. Seneca.
I, I, this is a safe course, because we know not whether or no the Saul we
see to day, may prove a Paul to morrow.

Again, let Nemo est negligendus, in quo aliqua significatio virtutis apparet.
Cie.
us consider if the party whom we traduce, do not as well deserve to be
commended for some other good thing that is in him; and as he may be taxed for
his deficiencie in some things, to consider whether he may not likewise be
praised for his proficiency in other some, and for these good parts which he
has deserved, be borne withal for such as he wants.

Lastly, let a man make it his own case, and handle the vlcetous inflammations
of his neighbor as nicely and with as much respect as he would his own. We Ad
reprehendenda abena sacta aut dict, ardet omnibus animus, vix satis aper^um os,
aut lingua prompta videtur, quae meditato pectore en^luat. Salust.
run with open mouths to reprehend the sayings and the deeds of others, and
think our tongues too backward in uttering what we have conceived: but
Crimina qui ternunt aliorum, nec sua ce^nunt; Hii sapiunt aliis, decipiuntque
sibi. Owen. Ep.
if we did descend sometimes into our selves, and not always fasten our eyes
upon the wallet which hangs at his back that goes before us, we might
peradventure find a means to cure this intemperancy.

It is hard, when he that cannot order his own life, shall be made the Judge
of another. It is impossible for any man to discern aright the moat which is
in his brothers eye, when there is granell in his own. The Manus quae sordes
abluit munda esse debet.
hand can never cleanse the body, unless it self be clean.

It was Publius Clodius his best policy, lest Cicero should accuse him justly
of Sacrilege, to step in first, and tell the Senate that Tully profaned all
religion in his house. Thus he that has most corrupt lungs soonest complains
of the unsavory breath of others. Thou hypocrite, cast first out the beam Qui
vult alterius oculorum tergere labem; De proprio citius eruat ipse trabem.
which is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see more clearly to cast the
moat out of thy brothers eye.

Nemo quin sui benignus est iudex, (says Seneca) There is no man but makes an
Idol of his own conceit, but only the humble man's eyes are so full of his
own wants and others perfections, that he admires every thing in another,
whilst the same, or better, in himself, he thinks not unworthily contemned.

No Cum tua peruideas oculis mala lippus in vnctis, Cur in amicorum vitiis tam
cernis acute? Hor.
marvel, if when we fix both our eyes on others wants, we lack a third to
see our own. The Pharisees are on the Disciples iacket for eating with
unwashed hands, while themselves are not blameworthy that eat with unwashed
hearts.

The Usurer blames his sons pride, sees not his own extortion: and whilst
the Neglectis propriis aliena negotia curat.
Hypocrite is helping the Dissolute out of the mire, he sticks in deeper
himself. Thus like mannerly guests, when a good morsel is carved us, we lay
it liberally on another trencher, and fast our selves. How Non quid faciunt
alii, sed quid te deceat vide.
much better were it for us to feed on our own portion.

There is nothing in this world but is subject to the Erinnys of ill disposed
persons, whose malice is as fatal as is the dart of Cephalus, or Paris shaft,
which neither a seauen-fold shield, nor Vulcans cunning workmanship, nor Pallas
Aegis can avoid: For Durum est vt qui nescit tenere moderamina vitae suae,
Iudex fiat alienae.
rash judgment often sets a ranckling tooth in Virtues side, often calls
Chastity her self an harlot, and with a guilty hand throws the first stone at
Innocence. Stulta placent stultis, obsonia quisque palato Digna suo quaerit,
non omnibue vna voluntas.
He that strives to please the intoxicated multitude, labors as much in vain,
as he that sought to put the winds in a bag: and the reason is, because it
is impossible to please the godly and ungodly, the judicial and iniudiciall,
the sensible and the senseless both at once. Neither Christ nor his Forerunner
could please them; For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they said he
had a Devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they said, Behold
a Glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend to Publicans and sinners. Yea,
should a man lead the life of a blessed Angel, yet from Reus est non qui
accusatur, sed qui conuincitur.
some mouths (wherein Detraction cloisters her self) as much imputation and
aspersion shall be laid upon him, as can be cast upon the Devil.

Ovid. Metam.
It is said that Thetis the mother of Achilles, drenched him being an Infant in
the Stygian waters, that thereby his whole body might be made invulnerable: but
see the severity of Fate, for even in that part of the heel his Mother held
him by, was he shot by the arrow of Paris, of which wound he dyed.

In like case may a man be like Achilles in the general body of his actions,
impassible, and secure from any assault of wilful and gross enormities; yet
if he Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato.
give way but to one handful (as it may be termed) of folly, not befitting
his particular calling, he shall meet with some watchful Paris, some
industrious Flatterer, or ouer-busie envious Sycophant Inimicus nunquam caret
pretextu criminis.
that will take advantage of his weakness, and wound his infirmity (so much
as in him lies) to the utter ruin of his credit, which is as dear to him as
his life.

O these flatterers are shameless creatures, so fawning and so base, that they
are more near the nature of beasts, then men, and therefore Diogenes knew no
fitter Epethite to give Aristippus, then Canis, the Kings Dog. But amongst all
the Dog-trickes they have, I like this worst, when they bite behind, and yet
this is their currish condition (if not to bite) yet Iste est thesaurus stultis
in lingua situs, vt quaeflui habeant male loqui melioribus. Plaut. in Panul.
to snarle at every man, whilst their masters feed them, and happy is that man
that never knew them.

What shall we do then? or how shall we be secured from Calumny? I can only
succor thee with two Bucklers, to repulse and give abatement to the violence
of her charge.

Innocence, and Patience.
Sen de ira lib. 3. cap. 22.
Conscientiae satisfaciamus, nil in famam laboremus, sequatur vel mala, dum
been merearis. Damnat reum vita haud accusatio. Cic.
Let us satisfy our own conscience, and not trouble our selves with Fame, be
it never so ill, it is to be despised, so we deserve well. Let us not care so
much what these Dog-tooth'd Critickes, Addertongu'd Satarists, and Parasiticall
Claw-backs, can say of us here, as what God will say unto us in the word to
come hereafter; for it is our belief in God, not the worlds belief on us,
shall save us; neither Duo sunt uccessaria, conscientia and f^ma, conscienti^
propter te, fama propter alium. Isocr.
need thou care much for any enemy in this world, so long as thou have thy
inward conscience for thy friend.

Saint Lib. de Bap. cout. Donat. c. 10.
Augustine when he was accused of Petilian to be a Manichee, (speaking from the
information of other men.) I say (says Augustine) I am no Manichee, speaking
of mine own knowledge, Eligite cui credatis, choose whether of the two you
will believe. And indeed being thoroughly acquainted with thy self, what need
thou ask any other man what thou art? Male de te loquuntur, sed mali, non de
te loquuntur, sed de se: Art thou back-bited? rejoice if guiltless; if guilty,
amend.

Pulchrum est laudari, sed a viro laud. ibili. Sen.
It is only worthy of praise, to be commended by the praiseworthy; and the
definition of reputation is to be valued by men of repute. For, Non est
speciosa laus in ore peccati; (says Theophilact) and this was the reason why
Christ rebuked the unclean spirit, when he proclaimed him to be (...), the
holy one of God, quasi nolens ab immundo ore commendari, as unwilling to have
his fame fly in so stinking an air as his breath.

Quis laudatur verius quam cui maledicitur a malo viro? It is better to be
envied then pitied; pity proceeding out of a cold charity, toward the
miserable; Inuidia virtutis comes.
envy out of a corruption of quality against the virtuous. Contemptum stulti
contemnere Dyndi me laus est, Contemni a stulio dedecus esse nolo Fitsg. Epig.
Every man ought to rejoice in his innocence, and to solace himself in his
own perfections; for it is as beast-like not to know his proper value at all,
as it is deuillish to know it too much.

Humble pride is a proud humility, and such as exercise it with innocence
rather then curiosity, do but show the difference between a noble and
generous, and a basely-fantasticall nature: Whereby then should a man be
persuaded that he is an imbracer of virtue more then in that he is prosecuted
by the restless venom of the envious? Conscia men's recti fame mendatia ridet.
Let us remember that an innocent honest man can no way be dishonored. For as
Envy is the shadow of Virtue, so when virtue shall come to that perfection as
to reveal it self to the world, then like the vertical Sun it abateth all
shadows, which the low-creeping objections of flattering Detraction can stir.

Innocence, to God is the sweetest Incense, and a conscience without guile, is
a sacrifice of the sweetest savor, and the first thing thou must take unto
thee for a buckler.

Patience, which consists in Ars prima est regni posse inuidiam pati. Sen.
bearing inevitable calumnies courageously, and with a high crest. Varro was
wont to say of an ill wife, that either a man must endure her, or rid himself
of her. Do thou the same here, tolerating what cannot be taken away: what said
I? thou should bear them? nay rather despise them. Non sumit, aut ponit
secures, arbitrio popularis aurae.
For a generous and heroicke spirit fears not the adulterate censure of a
senseless multitude, nor does he care how preposterously the vulgar comment
upon his proceedings, let them construe his meaning as they will, whether they
take it with the right hand, or the left, he is still the same.

I, I, Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, vincit Qui patitur, si vis vincere,
disce pati.
these are the safest weapons against Calumny, not those which the vulgar fight
withal, Memory and Revenge. As in traveling, if a Dog or a Horse dash thee,
thou art nothing moved at him, nor strive to do the like to him, but rather
rub it off; so should we do here, accounting of them as of Curs and Iades,
whose injuries proceed not from judgment but from froward passion, or else out
of some parasiticall humor, to flatter other men hereby Vnusquisque ad
quaestum suum callidus. Plaut.
for their own occasion. It is no disgrace to the Sun, though Bats and Owls
cannot endure it. If an Ass could laugh, he would laugh at any that could not
eat thistles: and therefore if any of these Asses of our age shall spurn at
thee, Non ego ventosae plebis suffragia venor. Hor.
I would never stand to kick at him again, but I would care as little for his
censure as his company.

But thou will reply, that the mere color and appearance of infamy is to be
feared. If thou be guilty fear it; if not, why fear thou? Apply it not to
thy self and al is well. Diogenes was wont to say, when the people mocked him;
They deride me, yet I am not derided: Contumelies not regarded, vanish of
themselves into oblivion; but repined at, argue a guilty conscience. The best
answer to their slanders, is to answer nothing, as if the adversary were
rather to be contemptuously pitied then reckoned of.

Marcus Cato having received a blow from one, and the party coming afterward
to give him satisfaction, and to entreat pardon, he sent him away only with
this answer; Non memini me percussum.
I assure thee I remember no such matter: He thought it better, non agnoscere,
quam ignoscere, not to acknowledge, then forgive. And when Lentulus had spit in
his face as he was pleading, he wiped it off, and said; Dicam eos falli qui te
negant habere os.
He would maintain such were deceived as did deny that Lentulus had a mouth.
Socrates received a blow upon the head, and said no more, but that it was great
pity men did not know when they should need a helmet. Malum non est quod non
sentitur. Sen.
They found no fault with these indignities because they did not feel them;
for he that is thoroughly settled and composed in himself, moves in so high an
orb, and so far a distance from the earthy bosom of malicious and ill-disposed
men, that their unsavory belchings and exhalations cannot possibly annoy him:
neither can the backbiting and slandering of any mercinary-base-minded
Flatterer appale him, because he has innocence and patience for bucklers to
defend him.

To conclude this point; Neminem nec accusaueris, nec laudaueris cito.
If thou desire to be well spoken of, then learn to speak well of others:
and when thou have learnt to speak well, then learn likewise to do well, so
shall thou be sure to get a good name. Be not long tongued thy self, and
ready to blaze abroad the infirmities and slips of others. Judge 1. Cor 4.5.
nothing (says the Apostle) before the time, when the Lord will lighten things
that are hid in darkness. Romans 2 3.
He is made subject hereby to Gods judgment that judges another man. And
therefore, whilst we are in the way (says Aug.) let us bear one another
burden, that we may rest together at our iournies end.

Lastly, Nom non solum ille reus est, qui falsum de alio profert, sed and is
qui cuo aurem criminibus praebet. Bern. de Consid.
stop thine ears against these fawning Parasites, and against all slanderous
tales whatsoever that are against thy neighbors credit: For, Aures claudendae
sunt adulatoribus. Sen. ad Lucil. epist. 53.
the Slanderer is as the Thief; he that hearkens to him, as the Receiver; if
there were no receiver there would be no thief. Men would not so burden then
themselves with the coals of contumely, if they had no where to unload them:
and therefore not I, but the Lord says; Exodus 23.1.
Thou shall not receive a false tale: It is ingrafted in the dispositions of
many men, not only to give open, but credulous ear to all whispering reports,
and the more willingly, if they treat of any wrong done, or to be done: but he
offends not only that vtters calumnies, but he that hears them with
approbation: and Detrabere, aut detrabentem audire, quid horum fit damnabilius
non facile dixerim. Bern. de Considerat.
whosoever presently gives credit to the flatterers accusation, it is to be
feared, that he is either wicked himself, or very childish in discretion.

I know well they will insinuate, and fawn upon thee, making a show of love in
their countenance; but believe me they Habet suum venenum blanda oration. Sen.
are Asps and Vipers which blow in their poiso^ through soft deceitful kisses,
and they will speak as ill, nay worse of thee to an other man for their own
advantage, and therefore, though they speak favorably believe them not.

Thus I will leave the Agent in his wickedness, and come to speak of the
Patients weakness; for as there is iniquity in the one, so there is infirmity
in the other: as there is subtilty in the flattering deceiuer, so there is
great simplicity in the credulous believer: and were there not indeed so many
Fools in this kind, there would not be so many flatterers in the other
kind: and therefore one compares these flatterers unto Wolves; for as they by
tickling and stroaking of Asses do use to devour them, so my Parasite (this
Wolf in a Lambs skin) if he can meet with such an Ass as will believe him,
he will claw him, to prey upon him, and tickle him in the ear till he tickles
him to death.

There is a monstrous fable in the Alcor. lib. 4.
Alcoron, that the earth is placed upon the sharp end of an Oxes horn, the
weakness whereof is the cause of earthquakes: Though that be a tale, yet this
is Experientia docet, and nocet.
most true, that he that fixes his estate on a flatterers sharp (or rather
smooth) tongue, will put an earthquake into it, and Pro. 26.28.
soon run to ruin.

I cannot more fitly resemble a Flatterer, then unto a Fowler, and the
credulous man unto a foolish bird called a Dotterell, for I have seen both of
them caught, and both after one manner. For first, the Fowler after he has
pitched his nets, with hands and knees he creeps upon the ground to drive them
(having still an eye unto his game) Omnes blandetores obsequosi, s^ruiles, and
humiles sunt. Arist. Eth. lib. 4.
so does the flatterer, cap, and cringe, and crouch down to the very ground
(having still an eye unto his own profi^). Again, I have observed, that in
driving them, as the Dotterel (making a stand) stretches forth a wing, that
then the Fowler stretches forth an arm; if both her wings, then he both his
arms: and if she stretch forth her wing upon her leg, in like manner does my
Dotterel-catcher his arm upon his leg, and all to drive this poor innocent
bird into his nets by his cunning and guilefull imitation. For the flatterers
art is nothing else indeed, but a delightful cousenage, and like the
reflection of a looking-glass, he imitates any action that you use, till at
last he makes thee a very Dotterel. For what is a Spiders web but a net for a
fly? and a flattering tongue, but a trap for a fool? Witness Solomon, who
says, that Pro. 14.15.
A fool will believe every thing that is told him.

I will not abuse your patience in discoursing too much upon the Patient, lest
speaking too much of his weakness, I bring mine own in question, only give
me leave to strengthen him with some few Cautions that are needful for him:
for I am of the Patients side, Vereor ne de me narratur Fabula
whilst the Agent tickles him on both sides; for either he praises him more
then he deserves, or else promises him more then ever he means to perform
Take heed therefore
of his Praises, of his Promises.


Aug. sup. Psalm.
Augustine has defined flattery to be Fallaci laud seductio: A seducing by a
deceitful praise, commending him to be liberal, which is either vainly
prodigal, or extremely covetous; telling another that he is humble and
familiar, when he is base and degenerous; and praising another for ordering
himself well, in all things, when he does palpably amiss in many things. For
what is flattery but Tho. Secunda secunda quaest. 95 art. 1.
Excessus delectandi alios verbis vel factis? An excess in pleasing both in
words and actions, to the end that they may wind themselves into the
familiarity of those, Pessimum very affectus and iudicit venenum sua cnique
vtilitas. Tac. hist. lib 2.
out of whom they mean to make a commodity unto themselves?

If he be an ordinary Flatterer, he will have certain common attributes,
which may serve every man; If he be a cunning Flatterer, he will follow the
Arch-Flatterer, which is a man's self; and wherein a man thinks best of
himself, therein the Flatterer will uphold him most. But if he be an impudent
Flatterer, look wherein a man is conscious to himself that he is most
defective, and is most out of countenance with all in himself, Dixit Anaxagoras
atram esse niuem, grauis author: Haec aetas multos vidit Anaxagoras. Owen epig.
that will the Flatterer entitle him to perforce.

His purpose is, Bern. sup. Cant. ser. 66.
Virtutem non colere, sed vitia colorare: not to embrace virtue with a good
intention, but to paint over vice with a fair complexion. For there is no
vice which has not from him his color, his allurement: and his best service
is, either to further guiltiness, or to sinother it. Especially Laudauit
niueas corui vulpecula pennas; Hei mihi quod vulpessecula nostra serant. Owen
epig.
there is no action of greatness, that passes without the Flatterers
artificial commendatio^. For does his Great-one mean to catch the people in
his cap, and make courtesy entrap their simple understandings? He auowes him
to be humility it self. Does pride and selfe-opinion make him look big? He
carries himself like a Prince, to whose place it belongs not to loose of his
height by declining to familiarity. Does he spend? He reckons not his own
estate, so he may supply the wants of others. Does he save? it is nobly done not
to undo his posterity. Loves he wars? Magnanimity and fortitude shines in
him. Is it peace? No Common-wealths-men are so worthy as the preseruers of
peace. In a word, does he what he will, he does virtuously. Let him get
prosperity and get it how he can, he shall not want virtue: for Sen. Trag.
Her. sur. Act. 2. Se. 1.
Prosperum ac foelix scelus virtus vocatur: Let the Flatterer alone for
multiplying thy praises, so that thou will divide to him thy goods. Hic lauds
numerat, dum ille lauds munerat: but though he speaks favorably believe him
not. Simonides compares these kind of men to Cooks, who do sweeten with
sauces those kind of meats which of themselves be bitter and sharp. Even so
these Flatterers, verbis coquinarijs (that I may use the proverb) do sooth us
in those things Sape flagellatur in cord proprio qui laudatur in ore alieno.
which indeed ought to be rebuked and reproved; and with their well cooked and
dressed words, do (as it were) Sunt nonnulli qui dum malefacta hominum
laudibus efferunt, augent quae increpare debuerant. Greg. lib. 18. part. 4 cap.
7. moral. di. 46.
make us to have so good an opinion of our selves, that we account those
things to be virtues in us, which indeed are vices, and worthy of much reproof.

Plin. hist. lib. 8. cap. 17.
It is reported, that all beasts are wonderfully delighted with the sent of the
breath of the Panthar, (a beast fierce and cruel by nature) but that they are
else affrighted with the sternenesse of his looks. For which cause the
Panthar, when he hunts his prey (hiding his grim visage) with the sweetness of
his breath allures the other beasts unto him, who being come within his reach,
he rends, and cruelly does delaniate them.

Laudare aliquem de quo non est laudandus, vel plus quam est lau. dandus, vel
non eo sine quo fieri debet, peccatum est: Alex. secunda secundae. Tract. de
Adulat.
Even so these Patrons and Minions of false pleasures (the Flatterers) that they
may prey upon the credulity of these abused Great-ones, imitate the Panthars,
extenuating and (as much as in them lies) hiding the grosnesse, the ugliness,
and the deformity of those follies they persuade unto; and with a false gloss,
varnishing and setting out the paradise of uncontrolled pleasures, to the ruin
often times of the informed, and glory of their own impiety. Exodus 10.19.
O that some strong west wind would rid our land of these Locusts. It is a
fearful and fanaticall blindness for a man to carry his eyes in a box, like
Plut^rchs Lamiae domi caecae, foris oculatae. Plut.
Lamiae, and only look into himself by the eyes of his Parasits, as if he
desired to read the Intus teipsum considera, non qualis sis aliis credas. Sen.
ad Lucilili. epist. 81
Catalogue of his own good parts through the Spectacles of flattery, which
makes the least letter of a great show, and sometimes a cipher to be mistaken
for a figure. The Sycophants language is a false-glasse, and represents thy
conscience white, when thou may change beauty with the Moore, and not lose by
the bargain.

Hieron. ad Demitriaden.
O what a happy man is he that neither flattereth, nor is flattered; deceiues,
nor is deceived: that neither does hure, nor receives hurt. Cauendum est ne
assentatoribus patefaciamus aures, nec adulari nos sinamus, quo falli facile
est, tales enim nos esse putamus ut iure laudemur. Cic in Laelio.
Happy indeed shall we be if we understand this, more happy if we repel it,
most happy if we be of S. Augustines mind, Bonum est laudari, sed praestantius
est esse laudabilem. Sen. lib. de moribus.
not to think those happiest who have most praises, but those who deserve
those praises. And therefore when these Parasites praise thee, think it is but
to prey upon thee, and Though they speak favorably believe them not.

Secondly, as thou art to take heed of their Praises, so thou art to beware of
their Promises. For as there are Parasites that will praise thee more then thou
deseruest, for their own commodity; so there are Flatterers that will promise
thee more then they mean to perform, partly to make use of thee, and partly
for their own vainglory.

These are they that receive and entertain their Favorites and followers,
with kind gestures, and good language only, Promissis dives quilibet esse
potest. Ovid.
unmeasurable in promises, but sparing in ministering to their wants: whom I may
fitly compare to Verba promittentium Cupressis smilia, quae sublimes cum siat
and pulchrae, fructum non habeant. Plut Apop.
some fruits, which by a lushious smell, and delightful colors, inuit a man
to eat, but prove unsavory and distasteful.

These are they that will use men as they do their Water-Spaniels, to fetch
and bring, and for your labor, they spit in your mouths, and make you their
mocking stock behind your backs.

These are your frothy,-barmy-headed,-superficial,-glozing Guls, that
Priusquam promittas delibera, and cum promisseris facias, vt ne quis merito tuo
te oderit. Stob. de Mor.
put more confidence in their words, then meaning; and more to the
pronunciation, then their words.

These are they that are the reflection of higher substances, whose
sugar-candied promises, and fustian protestations bring more petitioners to
their doors in the Vacation, then you shall find of Clyents at a Lawyers in
the Tearme-time.

These are your vnder-Spheares that follow the motion of their Primum mobile,
whose greatest glory is to have grace and favor with the higher Powers, when
in the mean time they have little or no grace in themselves, and Cum tot
populis in aula stipatus eas, in tot populis vix vna fides. Sen. Her. Fur.
have less will (if power) to show any favor to those that rely upon them.
Though they speak favorably, believe them not.

When the Douil promised Christ the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, it was more then he meant our Savior, or at least more then he could
perform, for these were not in his power; Now because in all things we must be
as unlike the Devil as may be (lest he challenge us for his own) thence we
may learn ( Mr. Perkins in Mat 4.
says a reverend Divine) to be wary and watchful to our promises, that
therein we be not like unto Satan, Ncmo fere eredit nisi ei quem fidelem
putat. Perditissimi est igitur lominis fallere eum, qui laesus non esset,
nisicredidisset. Cic. pro Ros.
promising that which we never mean to perform, or never can perform, though
we meant it.

What a devil then do these men meant to choke a man with such promises as
they have neither power nor will to perform?

Jn dome Principum nomen tatum amicitiae inane i^ritumque permanet. Plini Pan.
I cannot more fitly compare the friendship of these Courtholy-water-squirts to
any thing then to those Apothecary drugs which are hot in the mouth, and cold
in the operation: for it Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur,
Venalesque manus. Lucan.
is quick to promise, and slow to perform; receiving substance, but returning
smoke; at fumo pereat qui vendit eundem. Homer writing of Ulysses, says, that
whatsoever he spoke proceeded from his heart; this will never be justly
affirmed of these in after ages. Large promises in him that has neither power
nor will to perform, are figures of cruelty, and better it were for a man at
first to be denied, then at last deceived. Turpe erit in miseris veteri tibi
rebus amico Auxilium nulla part tulisse tuum. Ovid. Pont. 2.
The property of a true friend is to perform more then he promises, (of these
we may find some:) but the condition of a dissembler, is to promise more then
he means to perform, (of these we may daily light upon too many.)

Mart Epig. lib 2. Epig. 25.
Das nunquam, semper promittis Galla roganti,
Si semper fallis, iam rogo, Galla nega.
In Caranensi Hispaniae agro, fons est aurci color is omnes oftendens pisces,
nil extra illam aqud cateris differentes. Plin. not. hist. lib. 2. cap. 103.
In the Country Carinensis (of Spain) there is a River that shows all the
fish in it to be like gold, but take them into thy hand, and they appear in
their natural kind and color: And what of that? I will apply nothing but that
may imply something. For let a man fish for preferment (without a golden hook)
here upon our English shore, and some vainglorious gull as thou may take in
hand, will glister in his promises, as in his garments, but bring him to the
touch, he is but dross: thou shall find that all is not gold that glistereth;
no, no, his words are froth, and his heart as hollow as his head is shallow:
Though he speaks favorably, believe him not.

Autigonus was called Doso, Plutarch.
because he used to promise much and perform little, (like him that promised
centum cues, and brought but centum oua,) I will not call any of your
muskie-Courtiers Doso, though some of them do so: Plus tibi pollicitis
praestandu^, non minus, vnde Vna data est bomins lingua, manusque duae. At tu
nil praestas, promittis plurima, tanqua^ Mare duae linguae sint tibi, nulla
manus. Owen. Epig.
they are Giants in their words, and Dwarfes in their deeds, they have
masculine promises, and feminine performances; their tongues are as supple as
their hammes, they sooth all in speech, yet seldom speak in footh, their
hearts are many Regions from their tongues. Though they speak favorably,
believe them not.

They have quite forgot their Grammar rules, that to promise and to pay are
joined together, because that Omne promisum cadit in debitum.
Promise is a debt that must be paid; but it Prom. Pol. sed denique non Sol.
Rom 13.8.
may be they love to pay no debts. If some had known it sooner, I know whose
debts might have been paid the better. O we nothing but love, (says the
Apostle.) Allow this: but if these pay it, it is in cracked coin, not current
in Gods Exchequer. For, their Love is Dissimulation, and their Charity (not
cold) but dead. If Promises be Debts, these Undertakers are such banckrupts
(though not of wealth, yet of honesty) Si been quid facias, facias cito, na^
cito factu^ Gratum erit, ingratum gratia tarda facit.
that they will never pay, though you give them time till Dooms day. If thou
see them, trust to thy self, nay rather in God: for, he Ecclus. 32.24.
that trusts in him shall fare never the worse: but if thou trust to these,
it is ten to one thou shall fare never the better: And therefore though they
speak favorably believe them not.

More is procested now then in former times, but less done. It is wittily Non
temperare manus a pectore and ore, est animi signum valde impotentis adeoque
eius, quimbil minus sentit quam quod videri vult. Tacit.
observed that the old manner of saluting was, to take and shake one another by
the hand, now we lock arms and join breasts, but not hearts. The old
handful was better then this new armefull. The Romans usually painted
Friendship with her hand on her heart: as if she promised to send no Messenger
out of the gate of her lips, but him that goes on the hearts errand. Now we
have studied both textures of words, and pretextures of manners to shroud
dishonesty. Video blandas consalutationes, amicos complexus, bilares
compotationes, cataraque officia humanitatis, ac orem indignam, ficta, fucata,
omnia. Erasm.
How common a thing is it to see one man embrace another with such friendly
complements, as though they were knit in the insoluble knot of perfect
Friendship, and yet alas how far from meaning well one to another?

How swift Cras do non body, sic nego quotidie.
are some men with golden words to promise, and how slack to perform?

How easy to have a friend in words, and how hard to find one in deeds?

For you shall have some that by a special kind of mouthglew will cleave
readily to all acquaintance, and at the first dash (after the saluting of the
shadow of your shooe-strings) will engage himself to do you any friendly
office that lies in the uttermost compass of his power. But take heed how any
time thou trustest one that is too general, for he can never be at any time
particular. Common courtesy is no courtesy, and Amicus omnium, amicus
nullorum. Cic. de Am.
he that is kind to all, is commonly kind to none. He loves us best, that does
for us most; but he that speaks much more then he thinks, performs
always much less then he speaks: so he shows himself to be such as he
would be, he cares not though he be not such as he should be. Trust him not any
way till thou have tried him every way: his affection is a fiction, Though he
speaks favorably, believe him not.

Thus with as many good wishes to the Patient as to my self (wishing him
hereafter to take better heed of the Agents flattering praises, and his fustian
promises) I kindly take my leave of him till the next time I meet with him,
which will not be long, for I know I shall have occasion to speak with him
again in handling of the next thing which is to be spoken of in order, which
is the Malady, Credulity.

The world is but a wild Forest of fools, and the Credulous man is one of
them, and the Flatterer is his shadow. They say that he that will pass
quietly through a Commonwealth, must avoid the Fool, and take heed of the
Knave; but there is a great deal of more danger in the Knave then in the Fool,
for Credulitas error magis est quam culpa, and quidem in optimi cuiusque mentem
irrepit ficillime. Cic. ep. 10
Credulity is rather a fault then an offense, for it hurts no man but it
self: But in this deceit is both the offense in promising the Credulous more
then he means to perform, (for so he does what he should not:) and the fault
in failing of what he promised (for so he does not what he should.) The
masterpiece of this Art is, to draw on the Credulous by performance of small
things, that he may the more finely fetch him over in the greater (as Fabius
Liu. anal. lib. 13 (...)
Maximus told Scipio preparing for Africa concerning Cyphax: Fraus fidem in
parvis sibi perstruit, vt cum operaepretium sit, cum magua mercede fallat) The
only remedy against such Crasts-masters is this, not Paucis credendum, nec
nisi ijs quorum longo vsu cognita tibi fides. Cic. ad Frat
to trust, for he that trusts not can hardly be deceived, and therefore
Though he speaks favorably believe him him.

Let thus much (or rather this little) suffice to have spoken of the Malady:
and for this Breuity I will make thee some amends in applying of the Remedy.
Believe him not. Though he speaks favorably believe him not.

It seems Virtue had once the Empire of the world, for antiquity shows many
coins of her stamp; and even this age so fears her power as every one will
wear her livery, though few do her service. Seemings are now sought, Beings
thought superfluous. The labor of most men now a days, is not to obtain
Truths but Opinions warrant. It is a thing therefore very difficult to find
out the humors of men, because so many dissemble their dispositions. This
Annosa vulpes non capitur laqueo.
business requires a crafty and experienced wit, for deceit is never so soon
discovered as by the deceitful: whereas Credulity and too candide a
construction of another outward show is a Seni dire verba difficile. Ter.
Fallicur ex faci^i quicaret art doli. Ovid.
mere sickness in the judgment, and weakness in the understanding, and the
only disadvantage to an honest heart. For as the Orator says, Vt quisque est
vir optimus, it a difficillime esse alios improbos suspicatur, because he wills
no man ill, therefore he Innocens bominum genus, est mexime obnoxium
violantiae. Errat qui istorum, qui occurrunt, vultibus credit.
thinks that he has no man's ill will: But the handmaid of Wisdom is
Slow-beleefe. For there be some that seem the very images of sanctity, lowly,
courteous, modest, humble, their eyes fixed on their graves, their hair shorter
then their eyebrows, as though they were myrrors of Religion and Piety, and
yet have nothing within but artificial knavery, fraud, deceit, and hypocrisy.
The In verbis ne nimium mibi pruri, ad ficta abi. Lip. pol. lib. 1.
best discouerer of men's minds are their actions, the best directer of action
is counsel, and the best trial of counsel is experience. For moral Honesty
(like Christian Piety) consists not in verbal profession and protestation, but
in actual practice void of all corruption, and spotless.

De fide cuiusque magis oculis qua auribus credendum. Ruffin.
must not listen after their words, but look into their actions, lest his
ears that tickle with some pleasing report, do afterward tingle with the
smart of the blow. For, as Alexander said to Antipater, that outwardly he did
wear a white garment, but it was lined with purple: So, the Nescis quale tega:
splendida vita malum.
holiest men in show, prove often the hollowest men in heart; for there are
some, that with an external show of chirping piety will mask their damnable
dealing. But take heed of them. These Foris vultu applaudunt virginco, intus
Scorpionis pugnunt aculio. Alan. de Complanct. not.
Harpies have virgins faces, but Vulturs tallons. Though they speak favorably
believe them not.

Ambrose his counsel and admonition; Ambrose.
Neque adulantes nos, nec adulandos cuiquam exhibere, alterum enim calliditatis
est, vanitatis alterum: Let us neither flatter, nor suffer our selves to be
flattered: for the one is sign of craft, the other of folly.

And seeing Flatterers are so smooth and false a kind of people to deceive and
entrap us, Nam multi more atque exemplo isto viuunt, quos cum censeas esse
amicos reperiuntur falsi falsimoniis, lingua factiosi, inertes opera, sublesta
Fide. Plaut.
let us be very careful again in the choice of our company, our friends, and
our counselors; and let us Deligas quem diligas.
choose such as are timentes Deum, and veritatem amantes, fearers of God, and
lovers of the truth: such as do desire to please their friends, that they may
be thereby profited and not hurt: such as with the Apostle had Gal. 1, 10.
rather please God then men. And seeing it is hard to find such an one, let us
follow the counsel of the Wiseman, Amici tibi sint multi, Consiliarius autem
vnus: Auxilio multi, consilio mihi erint pauci. Sen.
Though our friends be many, yet let our counselors be few. Be at peace with
many, nevertheless have but one councellor of a thousand, Ecclus 6.6.

A man Metellus aliquid militiae interogatus, si inquit tunicam arcani mihi
consciam scirem in ignem abijcerem. Plut, de Grac.
may keep a corner of his mind from his friend, and it be but to witness to
himself, that it is not upon facility, but upon true use of friendship that
he imparteth himself.

It is not fitting that things determined should be communicated but to those
without whom they cannot be effected.

The tongue of a fool carues a piece of his heart to every man that sits next
him: but prying policy says, Eximia est virtus praestare silentia rebus; Et
contra, granis est culpa tacenda loqui. Ovid.
It is far safer to know what a man speaks, that to speak what he knows.
There is no better Philosophy then for a man to learn silence. And as it is
good to forbear to talk of things needless to be spoken, so it is much
better to conceal things dangerous to be told: for he that reueales a secret
makes himself a prisoner, and how can thou trust a man with that thou can
not keep thy self? But open not thy heart to enery man, lest he requite thee
with a shrewd turn. Eccles. 8.19. Vt vitrum quia pellucidum est, nihil colat,
ita quidam nihil tegere, nihil dissimulare norunt; quicquid in animo est, id
protinus omnibus palam est. Stob. de Prud.
Yet there are some that are never well but when they are vnpacking their
bosoms with words, and whispering their thoughts in the ears of their reputed
friends: and at length through the perfidiousnesse of some false brother they
are brought either to dye shameful deaths, or live the like lives. O do not
God so great dishonor, as to demi-deifie a flatterer in making him privy to thy
heart and thoughts. For, There is a friend ( Eccl. 6 9.
says the Son of Syrach) who being turned to enmity and strife, will
discover thy reproach. In minimis rebus qui deficit, ille putatur In magnis
nullam velle tenere fidem.
Prove him therefore first, and be not hasty to credit him, Ecclus 6.7. And
though he speaks favorably believe him not.

Ecclus. 6.15.
Nothing does connteruaile a faithful friend (says the Wiseman) Amicus magis
necessarius quam aqua and ignis. Sen.
and his excellency is invaluable. And therefore a young Soldier having won
the Race, Cyrus asked him if he would change his horse for a Kingdom. No
surely my Liege (quoth he) yet would I willingly forgoc him to gain a true
friend, could I tell where to find him. Faelix amicus cui vel vnus contigit.
For indeed (as the Son of Syrach says) He that has found such a one has
found a treasure, Eccles. 6.14.

And ancient Menander accounted him happy, that had but met the shadow of a
true friend. I mean Cui tuam rem cum credideris, sine emni cura dormias.
such a friend whose bosom is a closet, where one may safely lay up his
complaints, his doubts, his cares, and secrets, and look how he leaves them,
a man may be sure to find them. No, no, Vbi amici, ibi opes; and vbi opes,
ibi amici.
Friendship was wont to extend vsque ad aras, but now it extends vsque ad
crumenas, every Turpe quidem dictu, sed si modo vera fatemur, Vulgus amicitias
vtilitate probat. Ovid. (...)
man almost measuring every thing by the rule of his own profit. But (although
thou ought to give greatest credit in cases of greatest weight to the
counsel of those whose wisdom and experience have formerly approved their
service, yet) (...). i. Consule non quaesuauissim a. sed qua optima. Laert in
Solon
such as advise, either to sooth thy humor, or for their own particular
advantage, may well be heard, but ought not to be trusted. And therefore Though
these speak favorably believe them not.

Plain dealing is dead, and what we most lament died without issue.
Improbitas tanti, probitas tam denique parui Penditur, vt probrum paene sit
esse probum. Owen Epig.
The name of an honest man is grown odious, and the reputation to be such is a
clog to a man's rising. For albeit men's eyes be dazeled with the splendour of
virtue, and cannot choose but admire her beauty, yet have they no power to
follow her: many are content to woo her, but few to wed her: and Virtus
laudatur and alget.
many will be ready to praise her, that will let her starve for cold before
they will take her in and warm her by their fire.

In times past, he that learnt the seven Gram. loquitur. Dia. vera docet.
Rhet. verba colorat. Mu. canit. Ar. numerat. Geo. ponderat. As. colit astra.
liberal Arts, as Grammar, the key of knowledge; Logic, the rule or reason;
Rhetoric, the mother of Eloquence; Music, the sweet recreation of wearied
minds; Astronomy, the secret knowledge of Nature, and course of the heavens;
Arithmeticke, the Art of Numbering; and Geometry, to work by rule, compass,
weight and measure; he had obtained and gotten even a world of wealth and
treasure. But in these wretched days, he that knows not the eight liberal
Science, called -- viuere nescit, Vt been vulgut ait, qui nescit dissimulare.
Paling.
Ars adulands, knows not how to live.

While Homer was living, he was little regarded, but being dead, Alexander the
Great made great report of him. And so it fares here, wise men are not wanted
till they are lodged in their graves; but in the mean time Res humanas ordine
nullo fortuna regit, spargitque manu munera caeca etc. Sen.
the detestable crew of fools, flatterers and parasites, receives the largest
gifts at blind Fortunes hands, for now a-dayes whilst wise men beat the bush,
fools catch the birds; and while valiant men crack the nuts, cowards eat the
kernels.

This foole-catching trade, (the Art of flattery) may be called indeed Scientia
liberalissima, not that it contains any liberality of virtue, or honest
knowledge; but because benefits are so liberally contributed unto it (as daily
experience shows) for as one said, that now adays, one cluster of Law is
worth a whole Iuris-prudentes prudentes iure vocantur. Tam been cum sludeant
provide antque sibi. Owen epig.
vintage of Divinity; so may I say, (as I daily see) that some of Will Summers
Kindred can get more in one year with fooling, then some honest painful
Student can get all his life time with plain dealing. O how I suffer when I
see so many men fall from virtue, and addict themselves to this filthy trade of
flattery, whereby both Noblemen, Gentlemen, and good natured men are abused;
and fools, flatterers, dissemblers and iesters nousled in impudency, and
nourished by petty theeuery, like the waspe that lives upon the labor of the
painful Be.

For you shall have a stigmaticall Thraso, Fexpopuli, the scum and dregs of the
people, that has neither wit nor honesty, no nor any commendable quality, as
means to insinuate into favor, but garrulous prattling unworthy chaste ears,
yet shall he want no countenance (no nor maintenance) if so be he can but this
Art of Flattery, to feed the flame of wickedness with the fuel of sinful
foppery.

Though a man were an Ocean of learning, as Plutarch is called; or if a man
were so full as Pliny, whose works are instar mill voluminum: if a man were
a treasurehouse of letters, as Picus Mirandula writes of Hermolaus Barbarus;
Tom. 9 fol. 338. Epist. 84.
as Erasmus of Bishop Tonstal, a world of learning; mundus eruditionis,
abounding with skill in all arts, Theoricall and Practical, real and
rational, active, and factiue; yet let him Cura quid expediat prior est, quam
quid sit honestum.
study and practice this eighth liberal Science, and he shall find it more
liberal unto him then all the rest; for the professors hereof are grown so
familiar with the superior sort, that they bring to pass even what they list.

The flatterer was never yet ashamed to show his face, yet in former ages,
palpably to flatter was accounted but the profession of a knave: but now,
vainglory does so sway amongst us, that he that wants a knave to flatter
him, can play the fool and flatter himself. It is not worthy (now adays) to
be called a feast, where there is not a Iester and a Parasite to cheer up the
guests, the one to rail and slander, the other to smooth and flatter: for as
the body must be balanced with excess, so the mind must be recreated with
slavish delights. There you shall have one auow a villainy, an other will
swear to it, a third will defend it, and all the rest will laugh at it; and he
that can flatter it and fool it the finest shall be the most applauded, and
the best rewarded. Thus shall vice be animated and borne out, be it never so
brutish and uncivil, and be hugged in the bosom of charity, Stulti fortunati
miseros contemnunt.
when a man honest, if poor, shall be scarce known of his neighbors, much
less have any measurable allowance, Phaleris ornantur aselli dephalerantur
equi.
for vice rides on horseback when virtue goes on foot.

At melius est pro verita^e pati supplicium, quam pro adulatione beneficium.
Aug. ad Casulanum. 11 q. 3.
Hence it is so many dangers arise when the meed of virtue is ingratitude, and
so many good wits injured in the justice of their merit, guld by Scycophants
and Flatterers, are not only hereby distracted in their studies, and dismayed
to proceed; but which is worst, so great coffeehouse bred, that they often
prove disloyal, revolt from obedience, and either fall into dishonest shifts
at home, or bad atchieuements abroad, thrusting their weapons into the bowels
of their mothers, either by open practices, or secret conspiracies.

I should but jade your patience to recite the several practices of this
flattering flock, for there belongs unto their art, glozing, cogging,
doubling, dissimulation, ieasting and railing, with more tricks then ever
Baboone or Monkey showed for money. These are they that can spin themselves
silken suites (ex assentando) on the voluble wheel of their pleasing tongues.
These are they that with their detestable practice of flattery, withdraw men
from the study of virtue; these are they that lie at receipt for the fruits of
other men's deserts; these are they that make some to fall upon Sylla, some upon
Caribdis, whose Sirens songs yield such dainty and delicate tunes to the ears
of ambitious and vainglorious people, that while they seem to swim in the
flood of fortune, they sink in the stinking puddle of folly. O that we could
think that when these beasts skip and play above their wont, that there is
some tempest a coming. Adulatio, mel vene ta^um, and venenum mellitum.
Follow thou the example of Ulysses for the avoiding of these their Nos
adpatriam festinantes, mortiseros Syrenum cantus surda aure transire debemus.
Hieron. in Epist.
sweet venomous enchantments, stop thine ears against their magical
incantations, if thou must needs hear them, yet do not trust them, for they
will draw thee upon the rock of danger, from that Rock which is thy Savior:
Though they speak favorably believe them not.

As Diogenes said, that, Of all wild beasts a slanderer; of all tame beasts a
flatterer was the worst: So may I say, that although all Flatterers be odious
and dangerous, yet the Fallerete nullus vult, qui tibi dura minatur: Sed potius
caueas, turbidus ille monet. Fallimur a placidis vobis vultuque sereno: Cum
sap^do capimus saepe vene a cibo Mancinus. Ecclus. 12.2.
Creeper is the worst. The first and most pernicious that ever was, was a
Creeper, and beguiled the woman, who thought that such a crawler could not have
such craft, as afterward she found he had: but though he humbles himself
and go crouching, yet take good heed and beware of him (says the Son of
Sirach, Tranquillas etiam n^ufragus horret aquas. Ovid.
) for though his ward be low, yet he aims high, and hits those soonest who lie
highest. Though he speak favorably believe him not.

Nuda est veritas, nec quarit angulos. Adag.
The beauty of Truth is in her nakedness, and therefore she seeks no corners
to hide it: but Falsehood is ugly, if stripped bare; and therefore ( Non aeque
nocet his qui sese odisse fatetur, Atque hic qui purum fingit amorem. Occulta
subdolus art necet. Ecclus. 6.13.
like ill complections) she borrows colors to cover her deformity: and
therefore Diogenes calls it Lethale mulsum, poison in a cup of gold; a
beautiful whore, fair without and foul within; a monster ugly to behold, if
it might be seen, and very dangerous to trust, if it might be known: and
therefore (says the wise man) Separate thy self from thine enemies, and take
heed of thy friends. For this world is a Theater, wherein nothing is
represented unto us but in a personate fashion: Vterumq^e arma to milite
complent. Virg. Aeniad.
Look into Epeus horse, and Saepe sub agnina latet hirtus pelle Lycaon; Subque
Catone pio, perfidus ille Nero.
whatsoever the outside promise, you shall find in the bowels of it the
destruction of Troy.

Suspicion is a virtue, where a man holds his enemy in his bosom: and thou
had better suspect too soon, then mislike too late; for behold he
fashioneth himself to nothing more, then how to become speculatiue into thee,
to the end to know how to work thee, or wind thee, or govern thee, or
deceive thee. He is the very Fides est fundamentum humanae societatis. Cic.
Gangreene, and Canker worm of humane society: for like a false Apple he is
rotten at the heart, Abundans cautela non nocet.
take heed of him, and Though he speaks favorably believe him not.

His diebus non peractis,
Nulla fides est in pactis.
Videto.
Mel in ore, verba lactis,
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
Caueto.
FINIS.

