THE PRESENT state of Spain.

Translated out of French.

printer's or publisher's device ET VSQVE AD NUBES VERITAS TVA

Imprinted at London by P. S. for Richard Serger. 1594.

THE STATE OF SPAIN.
IT is a thing noted from all antiquity; that God has appointed in this
world the certain continuance of Monarchies, estats, and families, has
lymited the prosperity and thraledome of nations, and bounded the very lives of
all men living: nevertheless as well in matters of state as private those are
found most durable which retain and keep the greatest perfection and
excellencye from their creator: Some being ordained to serve for ministers of
his fury, othersome for examples of his divine bounty and grace. For we see
many men and sundry estates whom God has from most base foundations and
petty beginninges raised and advanced to the most supreme degree of power and
dignity, inuesting them with mighty Empires and boundless kingdoms. With
whose power as of men little virtuous, it has pleased the almightye to serve
himself, but as with a scourge to punish the Enormous sins of his people,
others have been ratified from God above in this most sovereign degree of all
human majesty in recompense of their holiness of life and unreprovable
dealing among men. But so soon as the one or the other, began to forget the
occasion for which they were placed in this world, which was to set forth the
kingdom, honor and glory of God only: whom they together with all men ought
to confess to be their general Lord and father; and that they have gonne a
boute by false pretextes, and sinister means to advance their own private
honor and glory, and not that of their great Lord and master. Then God who
alone reigns whom only we ought to serve, casts them down headlong,
destroys their monarchies, desolateth their kingdoms, and rooteth out their
posterity from off the face of the earth.

For example the crown of Castile, aunciently, a little country governed by
Judges, afterward by Earls, in the end by Kings, created through the
beneficence of Samson, the fourth of that name King of Navarre, surnamed,
Samson the Great, was by Jsabel usurped from the daughter of Henrye last of
that name, King of Castile: the said Jsabell matched in marriage with
Ferdinando, son to king John of Aragon whose kingdoms increased almost in our
memory into a mighty puissaunce and state. But for that the possessors thereof
not resting content with those blessings which God has given them here on
earth, have in hostile manner invaded the Countries and possessions of other
Princes, they seem at this present to menace their own ruin, as I hope to
dilate more at large.

This Prince then, ambitious, if ever were any in this world, amongst other his
famous feats of Arms, to the end to inueigle the earl of Roussillon, from
Charles the eighte king of France, made no bones to abandon his own Cousin
German, and brother in law Ferdinando, king of Naples to the fury of those
Armies whom Charles the eight marched against him for the recovery of the said
kingdom. Then during the reign of Jews, the twelfth breaking al conditions
of League and amitye, forcing the degree of kindred and alliance, which he
had with Frederick then king of Naples, he confederated with king Jews to
dispossess Frederick of his kingdom of Naples, and to share it between them
two (as in effect they did.) Afterward under a color of supporting Pope
Julius the second, his quarrel against the Emperor Maximilian and the king
of France, but of a troth for very fear he had of the greatness of our king,
who then might have chased him easily out of his unjust possessions, which he
held in Italy: he entertained the Pope in deadly grudge against him, and
stirred up the king of England and the Switzers to war upon his jack.
Invaded likewise from his own niece Catherine (under pretext that her husband
was adherente to the French King) the kingdom of Navarre her own proper
inheritance; which when he had conquested, he could find no better devise to
assure it unto himself then by a false pretense protesting how he was ready
to make restitution thereof to his niece: conditionally that lest he should be
too much over seen, a truce should be acorded him for a year with the king of
France during which in liew of restoring it, he fortified al places thereof as
much as he porsibly could, razed all the rest of the cities, so tresses and
Cittadels: making express inhibition, that there should not be any tillage of
the earth at al, to the end he might take away all mean of recovering the
places by him usurped and fortified in the said kingdom. Yet this was not all:
For with his force he could finely sow his subtilty, and help himself with
the cloak of religion, to make his matters the better, causing to
excommunicate the king of Navarre, husband to his said niece, for that he had
taken the part of king Jews, the twelfth a Prince so good and so holy, that
as yet of us all he is called by none other name, then a saint, and a very
father of the people, and upon this excommunication he sent very many
preachers into the kingdom to turn the peoples hearts from the obedience of
their true king and Queen their lawful Princes. And what with this matter
succeeding so well unto him, and what with the death of the said king and
Queen of Navarre which he saw fell out soon after within eight months
together, he suffered his young nephewe Henry their son to be trained up
by certain ministers in the opinion of Martin Luther and for the same effect
sent unto him some expressly himself, who drawing the Pope into hatred, for the
wrong don unto their father, to excommunicate him at the instance of his uncle
Ferdinando, who long before had gaped for that kingdom, it was no hard matter
for them to transporte the heart of these young Princes especially that of
Margaret his wives sister to the great king Francis from the hatred of the Pope
to the hatred of his very religion it self.

This is then the just and true mean by which the Crown of Castile has
received her ample increase, by annexing to it so goodly a kingdom as is that
of Nauar. But what fell out afterward? Ferdinando enjoyed it a small time, no
more then he did the rest of al his other Kingdoms, God permitting them to
pass unto another famely, and that his children, both male and femile, who
were many in number should die before him, except only Joan who was married to
Philip Archduke of Austria, a generous Prince, but of a very short life; after
whose decease she fell beside her self, leaving notwithstanding behind her
the two great Princes Charles and Ferdinando sons begotten by the Archduke of
her own body.

This Prince Charles being come to the Crown by the death of the said
Ferdinando (for he ruled King, notwithstanding his mother Joan was alive
detained as prisoner by him) sought by all means possible the alliance of
France promised by infinite Treaties (especially in that of Noyon) to be
accomptable for the kingdom of Navarre, which for all tha the never was. And
tasting more and more the sweetness of commanding, he got unto him, and made
speedy provision for himself of the two military Orders: of that of Saint
James and of that of Calatraua in Spain, to the prejudice of his brother, to
whom they were resigned: opened his eyes also to the Empire, obtained it, and
enjoyed all the Kingdoms and Seigniories both left him by Ferdinando of Arragon
and these which his mother the fool held: likewise the Estates of Flanders and
the provinces there unto annexed, leaving his said brother only some corner of
a country toward Austria, wherewith after some wrangling between them he did
as a moderate prince content himself being never afterward much moved
against his brother new created Emperor, but because he was still egging him
to resign to his son Philip now at this present reigning, the estate of King
of Romans, whereof he was possessed, to the end Philip might to the prejudice
of the said Ferdinando his uncle succeed in the empire.

Ambition most assuredly is a thing greatly detestable before God, who will
have men to content themselves with the lot which he gives them in the earth,
but the pretexts which are taken of the pure service of God, for an other
subject, are worst of all, and cry for vengeance before his holy face.

I will not say this prince Charles the first, under collor of defending the
catholic religion in Germany went about (as some have said) to invade the
estate and liberty of the princes of Germany: but this I will aduouch that he
and Philip king of Spain his son have employed themselves (by confession of
his own men, and none of his meanest servants, the one of them yet living, as
I think, the Seigneur de Champigny, not long since high Treasurer in
Flaunders, brother to the Cardinal Granduel) toward the protestants of
Germany, following the steps of the abouesaid Ferdina^do of Arragon their
predecessor, to cause the deceased king of Navarre to be instructed in the
opinion of Luther, to the end to make him the further from the crown of
France, from the alliance of the French, and from the recovery of his kingdom
of Nauar. But if he who seduceth but a little simple child be pronounced by Gods
own mouth to be of worser state then if he were cast into the bottom of the
sea, with a millstone tied about his neck, what shall his judgment be toward
him, who seduceth not only a child, but causes others to seducea king and a
whole kingdom? but this not sorting so good effect as they could wish, there
were 50000. crowns sent to the king of Navarre then, besides some horses in
gift to move the war in France, the which 50000. crowns for all that were
refused witnesses good enough of this most wicked inclination and vile
affection of the King of Spain, may be the Marquessat of Saluces, upon the
which he has caused 2. several enterprises to be made by his son in law the
Duke of Sauoy (at the first it was recovered by the sage conduct of Mounseur de
Rhets Marshall of France) and the pernicious league made for the ruin of al
France, nay rather of all the Estates of Europe, we need no other testimony of
his good nature and dispositon toward every one of us, the places borrowed in
Germany from the Archbishop of Liege and Colonia, there to foyst in his
garrisons when he list, and to level right from thence at the empire, to the
prejudice of his coosens, the children of Ferdinando of Austria, under show of
making ra^pire against the Protestants of Germany, for the good of the
Catholic religion forsooth his practices past, and every day put in ure in
Italy, his agents sent into Poland, Denmark, England, Scotland, and other
corners of the world say the same: and well may we liken the king of Spain to
those, who detaining an inheritance wrongfullie, seek by greater wrongs and
outrages to drive the true heirs farther from the recovery of their own. But
the judgments of God are great, his counsels wonderful, and the effects of
his justice inestimable. He suffers, according to the Apostles saying, that
we be common lie punished by those against whom we have trespassed. The king of
Spaines fathers, and he himself have sought by all means to ruin the kings
of France, and particularly Henry the fourth, reigning at this present: and
by abusing the muffler of religion to recoyle this lawful successor from the
crown of France, whom they see full of valor, and fed (as they say) with the
blood and marrow of the Lion, ready pressed one day to challenge his just
inheritance. But God who hates him more who abuses the holy name of religion
than him who having been seduced by purposed malice (as our king has) has
turned from it: would that this king should be new borne, who being
delivered from so many snares laid to entrappe and snare him, has received
the Crown of France, presented unto him by a puissant Army, who has
submitted it self unto him, with all the greatest States and honestest people
of France. And when? Even then when all the world judged him by the malicious
cariages and practiced death of the deceased king Henry the third the farthest
from the diadem thereof.

Germany for her part she opens her eyes to defend her self against this
king of Spain, who as an eagle supposes to hold already in his tale^ts the
empire of the whole world: The like does Italy: and already this building of
kingdoms patched together of so many usurpations begins to dissolve and
shake in sunder. Already the states of Holand and Zeeland, knowing by the just
judgment of God how wrongfully they were forced and distracted from the
obedience of laqueline of Henald their Countes and lawful Princess (who for
to save her own self was constrained to forsake her estate) have pulled their
necks out of the yoke, and made themselves free, choosing rather to die then to
be subject to a Domination so intolerable as is that of the proud Spaniard.

The provinces of Zutphen and Gueldres taken away from their lawful Seigneurs
by the deed of guiftes which the last Duke Charles of Bourgundie who died
before Nancie sought to get at the hands of Duke Arnald then his prisoner, to
the prejudice of Adolf his son, have slipped the collar also of his obedience
and the Country of Frizelande has don no less.

The best advised inhabitants of the low Countries of Flaunders Henald and
Artois held out their arms to the king of France, (nor only for the
excessive impositions (as of paying two shinllings for the grinding of a
quarter of wheat, four shillings for a cow which is the slaughter, or kept to
give milk, and other such like petty taxes, for which they pay full dear in
Flaunders) but for that they know that they are of the ancient Demaines of the
crown of France, Flanders, making one of the members of the kingdom and being
one of the principal seats of the twelve Peers. They cry with a loud voice
that it was not in the power of king Frauncis the first (then prisoner) so to
abandon and give them away: and that in this case there ought to be restitution
made seeing the law is held current of all, that a prisoner locked up fast in
prison (as was then the said king) he is not bound to perform any promise
made, but remains afterward in liberty of his faith.

Those of Lille, Douay and Orchies, principal cities of the low Countries, do
know and confess how by right they appertain to the king of France: for
Phillip the Hardy having promised Charles the fifte king of France, (who let
him have them at his marriage with the inheritrix of Flaunders) to return
again them unto his right so soon as God should have called unto him Jews
de Mayle Earl of Flaunders his father in law: and bound himself by contract
paste at Peronn the twenty of September 1368. under obligation, of himself,
his heirs and successors, and upon pain of the Apostolical censures,
whereunto the king of Spain stands answerable upon peril of his own soul.

And as for Milan, Sicilie and Naples, all the world knows what rights
France has in them all.

And as for the kingdom of Maiorica, the Earldomes of Sardinia and of
Roussillon out of which are as yet owing to the Crown of France, the 300.
thousand crowns which Jews the eleventh disbursed, when they were engaged to
him for that sum: Jews of. Aniow had the gift thereof, which the Lady
Marquess of Montferrat, sister and lawful heir to James the last king of
Maiorica presented him.

As for Biscay, it appertained to the Duke d'Alenzou of France by the right of
his mother Maria de Lara, Lady of the said country: but she could never
recover her prerogative from Henry second of that name king of Castile, earl
of Tristemara, invested seignieur thereof by the aid and only arms of Charles
5. king of France, who sent thither Bertrand de Guesclin his Constable to
ceaze it for Henry's right, who installed him therein. And by this king, albeit
a bastard, comes all the title that king Phillip at this present raygning
has in Spain: as in like manner from the side of Bastardes comes all the
rights and titles which he pretends to Milan, Naples, Sicilia, which are not
as yet in too great assurance to him.

As for Arragon, beside the quarrel of the donation made by Pope Martin
successor of Nicholas, to Philip the third king of France, or to Charles his
second son to the prejudice of Peter king of Arragon, husband of Constance,
the daughter of Manfroy of Naples, and bastard to Frederick the second
Emperor and king of Naples: and the rights of Matthew of Castelbon, Earl of
Foix and Bearne, on the behalf of Joane the daughter of John son to king Peter
of Arragon: saving also the deeds of gift paste by Rene d' Aniou king of
Sicilia to Jews the eleventh king of France; by whose only aid he was
crowned king of Arragon in the city of Barcellona: the house of Lorraine may
pretend herin also some right, because of Yolant daughter to the Duke of Bar
married to Jews of Aniou, who was forced to compound for alrights for one
hundred sixty thousand Florins.

And as for Portugal, it is a thing as yet of very slender assurance in the
house of Spain, as well by reason of the ancient emnity and an old quarrel
which is between these two provinces, as for the rights which may be
pretended therein amongst other by the successors either having right from the
house of Boloing from which the country of Boulenois in Picardy is at this
present anexed to the crown of France. For Alfonso king of Portugal marying
with Mahault or Mathilda countess of Boloing, had by her two children and it
fell out as she was in the country of Boulenois to set order in the affairs
of her husband the Earl, the K^ of Portugal being ravished with the beauty of
Beatrix; bastard daughter to Alfonso surnamed the sage, or Astrologian, King of
Castile, Leon and Toledo, where al things were so well agreed upon between
them two, that this Castilian king without other ceremony married her, leaving
Mathilda, who lived twelve years, during this dishonest marriage or rather
concubinage: and being returned into Portugal, was forced to return into
France to make her complaints to the king, and afterward to Pope Alexander
the fourth, who soon excommunicated the Portugal king and his new married
wife. Nevertheless the children of this his illigetimat wife did not forbear
to vsurp the kingdom from those who were lawfully begotten on his first,
Raynucio the D. of Parma at this present has also most apparent right on the
part of Maria his mother daughter to Edward, son to king Emanuel of Portugal:
the king of Spain who has usurped it being issued but of one of Emanuels
daughters, and Rainucio being descended of the son: there comes also a third
chalenger, Don Antonio K. of Portugal, who is the son pretended bastard of
Jews the elder brother of Edward: but legitimated by the Pope and by sentence
of the of the holy Sea, who after the full scanning of his title was elected
king of portugal by the people, according to the mental law of that kingdom.

The king of France Henry the fourth demands the kingdom of Navarre as to
him appertaining by the right of his mother, heir to that Catherine above
said, the niece of Ferdinando of Arragon: whose proper inheritance which was
that kingdom, cannot be thus lost to her dommage, when her husband should have
fallen into some enormous fault. To him appertain the places of Sosierra
depending from al antiquity of that kingdom which Queen Isabell the first
wife of Ferdinando by her testament, and for discharge of her conscience gave
order that they should be restored, as having been usurped by those of
Castile from Nauerre. To him appertains moreover the Duchies of Gandia
Mount-blanc in Arragon, and Pegnafiel: the Earldom of Ribargorcea, the
Infantasgo of Castile, the city of Balaguer, and the Towns of Castrocheris,
Harao, Villalon, Cuellar, the which king John father to Ferdinando of Arragon
gave to the kingdom of Navarre: upon condition that in recompense thereof; he
might enjoy the said kingdom during his life, whether he had issue or not by
his marriage with Blanch daughter to Charles king of Navarre third of that
name, being the little son of Philip d'Eureux of the house of France: and
there are also due unto his Majesty four hundred twenty thousand one hundred
and twelve Florins of gold, six shillings eight deniers; money of Aragon, as
well can witness the marriage of the said Blanch to the restitution of all which
territories and to the payment of every penie of these sums the king of Spain
stands bounden yet at this day.

This is not al, the very kingdom of Castile may lawfully be called in
question for the king of France, as being the true successor of Saint Jews:
and herein can be no prescription alleged. For it is never admitted in
matters concerning kingdoms, and things purchased by fraudulent dealing. His
Majesty's right is this, Henry the first of the name king of Castile and
Toledo, son to Alphonso the 4. of Castile, and to Leonora, daughter to Henry
the second, king of England, and to that Leonora, whom Jews the young king of
France put away, and dying without issue by the fall of a tilestone upon his
head, left his sisters: the elder called Blanch, mother of S. Jews: the
second, Berenguere, wife of the king Don Alfonso of Leon, and the third,
Leonora wife to the king of ragon.

Now when the said Berenguere by ordinanuce of Pope Jnnocent the third of
that name, had been separated from the King of Leon her husband, for that they
were near in Consanguinitie together: she retired her self after that
toward Henry her brother, with her son Ferdinando, which she had by the
King of Leon, and having gotten infinite favorites in the court of Castile,
seeing the King Saint Jews far distant from her, and much busied in other
wars, she handled her matters so cunningly to the prejudice of this S.
Jews, she caused her son Ferdinando to be elected King of Castile and Toledo,
upon the confide^t hope which she gave the Castilians, that in the person of
her son should the kingdom of Leon be reunited to that of Castile, and that
they should avoid by this mean the domination of a French Prince being but a
stranger amongst them. S. Lewers began quickly to look and to make insta^ce for
his Kingdoms again: but whilst they did finely hold him play with fair
promises, to restore him al again: he being not able to transport himself
thither by reason of his wars in hand, the whole remained amongst them
ever since.

I know well the Spaniardes allege, that S. Jews compou^ded afterward by
means of the marriage of his daughter Blanch with Ferdinando of Leon, son to
Alfonso the wise Astrologian, elected in favor of the French to be Emperor of
Germany, against Richard son to King John of England: But grant we that it were
so, which notwithstanding, can never be accorded them, the K. of France
remains not without a second right to the said Kingdoms. For afterward God
permitting not, that any so unjust usurpation should take place, Alfonso the
sage was deposed and deprived of the Empire by Rodulfe, elected and placed in
his room, in his own life time: was also bereaved by Sancio his second son
of part of his kingdoms thorough the aid of a Moore-king, named Mahomet Myr
of Granado, with whom this Sancio made league to war upon his father: whereupon
Alfonso growing into great indignation, and fearing least he should dispossess
the little infantes issued of his second son Ferdinando de la Cerda, but then
lately dead, to whom the kingdoms did of right appertain: he gave him his
curse and disinherited him, declaring by his Testament for heir in his
kingdoms the eldest borne son of his elder son, and in case he might not
possess them did substitute to the prejudice of his two other sons John and
James, Philip son to S. Jews, unto whom (pricked with the testimony of his
own conscience) he confessed these kingdoms of Castile and Toledo to
appertain. And in case the rights of Saint Jews should come to cease and
fail, that then these realms should come to the children of the said
Ferdinando de la Cerda, whereof there is as yet some remainder in Spain, which
possible will not be content to be tongue tied for ever. And one of the
desce^dants of this Ferdinando de la Cerde, Alfonsus who was father to John
d'Espagne Constable of France, behauing himself as a king of Castile and
Toledo made a present to Philip d'Eureux king of Navarre of the country of
Guipuscoa, Alaua, and Rioia, which had been territories and appurtenaunces of
Navarre: all which the king of France who is at this present, may as yet as
king of Navarre reclaim and justly challenge for his own right.

I will not stay my self at infinite other rights, which not only France
but the Empire, and other particular Princes may pretend in the dominion and
countries which the king of Spain holds (who by allusio^ to the house of
Austrich may be called Rich of other men's goods.) I will not touch the share
which the king of Spains daughters may pretend with his son, as well in the
kingdom of Leon, as in other goods partable from all times between sons and
daughters. Little will I also speak of the signal dommage of the division of
lands and goods pretended by the defuncte Emperor Ferdinando of Austria,
against Charles the first his brother, father to this king of Spain Phillip
rayning at this present.

What should I count the reuoults which are daily practiced in the indies by
reason of the intolerable imposts, which the king of Spain makes them
endure, who constrains them to pay every year (as in Spain likewise) their
part for the obtaining of the Popes Bull, that they may eat flesh, eggs, and
cheese upon fish days, both the men and women, poor and rich, of cities and
villages, all without difference from seven years of age vpwardes. And urges
them to this inconsideration of the expenses he is at in obtaining the said
Bull, which none may refuse to take, albeit he would never eat butter and
cheese in all his life. And that which is taken for a head in Spain, is two
Reals which is twelve pence sterling, and in the Indies is taken for every
poule eighteen or tweenty Reales: Count you after the rate what it does
amounte unto in such a world of people: and without the forsaide Bull, none may
nor ought not (as say these good hirelings preachers of Perdons) be buried in
hallowed ground, nor once come within the Church door. O abominable abuse! O
sin against the holy ghost! of those who terming themselves defendours of
religion, sell unto their own subjects, the help and succor which they say to
obtain for the health of their souls! See what a goodly reuenewe this is, and
like to be be long time favored of God. But in the mean time it is the
greatest of all Spain. O miserable and unnatural French men, who closing your
eyes to so many iniquities, do suffer your selves to be seduced by this GOLD
so ill gotten.

There remains their inquisition which serves their turn rather to rob the
goods of the innocent and miserable, then to contain men in any religion,
whereof they were but as it were a mask an muffler.

Thus Spain grows to be dispeopled by these cruelties intolerable and by
the Alcaualle, which they call the tenthpenny of every thing boughte and
soulde, yea of the very habit which you shall carry new in your cloak bags.
Who shall then be the man so miserable that will admit in our France such
people, whose very name is so ill received and odious, that to name them only
skarreth the little children, and makes them affrayde? Alas: Take heed,
Frenchmen, it be not reproched you before God, how ye have chaced away your
own brethren to lodge among you, barbarous people, take heed that this curse
fall not upon your heads, to be called justly Vipers who tears out the
entrals of your own mother, that is to say, of your own native country: and
believe that every one that would ruin the building of France, shall remain
buried in the ruins. But if the laws do punish a man for having slain a man
who is his like, by how much more strong reason shall those be punished, who do
not only kill a man, but procure the entire death and destruction of a kingdom?

The king of Spain, who here to fore said, that we must come to no tretie of
peace with our king being swarued from the faith, ceased not in the mean time,
and gives not yet over to assay by all means to make peace with his subjects
of Holland and Zeland, who are Lutheriens, Caluinists or Anabaptists. He
offreth to leave them their free exercise of religion, to let them have their
cities and governments in the same estate wherein they possess the^, demands
only at their hands that they would but acknowledge him for their king. But
those States full well know to whom they appertain, and what manner a thing the
Spanish domination is, and that this nation does applaud, as does the Crocodile
when she will cast forth her venom or bite: witness be the poor Earls of
Aignemont and of Horn put cruelly to death, notwithstanding their services
done, for the reducing of countries into his obedience, and the faith to them
promised. The death also procured by poison, as is said to the poor Lord of
Montigny the end of the poor Marquess of Bergues, and of all the Nobility
which by one or other mean they race and root clean out.

King Henry the fourth can well tell how to defy all their false drifts, and he
mistrusteth their cunning cariages, for all their sending him the portraite of
the infant: He may too well know, how when Ferdinando of Arragon the last, and
Philip Archduk of Austria, were in treaty of the marriage of Madam Claudi of
France with Charles the fifth, the father of this Philip now rayning, and
after the marriage concluded, sworn and confirmed at Blois, the king of France
Jews the twelfth his Lieutenants mistrusting nothing the Spainards ran upon
them defeating two French Armies the one in Calabria under the Conduct of the
Lord d'Anbigny the other at Cirignolla lead by the Duke of Nemours the Lord
Jews d'Armignac: the chief commanders of the Spaniards alleging for all
excuses that they had heard of no prohibition given them from their master, to
make wars.

At this present the king of Spain being of the age of sixty 7. years and
above vnlustly of his person (as he is doubtless) sees himself at the period
of his subtilties, cannot tell by what means to keep that which he has
purloined from others; his fair promises vapor away to nothing, his mind is
bewrayed and his counsels discovered. He seeks to help himself with the
feebler side in France, to the end to keep us still in war, for fear least
the weaker part through want of means should abando^n the war, he would make
us knock one another on the heads, that he may make his preie on us
afterward. He goes about to cut our throats with our own knives, and to
overthrow us with our own weapons, because by his he knows he cannot do
it. He entertaineth the war in our country, for fear least we set upon him
in his own: And if that part which he takes should become the stronger, he
would incontinent war upon it. He is not yet come to solicit (as they call
them) the Huguenotes of France to rebel against King Henry the fourth, and
to wage war upon him.

Let then all Princes and Potentates take heed of the enterprises and counsels
of so charitable a neighbor: And you Frenchmen, learn to be wise by your own
harms: I adjure you all by the honor and respect you bear unto God, by the
faith, love and loyalty you owe to King Henry the fourth, given by God unto
France, son to your predecessor Kings, issued from the loins of S. Jews,
and by the charity ye owe to your country, and to the safety of your selves,
of your wives and of your children, and to the conservation of our religion,
Temples and Fortunes, cease among your selves this peevish rebellion (if as yet
it have place in any of you) and reduce it to a due obedience, which only can
make next after the grace of God spring again upon us the bliss of our
fathers and the peace and tranquillity of their golden ages.

Some preach that religion is in great ieopar die, and that many of the fathers
in the primitive Church are dead for the catholic faith, and that we must die
for the same: I grant it, but they must give us the Scriptures as they are
understood. We are already to die when they shall force us to renounce our
Savior Jesus Christ, and to sacrifice unto Idols. Then and no otherwise ought
death to be endured in this case, so have those fathers received it, and we
will die before we will be other than followers of the true Catholic and
Apostolic religion. Our fathers in the church fled in time of persecution and
none of them have resisted kings in arms, finding it better to suffer then to
revolt. Our Lord also counseled his Apostles to fly in time of persecution
from one cittye to an other, and not to make any resistance by arms.

And ye the Lords of the Clergy, know ye that the doctrine which God has
given us (to you principally as a pledge of his grace) hall never get his
perfect and resplendent brightness, as long as these bloody wars shall
trouble the sweet streams flowing from so goodly a fountain. O how the league
does well show it self to be come from the lowest cauernes of hell, since it
puts division namely among the Catholics, who being united together might
lively have set upon the Heritikes and by fair war cut off many thousands of
them. Know that you have need of the material sword, which is that of the
king, to make you live in safety, rest, and justice, and to maintain this our
religion which is the true soul of the body of our estate. And sure, needful
it is to conserve the kingdom in his entire body without dividing it into his
members, for fear least by the cutting off of some one principal, this soul
take his flight away. Behold I pray you the fruit of the preachings of some
amongst you, and possible (albeit not all) moved with a good zeal but not
ruled as says the Apostle according to knowledge but what have you done?
truly you have furnished bellows and straw to kindle the coals of our
quarrel. O fury: O madness: unbeseeming your Priesthood. So is it come to
pass, that millions of your flocks are perished with out confession, without
sacraments, without sepulture: Of a hundred Churches scarce shall ye find one
standing whole, nor in ten parishes hardly one parish priest, if it be not in
the countries reduced to the Kings obedience. This was the matter that moved
Mounsieur Vigor, one of the most famous Doctors of divinity in France, and for
his singular learning made by the holy Father Archbishop of Narbona to say in
his sermons upon the feast of Trinity and S. Martin: Jf God would so much
afflict us as to give us a King who were a Turk or an Heretic, yet must not
we levy Arms against him, nor war upon him, for the great mischiefs
which ensue thereupon. These very words are contained in the books imprinted
before the troubles, but are maliciously put out in the new imprinted by the
League, for fear least this knife of truth should cut the throat of these
suppostes of 1easing, who could not abide so good a lesson in so good an
author.

But now our King is, God be thanked, most Catholic, and when he were not
so, God who caused himself to be enregistred in the records of the Emperor
Augustus, when he caused the whole world to be taxed: and the commandment to
pay the tribute unto Caesar, albeit he were a profane Pagan: the example also
of Saint Paul who appealed unto Nero a most wicked Emperor, show that the King
being such as God sends to take the royal place, is to be obeyed. The
examples likewise of the thirty three Popes being all martyrs, and died
consecutiuelie one after another have showed us the same, who never caused
sword to be unsheathed against the persecuting emperors or any other heretics.

The same did S. Gregory the Pope, dedicating his dialogues to Theodolinda wife
to Agilulphus King of Lombards, holding as yet then his paganism that through
the sweet persuasion of his wife, he might be brought to christianisme and
purchase peace unto the church. Did not Pope Leo the like prostrating himself
at the feet of the wicked Attilas. No less did Pope John the first of that
name, going from Rome to Constantinople to the Emperor Justin, to pray him to
set open the Temples of the Arrians, which he had caused to be shut up fearing
least the Arrians, which might consume of themselves, would disturb and trouble
the peaceable estate and tranquillity of the Church.

Doubt ye not also but that our holy father the Pope moved by these examples
will seek to repair the wrong done unto our king, by some misinformed of his
justice, or possibly carried headlong away with the Spanish passion. He shall
find him to be such a one that he is the eldest son of the Church: he will
call to mind how our king is descended from those, who have consecrated and
given in alms to the Church, the fairest flowers of their garland, and the
best of their good. Alas! His holiness cannot do less for our king Henry the
fourth, then by one of his predecessors has been done within these few
years to the Queen of Sweden being excommunicated and in relapse, receiving
her with all joy and gladness in the person of her ambassadors into the bosom
of the church.

The holy fathers have never refused the penitent princes, witness be the
peace of Constance and other decrees, whereof the histories and holy Councels
are fully replenished. His Holiness may see how much is envied the share,
which god has given our king in the earth: But he shall say to the king of
Spain, the greatest spiter thereof, that which Pope Boniface the 8 told most
wisely Albertus of Austria, who by his cunning working caused himself to be
elected Emperor, to the prejudice of William Earl of Nassau, then Emperor of
Germany, whom he slew in battle, he shall tell him, I say, that he who has
slain the Emperor with his own hand is unworthy to be invested and confirmed
in the Empire. For it is by his only hand and handling that this death and
slaughter is purchased in our kingdom of France, wherein he went about and was
willing to cause himself to be called king, but God be thanked, he has lost
his labor therein.

The holy father who was in the time of Emanuel Emperor of the East, would not
once harken to the offers he made him to cause the Greek Church to be
reunited with the Latin upon condition that the Empire of the West, being
vacant by reason of the deprivation of Frederick, should be reunited with that
of the East: foreseeing also that it was a matter greatly to be suspected
whereby to make the universal Church, to depend but of one only power among
men: and should his Holiness so much weaken a King or a kingdom, of France,
which is the true arm of the church to suffer all the world to be overflowed
with a king and a province mere mixed with races of Moors, Saracens and
Goths, than with true Christians, having more holiness and respect to sacred
things, than is borne to the least village in France?

His Holiness shall know that the kings of France and their peoples have
bent their forces and made good for the Church, then when Asia, Afrike, Spain,
Italy, and almost all the world were full of Arrianisme and heresies, let him
remember also (and his successors may for ever call happily to remembrance in
their holy sea) how that in the year of the birth of king Philip of Spain at
this present was fatal and dismal to the holy Sea, having therein the Army of
Charles the fifth his father, surprised and sacked Rome, ransommed the holy
father Clement and his cardinals ruined and profaned the temples and churches
of Rome which Attilas being named for his inhumain cruelties, the scourge of
God, refused, to do.

King Henry the fourth of France, knows right well, that he must one day give
account of his charge, and that God will cause him to be obeyed, honored and
served of his subjects, as he will obey, honor and serve God: He knows how
the first marshall, king and father of the whole world Adam, before his fall,
was respected of all living creatures, as Lord thereof, but after his reuolte
the very beasts rebelled against him, the Lion began to dismember and tear
him in pieces, the horse to kick and winch at him, the dog to snarl and bite at
him, and so all the rest in their kinds began to bend all the vigor of their
furies against him and that God has possibly permitted the same to be done to
him by some of his subjects (albeit if they turn not again to their allegiance,
they can never escape the divine vengeance, because their king has by the
suggestion of his enemies wandered astray in Religion. His Majesty knows too
well that he cannot purchase the grace of God if being advanced by him into a
more eminent than they in all manner of virtuous actions. He shows already by
the diligence which he uses in feats of arms, that as he is far gone in the
iourny of his age; and there remaining for him so many things to be done in the
world (the honor and labor whereof it seems that God has reserved for him)
he will imitate the birds of the more northen nations, where the day having but
one hour of length, they fly more courageously and more swiftly then any
other of the air. For he has in a small time reduced into his obedience the
most of the people of his kingdom, and shows them by the mild dealing he
uses toward them, that he has conquered them not for his own particular
good, but to bring them into their greater ease and security.

Already his Majesty does meditate nothing else but to make of his court the
cabinet of the most excellent and rarest things of the earth, and that therein
shall be found the most virtuous, honest, and best accomplished men of this
world. Virtue shall be in esteem if ever it were: he pretends so soon as he
shall have satisfied those unto whom his people (miserable as it is) has for
their follies past constrained to promise recompenses, quite to abolish, or so
to moderate the taxes that his poor subjects shall have cause for ever to pray
unto the Almighty for him, and his memory therefore may be sacred to all
posterity. He is not ignorant how by the too great excess of the said taxes
his people remains in languishing sort, and the nobility who follows him
is made poor because the Pezant cannot nor dare not till the lands of the
nobility and of others for fear of the said taxes, by means whereof the ground
should ly barren, without tillage, and the Nobility, which has no other
riches but of the glebe and soil can no longer follow and serve him, nor the
people of the country, or husbandman the very forge of all commodities of the
kingdom, succor him any longer.

Ye then of the Nobility (if there be any of this quality who will against
the deuoir of his profession wear the skarfe of the League in steed of our
white color of the flowers de Luce of France) what honor think you to leave
to your children, to say that you have fostered and nourished this mostrous
Hydra the league, which has brought forth unto us and our children so many
mischiefs and miseries. See you that you stop up the light and brightness of
your races under the sinders of your rebellion? Take ye, take ye the color of
your brethren, and permit not that your noble race remain vilanized, stained
and spotted with treason towads your selves, and toward you country.

And you good people whose prosperity is so much different from that in which
our deceased kings and fathers left you, behold the surface of our poor
country aunciently adorned with your goodly buildings (I cannot speak this
without tears) now desert, rugged and without tillage. Where is this liberty
promised you by the league? Alas! (As said, I think Theophrastus' to the
Greeks.) (They have put in too much vinegre,) where is this abolition of
taxes? Alas; they are six fold as many as they were before. Where is this
restablishment of religion? Alas they have beaten down to the ground and
profaned your churches; the priests themselves taking arms have run into a
thousand villainies. Consider that there is in France neither justice nor
publik force, but from your king, which may sauegard ye from injury. Perceive
ye not how you empouerish your selves daly, and that these hunger-starued
governors whose rebellion ye nourish, will stifle you one of these days to
have your blood, will flea you to have your skins, seeing that amongst them the
richest has naught to live upon, if it be not upon your substance, nor any
commodity, which they forge not already upon your battered Anuile. Live, live
under your king, and under his laws, chase far from you these
hireling-preachers of sedition, this miserable fierers and destroyers of our
country: it is not religion but rebellion they preach: away with them. The
Duke de Maine acknowledges already that he has been deceived and abused by
them. All the world knows it: and there is hope, seeing that the Crown (as
said Titus Vespatians son, called for his virtue and goodness the delight and
darling of the world) is a gift of God, bestowed on him whom he pleases by
his only hand and pure will, that the said Duke of Maine will reknowledge his
Majesty for his King, and will repose more confidence in him than in any other
prince living. Well he knows that the Maximees of Spain are first to make a
hand of them, who aid them in the Conquest of their provinces, saying justly
that they cannot credit the faith of them who have failed in that which they
owe to their own country: and when all that were not so, never was there man
who followed them but is dead miserably. The said Duke of Maine, has done but
too much for his part, when he had had place but to revenge the death of his
brethren whereunto K. Henry the 4. was never consenting. If he pass further, he
remaneth for ever most culpable and blameworthy. Let him not then let slip this
good occasion, whilst the time is that he may come in and yield himself to his
king with honor, making show of the common pretext of religion, and of no other
thing to have moved him to take arms, and let him call to mind how he has
to deal with a king of France who shall never be without successor to revenge
all injuries: that his majesty may one day come to an accord with the K. of
Spain, and so then by that mean this Duke may remain oppressed and of small
esteem. Let him confess that every Christian ought to level only at the
salvation of his soul, the which he can never obtain at Gods hands, nor any
good for his children, but in restoring unto his king that which he detained
unjustly from his kingdom, against the duty of a subtect, a vassal and an
officer to the crown.

FINIS.
A COPY OF SPECIAL RECORD, OF THE Homage done by Philip Archduke of Austria,
Earl of Flanders, etc. to the most Christian King of France, Jews the twelft
of that name, in the year 1499.
John Amys, Notary, and Secretary to the King our Sovereign. For so much as it
has pleased the Noble and puissant L. Monsieur Guy of Rochefort Knight, Lord
of Pleuuot, and of Labergemant, Chancellor of France, as well of his favor
to prefer me, as to command and inioyne me to take a copy of the receipte
of an Homage done to the King our gracious Lord, in his person, by the most
high and most puissant Prince, the Lord Philip, son to the King of Romans,
Archduke of Austria, Earl of Flanders, of Artois, and of Charrolois, the fifth
at day of July, 1499. the said Lord Chancellor being then in the City of
Arras, in the Bishops palace: And for that such great acts, and ceremonies,
which have bin used and observed therein to the honor, exaltation, profit, and
advantage of the King and his Crown, are worthy of perpetual memory: I have
been so bold at his instance, to couch in writing, all that I could see and
understand, touching this present act and business, and especially since the
nine and twenty of June last past, until the fifth of July, next ensuing. And
to come to the matter, certain and true it is, that the Lord Chancellor
departed the same day, at after dinner, from Dourlent in the country of
Picardy, to go for the City of Arras, where he arrived before night, being
all the way accompanied with the Lords de Rauestain, and de la Gruture, with
Charles de la Vernada, Knight of the same place, Master Christopher de Cremona,
Counselors of state and ordinary Masters of Requests of the Kings house,
Master Ralfe de Launoy Baily of Amiens, Master Francis d'Estain, Hugh de
Baigel, Almaury de Quinqui ville, Nicholas de Foix, Philip d'Estas, Richard
Nepueu, Peter de la Vernada, common Counselors: Mace Toustain, the Kings
Proctor general in his Privy Counsel, John Bourdelot, the Kings Proctor
general in his Court of Parliament at Paris: Antony le Viste, Register of the
Chauncery of France: Dreux Bude, John de Villebresme, Ralfe Guyot, Philip
Maillart, Notaries and Secretaries to his Majesty and to me. And as the Lord
Chauncellor came with this train within a mile and half of the City of
Arras, riding in gallant order, having before him the Gentleman Usher of the
privy Council, carrying upon his shoulder in open sight his mace, graven and
imbossed with the Kings Arms: after the Gentleman Usher followed next the
Clarke of the Signet, who carried the Scale, as the use is, when the Lord
Chauncellor rides his circuits into the Country: on either side of this
Clarke of the Signet, marched one of the two kings of Arms of our Lord the
King, enrobed with their coats of Arms, to wit, Mont-ioye, the chief king of
Arms of France, and Normandy: here came to meet the Lord Chancellor, the
Bishop of Cambray, Thomas de Pleures, Knight, Chancellor to the Archduke, the
Lord Earl of Nassau, the Lord of Fiennes, and diverse others both Knights
and Squiers, most of them of the Archdukes Council. The Bishop addressing
himself toward the Chancellor, signified unto him; that the Lords of his
company were sent by the Archduke his Master, to inform him, that the said
Lord Archduke was most joyful of his ariuall, and likewise of that, of all
the other Lords in train with him, and that they were all the welco^mest men
that might be, with other fair speeches, gentle greetings, and sweet
salutations: all this nobility doing great reverence and honor to the L.
Chancellor, and giving princely entertainment to all the Nobles of his troop:
for the which the L. Chancellor returned most honorable thanks to the
Archduke, and to the other Lords, who were come thither in his behalf. And
soon after they on both sides took their way to go unto the City. As the
whole company arrived at the entrance of the Suburbs, the Chancellor was met
by the Archduke himself, who to receive him the more honorably, and to meet
him by the way, was departed on horseback from the Abbey of Saint Vas, in the
City of Arras, and had passed clean through the greatest street thereof.
And so soon as the Archduke, accompanied with a great number both of Knights
of his order, with Squiers and other officers of his household, who were
marshalled on every side, to make way and place for the Chancellor, and those
of his train to pass, perceived the Chancellor, he put his hand to his
hatte, and uncovering his head, hastened on his Mule to march toward the Lord
Chancellor, whom he embraced, holding still his hat in hand, and there gave
him the gentle welcome: demanding him in this manner, How does my Lord the
King? To whom the Chancellor answered, very well God be thanked, as he
intended to declare unto him more amply. The like great entertainment gave
this Archduke to the Lords of Rauestain and la Gruture, saluting graciously
the Masters of Requests, and the other of the Kings Counsel, who were there
present. After many friendly speeches and countenances past, between the
Archduke, the Chancellor, and the Lord Rauestain, the Archduke holding still
his hatte in his hand, and would not be covered, except the Chancellor would
also put on: the Archduke and the Chancellor road on their way, to enter into
the City, the Chancellor still holding the right hand, and the Gentleman
Usher to the Kings Council, bearing up his mace in open sight, and the Clarke
of the Signet, having the Kings seal upon his back, as the custom is, when
the Chancellor rides thorough the Kingdom, and the two Kings of Arms in
their order, nor was there any other there, on the behalf of the Archduke or
Chancellor: which thing was, and has been greatly noted, as well by the
Archdukes people and officers, as by the other Cittisens and Country, whereof
there was no small number, both within the City and without, thither flocked
to behold this their magnificent entrance. Thus the Archduke conducted along
the Lord Chancellor still parling unto him, uncovering his head oftentimes,
and by no means would not put on again, except the Chancellor were covered as
soon as he: and thus did he bring him along, unto the very porch of the
cloister of the great Church: whence the Archduke would by all force carry him
into the Bishops Palace, in the which the Lord Chancellor has always been
lodged, nor could the entreaties and requests which the Chancellor made unto
him to content himself, that he had done so much unto him for the honor of
his King prevail any thing at all. Upon these enterparlies, the Archduke
departing from the Chancellor, withdrew himself into the City of Arras, to
his lodging in Saint Vas his Abbey: and the Lord Chancellor into the Bishops
palace, accompanied with the Earl of Nassau, and other great personages of
the Archdukes house: and afterward every one of the Chancellors train retired
themselves into such lodgings as the herbingers had appointed for them. After
many goings and commings to and fro, which by the Lord Bishop Thomas de
Pleures, the County Nassau, the Lord of Mont-labais, and other of the
Archdukes officers; during all the days of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday following, being the first, second, third, and fourth, of July, were
made to the Chancellor into his lodging, to treat and conclude upon some
points and articles propounded by the Kings Proctor general in his Court of
Parliament. The said matters coming to an issue, upon thursdaye request was
made by the Archdukes officers to the Lord Chancellor, that he would prepare
himself to receive the Homage which the said Archduke was bound to do to the
King, by reason of his Peere-dome and Earldom of Flanders, and likewise for
his Countries of Artois and Charrolois, and other territories held of the King
our Sovereign because of his Crown: and for this purpose to assign a day
and hour to the Archduke, to the end he might come to him to do his Homage.
To whom the Chauncellor gave this answer: that upon the morrow which was
Friday, and the fifth day of the month, were it about nine or ten a clock in
the morning he should be ready to take it: the which both day and hour
were accepted by those the Archdukes officers. For this purpose the Lord
Chauncellor gave commandment to provide and set in order a place in the
second great hall of his lodging, the which should be hanged round about with
rich Tapistries, and therein another little place to be mounted higher then the
rest by two steps, where should be set a chair of estate, costly trimmed,
and covered with flower de luces every where embrodered in gold, on the which
he would be seated, during the doing of this Homage: and gave them the
words which were to be pronounced touching this Homage, which was all done
accordingly. Friday being come, about the hour of ten a clock in the morning,
the Chancellor being in his chamber accompanied with the Masters of Requests
of the Kings house, those of his Counsel, the Baylie of Amiens, and all the
rest above named, word was brought him by Master Thomas de Pleures, and by
others the Archdukes officers, how the Archduke was departed from his lodging,
and was coming toward him to do his Homage, and that he should dispose and
seat himself in place convenient, to receive the same. To whom the
Chauncellor replied, that so soon as he should appear in the place
appointed for the receite thereof, he was and would be ready. Two several
times beside this, came there other his officers, both of his Chamberlains and
Secretaries, to tell him the first time how the Archduke was arrived, in the
first hall, which joined to the second, albeit the Chancellor moved not a whit
therefore. And at the second time, for that those officers affirmed their Lord
the Archduke was entered into the second hall, as true it was, and also for
that the Lord de la Gruture, and Master Robert de Framezelles the Kings
Chamberlain, who with the Lord de Rauestain, had accompanied the Archduke
from his lodging into the said second great hall, came to certify the
Chancellor how the Archduke was already in the proper place, appointed and
provided for the said Homage: then the Chancellor attyred in a robe of Crymson
Velvet, and with his hat on his head came only forth of his chamber, which
joined close to the great hall, in manner as follows: You must then know,
the Lord Chancellor had before him the Gentleman Usher of the privy Counsel,
carrying his Mace aloft in open sight, who so soon as he was come forth of
the Chamber, and entered into the second great hall, because therein was
already so great a number of people thronging one on another, as well of the
Archdukes officers as of others, that a man could hardly turn himself,
began with a loud voice to cry out in these words three or four times:
Room, Room, make Room my masters, give place there before. After the said
Usher marched the two kings of Arms of our King, enrobed with our Kings
coats of Arms: then followed the Chancellor, and after him the Masters of
Requests of the privy Counsel, and then the Notaries and Secretaries of the
King our Lord with whom I was. And for that the Lord Chancellor gave me
command before his departure out of his chamber, that I should take up some
place fit to behold the said Homage, and to hear as well the words of him,
as of the Archduke, which should be uttered and spoken by them both, and to set
down the same in writing, as I might best devise, I was not negligent to do
it. And you must know as the Chancellor approached the chair, wherein he was
to sit down, the Archduke, who stood hard by it, attending the coming of
the said Lord Chancellor, put off his bonnet incontinent, and thus bespake
the Chancellor: My Lord, GOD give you good morrow, and with that bowed his
head very low: but the Chancellor without speaking any word at all, put only
his hand to his hat he had on his head, not doing it off at all, then sat him
down in his chair, and forthwith one of the kings of Arms, as order was
given him b the Chauncellor, cried with a loud voice three times: Peace,
Silence, keep Silence there. After this, the Archduke bare headed presented
himself to the Lord Chancellor to do his Homage, saying: My Lord, I am come
to you to do the Homage which I am bound to do to my Lord the King, touching
my Peere-dome and Countries of Flanders, Artois, and Charrolois, the which I
hold of my Lord the King, by the right of his Crown. Then the Lord
Chancellor sitting in his chair, his hat upon his head, demanded him whether
he had any girdle, dagger, or other weapon: to whom the Archduke lifting up
the laps of his cote, which was vngirded, replied, he had none. So soon as
he had so said, the Chauncellor put both his two hands between his own, and
holding them so fast joined together, the Archduke would have bowed himself
down, making show to fall on his knees, which the Chauncellor would not
permit him to do: but in lifting him up again by his two hands, which he held
fast as we said before, spoke these words: Your good will suffiseth. Then
the Chauncellor began with him in this manner, holding still his hands fast
closed within his, the said Archduke standing all this while bare headed, and
forcing himself to fall upon his knees: You become the vassal of the King your
Soueraign Lord, and you do him faith and liege Homage, by reason of your
Peere-dome and Earldom of Flanders, and also of the Earledomes of Arthois,
and of Charrolois, and of all other the lands which you hold, which are of
his demaynes and held of the King in right of his Crown: you promise to serve
him until death inclusiuely toward and against all those who may live and
dye, excepting none: to procure his good, and to avoid his hurt, and to carry
and acquire your self toward him, as toward your Sovereign Lord. Whereunto
the Archduke made this answer: By my faith so I promise, and so will I
perform it. This done and said, the Lord Chancellor used these words unto
him: And I receive you, excepting the right of the King in other things, and
others in all. Afterward he turned his cheek to him, on the which the Lord
Chauncellor kissed him. When the Archduke requested and demanded at the
Chancellors hands letters testimonial of the receite of the said homage,
which the Chancellor commanded me to dispatch and give him. Then the Chancellor
rose up from his chair, and uncovering his head, did his reverence to the
Archduke with these terms. My Lord I did even now supply the office of a
King, representing his person, and at this present I am but Guy of Rochefort,
your most humble servant, always ready to serve you, toward the King my
Sovereign Lord and Master, in whatsoever it shall please you to command me:
whereof the Archduke gave him many hearty thanks, with these courteous words: my
Lord Chancellor I thank you, and beseech you evermore that you will in all
mine affairs toward my Lord the King, think upon me and have me in
remembrance.

Witness my manual seal put hereunto the first day of August. 1499. Sic
Signatum. AMYS.

A true Copy taken forth of the Royal Records, registered in the Court of
Parliament of Paris, thus signed: DV TJLLEL.

TO THE WORTHY, AND FAVOROR OF ALL VERTVES, MASTER RICHARD SONDS, SON and
heir to the right Worshipful, Michael Sondes Esquier.
SIr the duty I owe unto you, proceeding of so many and infinite curtisies, in
all bountiful measure received, as well in your foreign travails, as in your
home abode, have of long time been a continual spur to my weak forces; to
find some defense against that threatening monster ingratitude; and finding
wayward fortune still waspishe in her wonted manner, even loath to afford me a
good look: am constrained, lest I should be of you and the world condemned,
to take this poor occasion to show mine affectionate mind, not meaning thereby
to make this a show of a satisfaction for so great a debt, but only in part in
cut off the consuming interest, and to confess unto you in the witness of
the world a further duty to be accomplished. And knowing in part the
earnest desire you have always had; to see into foreign States, and acquaint
your self with the diverse manners of nations. I finding here a wandering
stranger by chance, whom I perceived fit to inform you of somewhat worthy the
inquiry: having now procured him a poor English weed, I am bold to commend
him unto you, hoping you will not deny him your friendly patronage, nor me your
wonted favor.

Yours wholly devoted, Richard Sergier.


