A NEW LACHRYMENTALL AND FUNERAL ELEGY:

OR, A DISTILLATION OF GREAT BRITTAINE'S TEARS, SHED for the unexpected and
sudden death of the tres-vertuous and most glorious Prince LODOVVICKE, Duke of
Richmond and Lenox.

Who departed this transitory life, at his Chamber in White Hall, on Monday
morning, being the 16. day of February 1624. being the same day appointed and
intended by him to have attended and gone with our Sovereign Lord, King JAMES;
Prince CHARLES his Highness, and other the Nobility, in Robes of Scarlet, to
the Honorable House of Parliament, which by reason of his death, was then put
off till the 19. day of February following.

Printed at London by B. Alsop, dwelling at the Sign of the Dolphin in
Distaffe Lane. 1624

SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MVNDI.
skeleton

TO THE MOST GRACIOUS FRANCIS DVCHESSE DOVVAGER OF RICHMOND and LENOX, etc.
NOble Princess, when you consider the several dignities of the world, in one
man so eminent, and near and dear a Friend unto you, it cannot but work a
deep impression in your mind, of so great a loss befallen you, whom the
world does take notice of, and my Elegy does express: but not to make you
mourn further; satis sufficit. So on the other side, considering the frailty
of life in Princes, as well as others, I could endeavor to comfort you with the
after-ioyes of his mortality, to stay your grief, and tears, you being wise,
and knowing that our chief dependancy must not be in mortal men, whose life
and means of life is but transitory, as we our selves, and all things that we
possess be, and therefore must put our trust and confidence in the Jmmortall
God, and Christ his Son, who is the wiper away of all tears, and the true
and everlasting Husband of his Spouse, the Church, and so by consequence, of
you, a Virtuous and Religious Duchess: who by place, person, and parts,
deserves the Antiquity and pre-eminence of many, which may stir up some
comfort in you. The sympathy of his noble death and your tender
heart-grieuing, moves me to condole, and to be partaker with you both in heart
and Pen, for so high and just a Steward to God and King; who as here, so in
Heaven, Did enter into his Masters Joy; the want of which Joy in us, should
make us more mourn, then his present death, since death to all is a debt which
of necessity must be paid, and necessity has no law to relieve it self by
too much grief, but wisely to make of such necessity a Virtue by a holy
contentation of Gods will: Let this suffice, to content you with patience as
Job, and with his Hearse, rehearse not your griefs, but as gracious Francis,
infranchise your self with truest comforts, and let Honor be honorably
solemnized, as Rebecca did good Isaac, of which, J doubt not of your large and
liberal love therein, since you may conceive another comfort infolded within
your sorrows, by the noble and worthy assembly of Parliament, that attends
their loves to his Funeral, as they intended his love, if God had so
appointed, to the Parliament. J have writ this according to the promise made to
your Grace by a worthy friend of mine, not as a professed Poet, but as a
confessed servant to your love, which pick not my Conceits from the fruit of
other men's labors, in Funeral Elegies, and get the start of presentation to
your Highness, and the worlds view: yet not a better representation of sincere
love to the Noble Duke departed, and your living Graces, then I by these few
lines hereafter shall express unto you, If not in Art, yet in heart. Thus
craving your pardon and acceptance:

From him which is the true wel-wisher of all comfort and happiness to your
Grace: SAMVEL TAILBOYS.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE ESME DVKE OF LENOX, etc. EARL OF MARCH and DARNLEY,
etc. LORD OF AVBIGNY, TERBOLTON and METHVEN, BARON OF SETTRINGTON, etc.
AND, TO THE MOST PIOUS PRINCESS KATHERINE, HIS GRACIOUS DVCHESSE, etc.
WHereas noble Duke and Duchess, I like a Funeral soldier, march my thoughts
and Muses toward you, as not against your entire and friendly bond of amity
and love you ever bare to your deceased brother; and now living sister, the
Prince and Princess of Richmond and Lenox, but to join my defense and love
with yours against the Common Adversary of ours, which is too much lamentation
and sorrow, since the true March of Piety, teaches all: That death is an
advantage to the godly, both to the living and the dead; to the dead, I know
you doubt not of: to the living, Solomon the wise says, Better it is to be in
the house of Mourning, then in the house of Feasting, for the wise do lay it
to their hearts, and the God of wisdom has directed his honors so unto you,
as your religious thoughts, may March to God with your name; and I am bold in
this Month of March to present the Springing thoughts of comfort to you and
your Noble Posterity, which to both your graces, and to the springing hopeful
Plants of your loins. I pray and wish all heavenly and earthly prosperity, to
remain to you and yours for ever.

Your Graces devoted SAMVEL TAILBOYS.

To the Noble and Generous Reader.
I Shall not need to incite you, or cite to you the Council of S. Paul, To
mourn with them that mourn, and rejoice with them that rejoice, though I
shall by my Elegy give you cause for both in one Object, a worthy Prince, and
Duke: for I know you are ready to Minister it unto your self in the love of
him who was so beloved, and especially now to mourn for his loss, whose worth
and parts, had so many deserved titles of Honor, and was so gracious and good
a member, for the good of all Britain, both to Church and Commonwealth. In
which respect, I commend my love to your good liking, and acceptance of this
after Elegy.

S. T.

AN ELEGY TO THE WELL-DESERVING HONOR OF THAT PIOUS AND Glorious Prince
deceased, LODOVVICKE STEWARD, Late Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Earl of
Newcastle and Darneley, etc. Lord of Torbolton and Methuen, etc. Baron of
Settrington, etc. Knight of the Noble Oraer of the Garter, Lord high Admiral,
and Great Chamberlain of Scotland, Lord high Steward to the KINGS most
excellent Majesty's most Honorable Household, Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council for
England and Scotland.
How sudden was the loss of Noble Grace,
In LOD'VVICKE high, brought low in a short space:
Like French Flower,
One day flourishing like the FLOVVER DE LVCE,
Next vanishing, like Flower of no use.
His Crest a Bull spitting fire.
One day seems strong as Bull, his Crossed of Arms;
Next day knocked down by cruel Death his harms?
O cruel Death! to murder such a worth,
Of highest price with God and Man, set forth,
The righteous men God takes from ill to come,
To possess Joy, though grief may fall to some,
^lowicke in ^nglish.
As is to me and all his friends a cross,
When I and they do see so great a loss.
Great LOD-O-VVICKE his weeks through all the year,
In care and love to Britain did appear,
Grave, wise, just, true, a mirror of mankind
In Virtues goodness, which flowed in his mind,
For public good, and for his private fate,
Did load each week with love and lordly state.
^udouicus la^ne.
LVDOVICVS could say I play with strength,
His recreations comely at Bow length,
And shot his arrows long from arrow-head,
With strength, with skill, til dart of death struck dead:
He like a Jonathan that used his skill,
Compared ^o Jonathan, David's true friend.
To prosper David from the wickeds will
Of Saul's abroad that secretly does dart
To wrong the life of truth, in our Kings heart,
Who ever yet with Harp of Peace has played,
To please such Saul's, their rigor to have laid,
From cruel wrongs of Country and of blood,
Palatinate.
So near him wronged by Saul's, that is not good,
This Jonathan, for such cared not at all,
Though they were Kings as cruel as was Saul,
But freely, friendly, thus his life and days,
Spent in love of s King, wife, and friends always.
Mourn Heavens for one so high and true to King:
Mourn Earth for him whose praise on earth did ring:
Mourn Britains all for Peer of noble fame,
Whose true respect to you and truth did frame:
Drop Eyes and Pen, and mourn with them that mou^rne
Royal blood
For loss of Richmonds Duke so highly borne,
Yet borne to die, and dies to live for ever,
So as his worth and praise to die will never.
Whose royal blood to King, though borne in France,
And by Kings love in Scotland had substance,
Of three languages.
Of honors due as his deserts brought forth,
Till Britains glory brought him of more worth:
All three their Language from each place he had,
Hon'ring this Land, as we of him were glad,
So comely, Courtly bred of French we find,
Indu'd by birth by Arms and Language kind,
And now has left his names Integrity
Unto a brother of the same sincerity,
The new Earl March Duke of Lenox.
Earl March now Duke transporteth so his name,
As earth and heavens do glory in their fame,
Being so like of Nature, Grace, and parts,
Deserves like love and honor from all hearts,
GOD.
The Heaun'ly Steward which commands Kings,
Lodowicke Steward, Lord high Steward,
And calls all his Stewards to reck'nings,
In life and death to him all must account,
For things here done what ere it does amount.
Our Steward high whose life and love was just,
That high and low did faithfully him trust,
Is now, from Stewardship of Name and Place,
Called to God for a more higher grace,
Of honors due, Princes Co^onet.
Crowned so in Angels sight;
Though Natures grace, Death showed his mortal spite,
So suddenly to shorten his sweet day,
In worldly Stage, where all our lives are Plays,
Whose Scene has end, in better Joys to rest,
My joy's for him, that he is ever blessed.
Then Noble Duchess, Francis Duchess.
grieve not for your cross,
Beare't patiently, though it be heavy loss;
That by the trial of your patience,
You being Gods, his love yields recompense
To Faith, to Grace, by King, by Prince and Friends,
All ioynes in one, and Grace and Honor lends:
Some Natures grief cannot well patience bear,
But Women's ornament pulls off and tear,
Which should not be, but for to wipe Christ's feet,
When tears do wash them by Repentance meet:
Ye liquid eyes mourn not for him in dust,
His Soul's in Heaven, to joy therefore ye must.
So wisely now Steward your own griefs care,
As they with grief breed not your minds despair.
Duke, Rich-mon^^.
Though Richmonds riches of this world is gone,
With him, heavenly riches remains alone,
With Highness, Greatness, and true beauty there,
Although next Christ, he left his beauty here.
A Princess high, noble, good, and virtuous,
A Duchess wise, of comely grace, and beauteous:
Yet now his beauty does with Angels sing,
As rich in love still to his Dove and King,
And shines above the Sun in brightest glory,
As member fit for Gods eternal Story,
Old Duke of Le-nox.
LENOX departed consters Night of life,
A sudden darkness made to King and Wife,
That shall never see his day of life again,
Till they to him shall go for such like gain:
Earl of New Castle,
For he (as Earl) has early got the hold
Of a New Castle strong, where he is bold
Against sin, and Satan, sickness, grief, and smart,
By Divine power resists them all apart:
Together bent, they cannot him withstand,
New-Castles force so high on Mount does stand,
Lord of Scotland.
And he as Lord has one which is above him,
As he was Lord, so many were below him.
All his Baronies and his Lordships place,
His titles great have now far greater grace;
Those showed desert, commending Lenox love
To Sovereign Grace, whose merits well did prove,
And found in Scotland and in England to,
Where he such love and honor obtained so,
In number six in one, Had titles 12.
and six in other,
If any Lord deserves it, it is his Brother.
Knight of Garter.
With whom for Wisdoms love I do here Quarter,
To gain the George, and Englands Noble Garter
To wear; with HONI SOIT QVI MAL'Y PENSE,
Since name and fame does carry the like Sense,
Of Steward, and Duke, Earl, Lord, and Baron,
Though he some places had on the Maron,
Of Scotlands Admiral and Chamberly'n,
Lord. Admiral and Chamber^ain of Scotland.
Which our King JAMES did place him both therein.
And now (as Admiral) floates above the Sea
Of stormy waves, and of the biting flea,
I mean of Death, whose Chambers are of earth,
And bites us here to drink our blood and breath:
All this and more to speak I might be teller
Of his true praise as Privy Counselor,
Who was so loved in Country, City, Court,
That where he came he had a good report,
Of high and low, Kings privy Counceller ^f England ^r Scotland.
all wished (his life might last)
To see him sit in Parliament, and graced,
For good of King, his Country high and small,
Roab'd with Skarlet, as Nobles, so had all.
^he Parlia^ent did re^yce him.
In Parliament House appointed was his place,
His time and day was come for public grace.
The Commons they came, and thought to greet him,
The Peers and Nobles there thought to meet him;
The Bishops ready to offer Incense sweet,
For him and all to offer Prayers meet;
But he himself was turned the Sacrifice,
And turned them all to sorrows weeping eyes,
Both King, and Prince, our Commons and our State,
Did stay, as though they came his Hearse to wait,
Or were so summoned here to meet his death,
That ouer-ioy'd this day and gave up breath,
Like Simeon, Like Symeon that hoped for Englands good thereby.
Lord let thy servant part,
Now I have seen this day which joy'd my heart,
Christ's love to me and land, which robbed his on back,
For Parliament in Heaven where is no lack
Of Honor, Beauty, Riches, and true Fame,
Since he is Christ's, and Christ is his by name,
Where Grace, and Names, and Honors all in one,
Agrees with Saints though we like Saints do moan,
And mourn in all degrees following Hearse,
With Trumpets sound and Heralds to rehearse.
All which is said, may be so from his Name,
Construed true from's Latin Anagram:
LVDOVICVS STVARTTE. est, VIRTVTE DVCTO SALVS.
Such Joys the godly do in death attain,
That death's no loss, but a Celestial gain;
For dying in the Lord, they dying live,
And for their life he does a better give.
Here Is for your comfort then, he lived in fear
Of God and Heaven, and now he lives there.
FJNJS.

