IETHROES COUNCIL TO MOSES: OR, A DIRECTION FOR MAGISTRATES. A Sermon preached
at St. Saviors in Southwarke. March 5. 1621. Before the Honorable Judges by
that Reverent Divine THOMAS SVTTON Dr. in Divinity.

LEVIT. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty; but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT DVCE, Knight Barronet, Lord Major of the
City of LONDON: and to the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs and Aldermen of the
same; W. I. P. wishes increase of knowledge and grace in Christ here, that you
may reign with him hereafter in glory.
HAVING a Sermon come to my hands, of the Counsel of Iethro given to Moses the
servant of the Lord, how he might with more ease to himself and the people
decide all controversies; as it was preached before the Judges in Southwarke,
by that Reverend and learned Divine, Mr. Dr. Sutton, late Preacher at Saviors:
The which Sermon gives direction, not only to Judges, but also to all
Magistrates in the Land, how to carry themselves in their several places
against all offenders, and betwixt man and man: It being a subject of so
necessary a use; it is thought meet to publish it in these evil times,
because the seat of Justice is now had in much contempt by many who live as if
there were no God in heaven to behold their wickedness, nor Magistrate on
earth to punish their horrible crimes. And seeking out for a Patron, I thought
fit to dedicate it to your Honor, and Worships: To your Honor, who in your
Shreivalty showed your great zeal and love to the Gospel of Christ, that upon
a discovery of the practices of Jesuits and Priests, rose at midnight to
execute the warrant of Sir Robert Nanton, then Secretary to King James of most
blessed memory; where was taken seventeene Altars for their Popish Mass, ten
Copes, twelve or thirteen Surplices, above ten thousand Popish books, besides
several packets of Letters, partly come from Bruxels, and going to Bruxels,
etc. And seeing the Lord has advanced your Honor into the chair of Moses,
under our gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, the Lord give you courage and
zeal, against all Popish superstitition and Idolatry: requesting you that you
would be pleased to peruse the short directions in it: That so you may with the
rest of your Right Worshipful Brethren, the better direct all and several
Officers in their several places, under you in your several Wards; that they
also may be men of courage, fearing God. To that end I beseech the Lord of
heaven, who directed his servant Moses, so to direct your hearts, that you may
have both the courage and zeal of Moses, against all idolatrous Priests and
Jesuits that swarm in the Land, whose treacherous practices this worthy
Sermon does at large discover: and so put them out of all hope of gaining any
Proselites here among you. Thus daily praying unto the Lord on your behalf, I
humbly take my leave.

Your Honors, and Worships, to be commanded in the Lord Jesus: W. I. P.

Dr. SVTTONS Prayer.
OH most gracious and most glorious God, before whom the Sun and the Moon
become as darkness, the blessed Angels stand amassed, and the glorious
Cherubims are glad that they may cover and hide their faces, as not daring to
behold that incomprehensible greatness, and that infinite goodness which thou
art; with what confidence shall we forlorn sinners be ever once able to
appear before thy all seeing providence, that terrible and angry countenance,
that sinne-revenging justice of thine, which is so fierce and terrible, that it
will shake the heavens, melt the mountains, dry up the seas, and make the
tallest Cedars in Lebanon to tremble: Good Lord, where shall we hide our selves
from thy presence; masses of corruption, mountains of sin, dead and dry
trees, fit fuel for thy fierce wrath to work upon: if we should climb up
into heaven to hide us from thee, thou art there, or go down into the bottom
and depth of hell, thou art there also; or take the wings of the morn, and fly
to the utmost part of the seas even there also will thy allseing eye behold us,
and thy right hand will quickly visit and find us out: we will therefore here
dissolve and melt our selves into a flood and fountain of many tears,
bewailing and bemoaning our woeful and miserable estate; for albeit by reason
of that soul Chaos, and stain of natural corruption and original sin, we
have deserved long since to have had the sweet issue of all thy good blessings
to be stopped and dried up, thy mild and gentle corrections to be turned into
the sudden execution of bloody tortures and fearful judgments upon us even
in this life, and at our departing out of this world to be plunged
everlastingly into a pit of destruction, there to be fried and scorched with
Satan and his Angels for evermore. And yet for all this, O Lord, we have never
ceased to add oil unto this flame, and to blow up the coals of thy fearful
displeasure, through the hot and eager pursuit of many loud crying actual
sins and transgressions; so that from the crown of the head to the sole of
the foot, there is not one place sound or whole within us, but we are all full
of sores and swellings, and botches, full of sin, full of corruption: our
understandings which should have known thee to be our true God, and him whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ our Redeemer, these are blinded and missed with
ignorance and doubting, our affections which should have been good guides to
have directed our feet into the way of peace, they are become swift messengers
of Satan to buffet us; our bodies which should have been sweet Temples for thy
blessed Spirit to dwell and lodge in, they are sinks of sin, and cages of
filthy birds: our eyes O God, are like open windows, and doors to receive
sin, our hearts like common Innes to lodge sin, our heads like skillful
Politicians to contrive sin, our tongues smooth and sweet Orators to plead
for the maintaining of sin, and all our hands like stout soldiers and
courageous Champions to fight in the defense of sin. Thus have we waged and
managed war against thee our God, ever since we were borne, so that now thou
may justly spue us out of thy mouth, cut us off in the midst of our sins,
come amongst us this very present, and bind us hand and foot, and at the end
of these few and miserable days send us all into hell together, that so Satan
might pay us our wages only, whom thus long we have obeyed and served: thus
emptying our selves from all trust and confidence in the arm of flesh, we fly
unto thee O God, the anchor of our hope, and the tower built for our defense,
with many deep sighs and groans from our perplexed consciences and discased
souls, most humbly entreating thee to be gracious and merciful to all our
sins, for they are wondrous great, make it thy glory to pass by and to wink
at them; pour into our souls the oil of thy mercies, supple our hard and dry
hearts with the sweet influence of thy best graces, and cure all our swelling
wounds with the true balm of Gilead; purge (good Lord) and cleanse all the
polluted and infected corners of our hearts, that though at this day our sins
be as old as Adam, as numberless as the stars of heaven, as high as the
tallest Cedars in the forest, Lord pluck them up by the roots, bury them in
everlasting forgetfulness, that they may never stop the issue of thy
blessings, nor draw down upon us the vialls of thy wrath, nor be a wound and
grief to our troubled consciences in this life, or work despair in us at the
end of our days; nor stand up in judgment to be the utter ruin and
condemnation of our souls and bodies at the last day. Good Lord prepare us all
for a better life, fit us all for the kingdom of thy Son Christ Jesus, guide
us all with thy blessed Spirit, tutor us out of thy holy word, humble us by thy
merciful corrections, and by thy fatherly blessings, wed our affections, and
knit our hearts more near unto thee in newness of life, than ever heretofore
they have been: that living as becomes thy obedient children and servants an
holy and a religious remnant of our days, we may by thy grace and mercy be
partakers of a joyful and a comfortable death, and after death of a glorious
resurrection to everlasting life and peace among thy Saints. Neither do we pray
to thee for our selves only, but for all people and Nations of the earth, but
more particularly for the place in which we live, and therein according to our
bounden duty for thy servant and our Sovereign, Charles, by thy special
providence King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the most
true, Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith, and in all causes, and over all
persons within these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions next under thee and
thy Son Christ Jesus supreme Governor, add unto his days, as thou did
unto the days of Hezekiah, that he may enjoy a long and a prosperous reign
over us; and in the mean time remember him in goodness for the good he has
done already to thy Church. Bestow the sweetest of thy blessings upon our
gracious Queen Mary, our hopeful Prince Charles, and the rest of those royal
branches beyond the seas, season them in their young and tender years with thy
fear, that they may be great in thy favor: and if it may stand with thine
eternal Decree, let us never want a holy and a religious man of that house and
line to govern the scepters of these Kingdoms, and to maintain the preaching
of thy glorious Gospel within these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions so
long as the Sun and Moon endures. Bless our King with an honorable,
valiant and a religious Council and Nobility, bless him with a learned,
painful, and a zealous Clergy, by what names or titles soever they be called,
whether they be Archbishops, or Bishops, and all other painful laborers in
this thy Vineyard: bless him with a wise, prudent, and a religious Gentry:
bless him with a peaceable, a loyal and a religious Commonalty, and good God
we beseech thee to shower down thy blessings upon the right hand and upon the
left to them whom it has pleased thee to send to this Congregation, that by
the blessing of thy good Spirit whenever they shall stand on thy Mountain to
deliver a Message from thee, give them good Father, (what will thou give them?)
give them wise and understanding hearts, that they may open to thy people the
wondrous things of thy law; good Father touch their tongues with a coal from
thy holy Altar, that by the blessing of thy holy Spirit they may be able to
work some holiness in the hearts of a sinful and unbeleeving people: and cut
down the head and strength of some sin that remains in us: and to this end
and purpose make them sound in thy Doctrines, terrible in thy threatenings sweet
in thy comforts, powerful and effectual in all thy persuasions; and merciful
Father make thy word like the bow of Jonathan, and like the sword of Saul or
Gideon, that never returned empty from the blood of the slain, and the fat of
the mighty.

Lastly, we come unto thee for our selves again thy most unworthy servants,
that are here assembled in a reverent fear of thy most holy and blessed name,
most humbly entreating thee in Jesus Christ to be gracious and merciful to all
our sins, and to be effectually present with thy blessed Spirit in the midst
of us all, and grant that thy word may drop and distill upon our tender
consciences, like rain upon the mowen grass, and as dew comes down from
heaven to water the earth; take away the scales of ignorance from all blind and
dark understandings, remove far from us all lets and hindrances whereby the
blessed seed of thy word has bin to many and sundry times made unfruitful in
the hearts of sinful and unbelieving people: and to every soul that is
present in thy house this day, or at any other time, grant us all holy
diligence to seek thee, godly wisdom to know thee, and sanctified
understanding to find thee aright; that so thy word may prove the sweet savor
of life unto everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior;
in whose most holy and blessed name we are bold to conclude these our weak and
imperfect prayers in that perfect form of prayer which Christ has taught us,
saying, Our Father, etc.

A DIRECTION FOR MAGISTRATES.
EXODUS 18. Chap. Verse 21. Moreover, provide thou among all the people, men of
courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness, and appoint such
over them to be Rulers over thousands, Rulers over hundreds, Rulers over
fifties, and Rulers over tennes.


THERE are in the body natural three principal members, the liver, the heart,
and the brain, resembling three principal members in the body politic, the
Magistrate, the Physician, and the Divine. The liver is the beginning of
natural faculties, segregates the humors, ingenders alimentall blood, and by
veins sends it into the body of man from noxious humors, whereby it may be
endangered, and prescribes wholesome diet, whereby it may be preserved and kept
in health. The heart is the beginning of vital faculties, generates vital
spirits, sends them into every particular member: Like to this is the Divine,
for he is Principium, though not (...) of generation, nor (...) of Radication,
yet to use the word of the Anatomist, he is Principium (...) of dispensation of
the vital spirits, he takes a man where the Physicians leave him, makes him
of (...) to be (...), of a natural to be a spiritual man, transformes him
from a mere man to be a pure Saint. The brain is the beginning of animal
faculties, chief commander of the body, sits in the highest room, as in her
royal palace, compassed about with the Cranium, the Pericranium, and the two
Meninges, which are like strong Castles and Countermures against foreign
invasion; it has the five external senses as intelligencers, to give notice
what is done abroad, the common sense, he fantasy, the understandings privy
counselors, the memory as register and book of records, yet the brain is not
idle, but busied in tempering the spirits received from the heart, sending them
by nerves into the old body, and thereby giving sense and motion to each part:
And this brain is the fit emblem of a good Magistrate, who as he has forts
and guards, and Counselors, and records, so must he know that he has them
not for his own use, but for the benefit of the body Politic; and therefore
must bestirre himself in tempering the spirits received from the heart, I
mean in making use of spiritual counsels received from the Minister of the
Gospel. Now as the body Natural is in best estate when all these three are
well affected, but very ill at ease if there be a distemper or dyscracie in any
of them; so in the body Politic, if the Physician, the Divine, and the
Magistrate, be faithful in their places, and follow the rule of their books,
there would be no complaining in our streets: But if the Physician instead of
wholesome Physic, minister nothing but hemlocke; the Divine in stead of
wholesome Doctrine broach nothing but heresy and curiosity; the Magistrate
turn justice into wormwood: then is the head sick, and the heart heavy, and
in the Symptoms of death upon the whole body, once more. Of all parts in the
body Natural the brain is most subject unto diseases, and of all parts in the
body Politic the Magistrate most obnoxious to slips and falls. First, because
he has many provocations which others want. Secondly, he wants a benefit which
others have, he is not freely reproved, as others are. Thirdly, because of
those Cubiculares Consiliarij, as Lypsius calls them, Politic. cap. 9. lib.
3. Tineae et Sorices Palatij, these rattes and mothes of the Court that feed
upon other men's wants, live by other men's losses; and as the common soldier,
in Tacitus in Pompeium, Miseria nostra magnus es, grow great by others men's
miseries, who sell their Masters favors, as Zoticus in Lampridius sold the
fair promises of Heliogabolus; and are always ready for their own advantage
to applaud their Masters worst and basest actions.

Hence is it, that Iethro gives this good direction to Moses, the Judges and
Magistrates which thou do appoint must be men of courage, fearing God,
dealing truly, hating covetousness. Which words have in them, 1. A Quis, 2. A
Quos, 3. A Quibus. The Quis is Moses, Sed consulto Domino, and gives this
conclusion, that the ordination of Judges and Magistrates is of God. In the
beginning of time the Lord prescribed to the heavens their courses and motions,
and they observe them; to the Elements he set bounds and limits, and they keep
them; the bees he gave a King, says Elian de hist. animal. lib. 1. cap. 11.
and they obey him; to man he gave laws, and he transgressed them, wrote them
in his heart, and man blotted them out. Again, whenever the Heathen made
laws, they were wont to father them upon some of their gods, thereby to
purchase credit and reverence: When Licurgus made laws for the Lacedaemonians,
he fathered them upon Apollo: Minos for the Cretians, he fathered them upon
Jupiter, Solon, and Draco: For the Athenians, they fathered them upon the
Goddess Minerva, as Diodorus Siculus reports of them. When Numa made laws for
the Romans, he fathered them upon the Goddess Egraecia, as Plut. in the life
of Numa Pompilius reports. When Anacharsis the Scythian Philosopher made laws
for the Scythians, he fathered them upon Zamolxis, as Vives upon Aug. and
Herodotus in his Melpomene have related: but all this could not refrain
wilful man from exorbitancy and manifest riot against God. It is true of him
which the old Lacedaemonians said of the old Athenians, they knew what was to
be done, but did it not; and which the Cimickin Laertius objected to the
Philosophers of Greece, they had good laws, but practiced them not, they made
no more account of laws than Remus in Livie, dec. 1. lib. 1. of bestriding the
walls which Romulus had built, he stood in no more awe than the frogs in the
fable of leaping over the jaws of the lion, when he was couchant and fast
asleep; and therefore did God appoint the Magistrate to put life into this
dead letter, and made him (...), as Aristotle calls him, Ethi. lib. 5. cap. 4.
a living law, that these two, the Law and the Magistrate, the one as a sword,
the other as a soldier to draw it, the one as a sovereign medicine, the other
as a Physician to apply it, the one as a pibble gathered out of the stream,
the other as a skillful David to sling it, might unite the forces to the utter
extirpation of idolatry, the protection of justice, the supporting of sound
religion, the disparaging of sin: and this is the authority they have from
God.

In which point we must with Tully distinguish the power it self. Secondly,
the means of attaining. Thirdly, the manner of execution. The first is
always of God, but not the second nor the third; Potestatem Deus distribuit,
God gives the power. Elationem potentiae malitiam venit, says Gregor. as he is
quoted by the ordinary gloss; If the Magistrate be good, he is set there for
the good of the people, if wicked, he is set there for the sin of the people;
Saul is appointed by God as well as David, Nero as well as Josiah, and Ashur as
well as Moses or Joshua; But the one is stirred up to be the Savior of the
people, as Ehud was, Iud. 3.15. the other as the rod of his wrath, as Ashur
was: Esa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nurses:
Nor from Christ, who commands to give unto Caesar that which is due unto him,
Mat. 22.21. nor from Peter, who bids honor the King, 1. Pet. 2: 27. nor from
Paul, who bids pray for Kings and Magistrates, 1. Tim. 2: 2. nor from Moses,
who commands not to rail upon the Judge, nor speak evil of the ruler of the
people, Ex. 22.28. It is true of them which God said to Samuel concerning the
Jews, when they disliked their present government, they have not cast away
thee, but they have cast away me, that I should not rule over them, 1. Sam.
8.7. The other is the Papist, who denies not temporal authority of our Kings
and Judges, yet ties one of the Magistrates hands, lessens his authority, and
limits him only ad Temporalia, and for spiritual matters, he has no more to
do with them than Vzzah had to touch the Arc, who for his pains was stricken
with death. 2. Sam. 6.7. he dares not deny but Magistrates be gods, for David
should confute him; I have said ye are gods. Psa. 82. but yet say of them as
the Aramite said of the God of Israel, that he was the God of the Mountains,
not of the Valleys, 1. King. 20.28. they be gods and governors of the Laity,
not of the Clergy; For the Council of Constance: Sess. 31. Laicus in clericum
iurisdictionem non habet. The Council of Trent. Sess. 25. Personarum
Ecclesiasticarum immunitas adeo instituitur: Beller. lib: de eler: cap. 28.
clerici non possunt a iudice politico puniri, nec sunt Reges Clericorum
superiores, idque habuit iure divino. The exemption is by a divine right, says
the same Cardinal against Berclay. cap. 34. quite contrary to the order and
course of Scripture, for David had the same power over the high Priests that
Kings have over their subjects, and calls Zadoc the Priest and Nathan the
Prophet his servants, 1 Kings 1. Solomon his son turned Abiathar out of the
Priesthood, that the word of the Lord might be fulfilled which was spoken
against the house of Ely, 1 King 2.27. Which text has so puzzled Bell. writing
against Berclay, that he is glad to confess that in Salomons time Priests
were subject unto Kings: Christus solvit etc. Math: 17, 24, 25. Paul appealed
ad Caesarem, non ad Petrum, and he has warrant, Act. 23.11, when Saint
Chrysostom expounded that of the Apostle Romans 13. speaks thus etc. consonant
to this is Tert: lib. de Idela: cap. 15. and St. Bernard ad Archiepiscopum
Senonensem Epist: 42. Si omnis anima et iam et vestra quis vos accepit ab
vniversitate, si quis tentat excipere conatur decipere. For conclusion note,
only how Bellarmine in this point has contradicted himself in writing
against Barclay, cap. 34. his position is, Clerici exempti sunt non solum
privilegijs Principum, sed jure divino: and yet in his 1 Lib. Ecclesiae de
membris militantis, entitled De Clericis cap. 28. Nullum potest deferri Dei
verbum quo ista Clericorum exceptio confirmetur: Propos. 4. In the first
skirmish he is like to Thrasilius in Anthonies Deipnosoph lib. 12. challenges
every page of Scripture to be their advocate, that if it were possible for
paper and ink to blush, his books would be as red as his Bonnet, and at the
parting he is willing to confess, that there is no express precept of
Scripture for it. I end with the speech of Constantine the great, noted by
Theodoret, lib. 1. cap. 20. when he exiled Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, Si
quis Epispiscoporum in consulto tumultuatur meae authoritati illius audacia
coarcebitur.

If it be Gods prerogative to appoint Magistrates, what may we think of them
that would wring this power from God, and cast it upon him that sits in the
Temple and advances himself above all that is called God, making himself the
King of all other Kings, to whom all Kings and Kingdoms must do homage and
pay tribute, the greatest Monarchs must fall down and kiss the feet of his
Holiness, as they say their books Sacrarum Ceremoniarum, lib. 1. cap. 3.
sect. 2. The Emperor must hold his stirrup when he mounteth, the bridle when
he lights, bear his train when he walks, hold the basin when he washes;
he now acts the same part that the Devil acted, Matthew. 4.9. and takes upon him
as he did to dispose of all the Kingdoms of the earth; and we may say of him
as Irenaeus said of the Devil, Mentitur Diabolus, nam cujus jussu homines
creantur, illius jussu regna constituuntur. Who knows not that Frederick the
first was deprived of his Kingdom by Pope Alexander the third, as Petrus
Iustinianus reports in his Lib. 2. Rerum venatarum: Frederick the 2. by
Innocentius the 4. Leo the 3. called Leo Isauros was by Gregory the 3. first
excommunicate, and then deprived of all his revenues in Italy, because he
commanded that Images should be pulled down in their Churches, as Carrion in 3.
of his Chro. in the life of Leo the 3. That Paul the 2. in the beginning of his
life a Venetian Peddler, as Platina calls him, at the end strangled by the
Devil in the act of Sodomie, as Melancton lib. 5. page 913. deprived George
the King of Bohemia, and stirred up the King of Hungaria to make war against
him, as Omiphrius says of him, and for no other reason but because he favored
the doctrine of John Husse, as Bonfimus Rer: Hung: Dec: 4. lib. 1. Pope Julius
the 2. deprived the King of Castile. Pope Alexander the 6. took away the East
Indies from the true owner, and gave it to the Lusitanians; the West, and gave
it to the Spaniard, that Atabalippa might justly challenge, but all in vain:
Quid monstri esset iste Papa qui sic daret non sua? as Montinaeus de temporali
pontij monarchia, cap. 5. That Pius the 5. as Genebrard, at the year 1569.
took away this Kingdom from the late Queen, and gave it to Philip King of
Spain. That Sixtus the 5. deprived Henry the 3. of France, first of his
Kingdom, and then of his life: I omit the wrongs to Henry the 2. they are
noted by Matthew Paris at the year 1170. to have been so shameful, that
Matchaivell himself in the Lib. 1. Hist. Florent. seems to scorn him for it.
Rex his flagellis tergum subjecit, quorum hodie puderit quemlibet privatum. And
when King John complained, Romany artibus emunxi Anglos argento: Pope
Innocentius the third took away his Kingdom, and gave it to Philip of France,
as Matthew Paris at the year 215. I marvel not that the Pope would feign have
footing in England, which Innocentius the 4. called Hortum delitiarum, puteum
vero inexhaustum. Who would not desire to have such a garden, who would not
wish such a well as that? The Poets feign, that the River Arethusa being
suddenly swallowed up into the ground, runs quite through the sea, and rises
again in Cicily. But without feigning, from England as from a well has sprung
golden rivers, which being suddenly swallowed up did run through the sea, and
rise again at Rome in the Popes Exchequer. But I marvel why Priests and
Jesuits will be his Factours, whom he uses as a fisher uses little fishes
to catch great ones, he fisheth with Priests and Jesuits as baits to catch
Kings and Princes, and Kingdoms. I remember a fable of the Ape, seeing a
Chestnut in the fire, and knowing not how to get it, spied a Spaniell by the
fireside, and suddenly caught his foot to take out the chestnut: wherein these
men may see their faces in a homely glass. The golden Supremacy is the
chestnut, perils and dangers the fire; the Pope loath his own fingers, uses
them as the Spaniells foot to scrape forth the chestnut: little cares he how
they be scorched, so he be in hope to obtain his desire; and though many of
them have burnt both their hands and hearts, yet blessed be God he mist the
chestnut. We have heard the roaring of his Bulls, but they have not hurt us,
they have been like the shows of Semiramis the Astrian Queen, when she
warred against the King of India, which seemed afar off to be Elephants and
Dromedaries, but being examined were nothing else but hides of oxen stuffed with
straw; such have been all Popish machinations against us. They have plotted,
but God has prevented them, laid snares, but God has broken them; attended
mischief, but God has confounded them: Nati natorum and qui nascentur ab
illis, the children that are yet unborne have continual cause to remember what
the Lord has done for us; let our tongues cleave unto the roof of our
mouths, let the Sun deny us his light, the heavens their influence, the
earth her fruits, if we forget to give God thanks, and to say as Psalm. 124.
If the Lord had not been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick, when
their wrath was kindled against us, etc. and this I pass over and come to a
two fold duty. The one concerns our duty to the Magistrate, the other, the
Magistrates duty toward God.

Our duty to you is reverence and honor Aristotle: and Herodotus in Euterpe,
have recorded a story of Amasis the King of Egypt, who being mocked of his
Subjects, by reason of his mean descent, took a golden basin wherein they
used to wash their feet, and turned it into the Image and similitude of one of
their gods: and the men that before regarded it not, did then fall down and
worship it. The story applies it self, though when you were private men your
respect was ordinary, but the Lord has given you his own name: I have said
you are gods, and set you in his own place of judgment, and trusted you in
his work, the cause and lives of his people; we obey and reverence you even
for conscience sake, and this is our duty toward you.

The next is the Magistrates duty toward God: God has given you much, and he
requires much from you, and yet sometimes it comes to pass that they pay him
least who owe him most. Tacitus reports of Claudius that he was a good subject,
but a bad Emperor; and in his lib. 2. Hist. of Titus, that he was a bad private
man, but a good Emperor; But where one proves like Titus, bad private men, and
good governors; a thousand prove like Claudius, good private men, but bad
governors. As Pope Urban said of Baldwine the Metropolitan Bishop of this
Kingdom that he was Monachus ferventissimus, Abbas calidus, Episcopus tepidus,
Archiepiscopus remissus. or as Bucolcerus at the year 1464. reports of Aenaeus
Silvius, that after he got the Popedom and changed his name into Pius
Secundus, he then condemned many things which before he allowed: whereupon one
wittily plays upon him thus, Quod Aenaeas probavit, Pius damnavit. It was the
practice of heathen persecutors, to place the Image of Venus, in the same
place, where Christ was crucified, that if any came there to worship, they
might seem to worship Venus. A trick which the Devil uses at this day, to
set in Gods room and seat of judgment an Idol Magistrate, sometimes a
Cupid, or Venus, delighting in pleasure, sometimes a Mars, delighting in blood,
sometimes a Mercury, with a voice like Jacob, to speak smoothly, but hands
like Esau, and fingers like lyme-twiggs, to bring all homewards, and make their
places but bands for their profits. And howsoever this point may seem as
needless, as for Phormio to discourse of military Discipline before
Hanniball; yet I beseech you bear with patience, for though I must remember
you, I must not forget my self, nor my place, nor the mount whereon I stand.
For I also am in Gods room, and am set here to put you in mind of your duty:
your maine duty is the care of religion and worship of God, the suppressing of
Idolatry, and prophanes. There are a kind of men whereof I may say as Tully
said of the Catelinarians, Semper prohibetur, semper retinetur, we have laws
against them, and yet still we keep them: a good common wealth consisting of
Heterogeniall parts, must be like Peter's sheet in the 10. of the Acts. wherein
though there be all manner of beasts, and fowls; yet must it be knit at the
four corners: though in a common wealth there be Nobles flying above, like the
fowls of the heaven, and meaner men creeping below, yet must it be knit at the
four corners, the remotest parts as lines in a center, must meet in unity of
religion; if you be slack in this, it is no small danger whereto our Kingdom
may be quickly brought. Seneca on Theavil. reports, that Cadmus the King of
Phaenicia seeing some of his followers stain by a serpent, slew the serpent,
and sowed the teeth of it; Ex quibus prodiere homines armati: and we have good
cause to fear it, though some of these serpents brood be dead, yet there be
armed men bred out of their bones, who though they may speak us fair, yet I
approve the judgment of Caesar, who stood more afraid of Brutus, who had his
mouth in his heart, than of Anthony, who had his heart in his mouth. Our land
never was so sick, never groaned so loud, never mourned in such a passion,
never traveled of such Hermaphrodites with half so much pain and grief, as
now it does; she has already bred, and at this day both feeds, and clotheth
numberless swarms of outcast professors, who sometimes like Judas pretend to
kiss, but if they can come near enough, intend to kill her; she may conclude
a peace with foreign enemies, but they will cut her throat by way of
friendship: It is no whispering rumor, but the voice of truth, but they are
warmely lodged and richly friended, and costly fed, with the marrow and
fatness of our land, who in the midst of our Iubiles make flawes in our
peace, and in the midst of our joys endanger our lives; and if ever forraigner
should invade our Land, would lend their knives to cut our throats, and be the
foremost men to bear arms against us: this alas, this is the malady that
makes the visage of our Church so wanne, and her face so full of wrinkles, her
back so full of furrows, and her eyes so full of tears, and her heart so
full of sorrows, that though many good Physicians will speak her fair, and
wish her health, yet they launch not the Impostume, they purge not the fretting
humor that consumes and grieves her; you may read in her face that the
gripings and convulsions are unsufferable; you may hear by her groans, that
her pains are intolerable; you may presage by her pulses the signs and
Symptoms of desolation and death: And when these Catholic vipers have broken
her heart, what will become of us, who suffer such professors, as will never
prove good subjects to varnish their nests, and make their bowers within her.
It would do them good to do us hurt, it would lengthen their lives to shorten
ours, it would bring them half way to heaven, to bury their poniards in our
breasts, it would make a new feast, and another holiday in the Roman
Calendar, if they might smell the burning, or hear tell of the smoke and
ashes of our Churches, they are already become so bold, their number so
exceeding great, their religion so bloody, their malice so inveterate, that if
no sharper course be taken to repress and smother them, they will adventure
within a while, to try whether we or they shall be the Masters; and if either
malice, or multitude can do it, they will make bonefires of our flesh, they
will cut off our lives, and confiscate our livings, and set fire on our
Churches, and martyr our Clergy, and massacre our Judges, and murder our
Princes; and say of England as Edome did of Jerusalem, down with it, down
with it, even to the ground. And if ever this day of mourning come upon us,
which I pray God may never come, we may thank our selves for keeping such
Romish waspes in our English Hives.

The Second part of the Text.
I come now to the second part of the Text, The Quos,( viz. The persons whom he
must appoint:) and these are described, first generally, The Magistrate must be
a choice man, one of a thousand, culled and selected out of all the people.
Secondly, He is described by his particular properties, and these are 4. First,
they must be Viri potentes, powerful and able men. Secondly, They must be,
viri timentes Deum, Such as fear God. Thirdly, They must be, viri amantes
veritatem, such as love truth. Fourthly, viri abhorrentes avaritiam, such as
hate covetousness. Of these in order.

And first of the general, he must be chosen out of all the people, he must
be a ch^ man. It is the observation of Abulensis, that Moses chooses the high
Priests out of all the people of Israel, Numb. 17. It is the observation of
Pelargus, that Moses summoned by death to resign his place, nec filios
obtrudit suos, nec populum in suffragia mittit, he shuffles not in one of his
sons, nor commit to most voices, but desires God to appoint and nominate some
one whom he had singularly enriched with his spirit, Numb. 27. David, a man
culled out of all the sons of Iesse, 1 Samuel 16. the twelve Apostles picked and
chosen out of all the Disciples, Luke 6.13. Were the birds of the air to choose
them a governor, it should be the Phaenix; were the stars of the heaven to
choose them a governor, it should be the Sun; were the trees of the forest
to choose a governor, it should be the Cedar; were the flowers of the garden to
choose them a governor, it should be the Lilly, or the fragrant Rose.

We must observe the rule of Paris King of Troy, when Pallas Juno, and Venus
contended for the golden apple, Detur digniori, let the most virtuous have it:
the Magistrate should be like a poesy made of the choycest flowers, or like the
picture of Helena that Zeuxes made in the Temple of the Croconians, whatsoever
was fair and beautiful in any other, was admirably composed and wrought in
that one. St. August. De Civit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 12. says, the ancient Romans
built their Temple of virtue directly in the way to the Temple of honor, to
signify that it was not for a man to ^pe to a seat of honor, before he had
proceeded in the school of virtue.

Hence I might justly challenge the precipitant forwardness of some, who
boldly intrude into places of eminence, both in Church and State, though it be
well enough known that they are as eminent for their imperfections, as they
are for their places: and the injurious dealings of others, who set Idols in
the room of God, prefer unworthy persons, who come little short of
Calligula, who was so in love with his horse Incitatus, that he gave him his
provender in a golden charger, made his horse a Priest, and solemnly promised
to make him a Consul. But the general will be manifest, if we take view of the
particular properties, whereof the first is, they must be viri potentes, able
men, non corporis fortitudine, sed animi, says Ferus: If the eye of a Judge be
not be not like sn Eagle, his hand like a Ladies; if the heart of a Judge be
not like a lion, he is not fit to be Gods sword bearer, he must have a
Surgeons heart, who cuts the wound, weep the patient never so bitterly.
Plorat secandus, and secatur, plorat urendus, and uritur, says Aug. in Mat.
Ser. 15. and this is not cruelty but mercy; for sevit in vulnus, ut homo
sanetur, si palpetur vulnus, homo perditur. It was Gods speech to Joshua, Be
thou strong and of good courage, Josh. 10. the commendation that the Angel gave
Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man, Judge. 6.8. I am of the opinion
of Chabrias in the history, if you be lions, let all the rest of the people be
timorous hearts, we shall do well; let all the rest of the army be lions, if
you be timorous hearts, nothing can be well. O then awake and put on courage,
you that minister judgment, me thinks God speaks to you as Gideon did to his
men of war in the seventh of Judges, If you be timorous and fearful, depart
from Mount Gilead, and lay no hands upon your swords; you must remember that as
the royal throne of Solomon whereon he sat to judge was supported by lions on
both sides, 1 King. 10.20. so when you sit in seats of judgment, which is as
the throne of Solomon, be supported by the lyon-like virtues of courage and
magnanimity; you must not transgress for fear or favor, therefore you have
need of courage; to silence the mighty, therefore you have need of courage;
to rescue the poor out of the hands of the oppressors, with as much danger as
David rescued his silly lamb out of the mouth of the lion and the bear,
therefore you have need of courage: you must with Zeileucus King of the
Locrenses, pass sentence upon your own children if they be found worthy of
death, therefore you have need of courage; you must confute the sins of the
mighty, you must support the work of the Ministry, you must be (...), a
living law, to help the poor to their right that suffer wrong, to hear the
widows cause, to acquit the innocent Joseph's and Ieremies, whom malice and
revenge has cast into prison, and shut fast into the stocks, and therefore
you have need of courage.

Moses must choose Judges that do fear God, nothing more needful then this. I
may say of it as Aristotle of Justice: Eth; lib. 5. He that has this virtue
wants none, and without this, what is the Magistrate, but flagellum piorum, and
captivus vitiorum, one that Judges others, and is sins prisoner, himself?
without the fear of God, what is he? one that quarters his coat with Princes,
and wants the badge of Christianity upon it: without this fear what is he?
one that sitts with Kings on earth, but has not so much as a pew in heaven:
without this fear, what is he? An heir of fair and goodly possessions, but a
common pandor of foul and prodigious vices: Without this fear, what is he? An
Ahab, to reave away poor Naboths Vineyard: a Pilate to condemn the innocent:
a Saul, to torment the Saints, a Vespatian to squeaze men like spunges: a
Gehazi, to pocket up Talents of gold: a Bremus, to let desolation into the
Churches: In a word, without this fear, what is he? A perverter of Justice, a
receiver of false witness, a Patron of violence. Not like Zabulon, a Haven for
weather beaten ships: But like Dan, a Serpent in the way, and like Benjamin,
a ravening Wolf: And as Paul called Ananias, a whited wall. Act: 23.3.

But how glorious the name, how beautiful the feet, how welcome the coming,
how gracious the admonitions, how straight and impartial the proceedings, how
joyful the widow, how glad the innocent, how happy the land, from Dan to
Bersheba, when valiant Othniels, valiant Gideons, incorrupt Samuels, in whom
God has planted his fear, be placed over us, to judge the people: Then is the
Judge wise to discern right from wrong, and to find out the hidden Mysteries
of injquity, for God reveals secrets to them that fear him, and they have the
promise of understanding. Psalm. 25.14: then he begins to resolve better then
Crisippus: Si Magistrat^ ^te non gessero, Deo displicebo, si recte hominibus ^t
neutrum volo: If I be not upright, I displease God; if I be upright, then I
displease men, therefore I will do neither, for the fear of God takes away
all desire of pleasing men. Gal. 1.10. Then he judges others, as one that
remembers he must be judged himself: meats unto others, as he that looks
that God should meat unto him. Again, then he helps the Orphans to their
right: Then he lendes an ear to the widows cause, then he watches over his
heart, that it receive no malice, over his eyes that they behold no wrong, over
his ears, that they hear no false accusation, over his tongue that it utter
no unjust sentence, over his hands, that they receive no bribes, over his
passions that they sway him not, over his humors that they draw him not, over
his followers that they persuade him not: then will he not be like Solons judge
mentioned in Plut: to expound as he lists, nor like Bonutian in Sueto, to
punish the poor, and pardon the rich; he esteems not the judgment seat to
be a golden harvest, nor is he like a pair of balance, to incline to that
side which has most weight, as Aeschines sometimes objected to Demosthenes,
though he should receive such a writ Agesilus in Plut: sent to one of his
Judges, Si insons est dimitte, Sin minus mei causa dimitte, utcunque dimitte:
yet he would neither condemn the innocent, nor justify the wicked; if any
spark of this holy fear be kindled in his heart by Gods holy Spirit.

I will owe you the enlarging of the the particular: hear but a touch of the
4. and I will captivate your patience and attention no longer. They must be
viri abhorentes avaritiam, such as hate covetousnes, that is the root from
whence all evils grow: 1 Timothy 6.10. and of all evils this is the greatest,
that if a man be once infected with this disease, he loves nothing, longs for
nothing so much as that which increases his malady and sickness. S. Bernard
compares him to a little hell, that will never say it is enough. August. Evang.
Quest. lib. 2. to the dropsy, whereof Ovid in his fast. quo plus sunt potae,
plus sitiuntur aquae: Solomon Prove: 30.15. to the two daughters of the
horse-leach, that is two forkes, she has under her tongue that be never
satiate: non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. Iuven. Saty: 14: to a
hot chimney satisfied only with that which sets it on fire: or is like to a
man that has canium appetitum, sitim non pellit nisi causa morbi: A sin
which has been often arraigned, convicted, and condemned: but still it makes
shift, for reproof or pardon, and is not yet executed; the effect of my speech
shall be that it may be close prisoner, and not appear at this Assyses, that
it may not sit on the bench, the Judge must stop his ears, as Ulysses did
for fear of the 5 Siren charms, and though a man should come unto him as
Jupiter came into Danae's lap, Per impluvium aureu^, in a shewer of gold, he
must have no welcome. And Lucian in Hermotinus commends the old Areopagites,
that they judged their causes in the night time, that the Judge might not see
the glistering of gold.

A man that has a pearl in his eye, is presently blind, and knows not which
is the right way for him to walk in, if he be not led and guided, he stumbles
at every block, and falls into every pit, and lives in continual danger of
his life: If Judges have a rich pearl in their eyes, it quite blindes them,
Excellens sensibile destruit sensum, says Arist: 2. de anima. 12. such bright
objects will dazzle them, that they cannot judge between right and wrong. I
cannot approve that of Athenaeus, lib. 12. that justice should have, etc. I had
rather approve and like her in her old portraicture, as she was painted by the
old Heathens, without eyes, and without hands; without eyes, to signify that
the Judge should not so much as look upon gold to covet it, and without
hands, to signify that if never so much were offered, they should not take it.

Tully Offic. lib. 3. remembers a saying of Caesar borrowed from Euripides in
his Phaenicia: Si violandum est jus, violandum est regni causa; if conscience
may be cracked, and justice cast under hatches for any thing, it is for
reigning; but mine justly, violandum lucri causa, if for any thing, it is for
gaining: and therefore the Poets feign, that when gold was dug out of the
earth, justice took her self to her wings, and flew into heaven: first,
Effodiuntur opes, and then immediately upon it, Terras Astrae a reliquit. My
hope is, that this impiety dares not pearke up to the bench, and I desire that
it may be kept from the bar also; if it may be permitted to speak, it will
make a Lawyer Pharise-like to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel, to tithe
mint and cummin, and play fast and loose with his tongue, as he list: a golden
key commonly opens a wrong lock; Loquente auro nil pollet quaevis oration. The
mouth of a Lawyer, says Tully, is an Oracle for the whole City, but if in
this mouth there be a gilded tongue, it will prove like the Oracle at Delphos,
whereof Demosthenes complained in his time, that it did speak nothing but what
Philip would have it that had given a double fee. But I for my part accuse no
man, but many that have been ancient Termers say, that Lawyers take much money
and say little for it, that they come amongst many of you for succor, as a
sheep runs to the thorns and briars for shelter in time of a tempest, they
are saved from the shower for that time, but that which saved the^ pulls that
wool from their backs, that they are never able to abide another storm. Some
have money for holding their peace, others for speaking; that you who should be
like Atropos to cut, become like Clotho to spinne, and like Lachesis to draw in
length the thread of contention. Maginus and some other Geographers noting the
diameter and circuit of the earth, are of opinion, that if a foote-man had a
path round about the world, he might go it in 900 days, and take no hard
journeyes; a strange thing that one man in that time should go through the
world, and some other in twice so much time cannot pass through an English
Court, or the length of Westminster hall: let it never be told in Gath, nor
published in the streets of Askelon, that English Lawyers should grow great,
as that common soldier in Tacitus told Pompey, per nostram miseriam, by the
misery of poor clients: it is wickedness inexpiable to build your houses with
the fall of others; let it never be said that you are like the milt of a man's
body, whereof Laurentius says, that it never grows great until all other
parts of the body decay and perish. But purge your hearts from covetous
desires, wash your hands from the rust of that silver, and your consciences
from the canker of that gold which with greediness you have conjested and
raked together, know for certain that God will strictly examine, and your
souls shall one day pay for it.

When one asked Diogenes, what was the reason that gold always looked pale,
he shaped him this answer, Quia tot habet insidiatores, because so many crafty
heads lie in ambush for it; I pray God you may all be more greedy of heaven
than of earth, more willing to win the straight way to heaven, than the broad
way to a heap of wealth: And more careful to make your election, than your
lands and possessions sure.

Thirdly, this sin is to be whipped from all Iurers and Witnesses also; if you
have but such a thought of this, what shall I have? you shall be sure to meet
with Simon Magus, that will say, what shall I give? You must swear in truth
and justice, Ier. 4.2. You are to be whipped for ever out of the company of God
and his Angels, you are to be shut out of the kingdom and inheritance of the
Saints, you shall hear the thundering of an angry Judge, Mal. 3.5. There will
be a writ against you, a flying book, it is ten cubits broad, and twenty
cubits long, Zach. 5. and that book is a curse that flies over the whole
earth, verse 3. that curse shall lay siege to the walls and timber of your
houses, to consume both you and them, if money make you speak either more or
less than the truth. Such men, says Diodo. Sicu. Bib. lib. 2. cap. were
always punished with death: and so Bohemus de moribus gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. ad
Aug. in his Quae. in Deuteronomy. lib. 5. cap. 34. but that is but an easy
punishment, and temporal, but the judgment that God has for you is endless
and easelesse, you shall stand without, Apoc. 22.15. without God, without
glory, without mercy, without comfort, without hope, without the Kingdom, you
shall have your portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
Apoc. 21.8. I therefore charge you in the name of God, as you will answer it at
the dreadful day of judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened,
and when you shall remember my words, and see my face again, that not money
nor moneyworth make you smother the truth, or support an ill cause; that you
deal faithfully betwixt a man and his brother, that you remember the Apostles
rule, Ephesians. 5.3. Let not this sin be once named amongst you. A word for
conclusion.

Right Honorable, be you like Iethroes Judges, men of courage to help poor
ones, to defend weak ones, to oppose great ones, to cut off wicked ones: Like
Iethroes Judges fearing God, setting God always before your eyes, judging
others, as if you were going to be judged your selves, having Gods Law that was
once written in Tables of stone, firmly, and plainly written in the fleshly
tables of your hearts. Be like Iethroes Judges, men of truth, receiving no
false nor suspected witnesses, pronouncing no unjust nor partial sentences. Be
like Iethroes Judges, hating covetousness, as the stain of your Courts, the
baine of your consciences, the smotherer and stifler of Justice, the death and
poison of souls: that when you shall put off your scarlet robes, you may put
on the long white robe of Saints, and when you shall be removed from these
seats of justice, you may be admitted into a seat of glory: and may follow
the blessed Lamb wheresoever he goes.

Grave and learned Counselors, you must be like Iethroes Judges, men of
courage to plead against profaneness, men fearing God, as patterns and
examples of holiness: men of truth, not setting a good countenance upon a bad
cause: men hating covetousnes, lest it be truly wrote upon your graves, as it
was upon the Tombstone of Trinullius, Hic ^andem quiescit mortuus qui vivus
requievit nunquam: Here he restes in mould, who whilst he lived, could never
rest for gold, nor suffered them to rest that would. Think godliness your
greatest gain: Plead for Christ, and he will plead for you, that when you
shall be called from these bars, to answer for your own sins at the bar
and tribunal of Gods judgment seat, you may find mercy and favor with God,
and you also may follow the blessed Lamb wheresoever he will.

Iurers and witnesses, you also must be like Iethroes Judges, men of courage,
whom greatness of person cannot daunt; men fearing God, whom no private
affection can command; men of truth, whom no perjuries can attaint; men that
hate covetousness, and say with Balaam, if Balaac would give me his housefull
of gold and silver, I will not be suborned or hired to deflect one hairs
breadth from the Eclipticke line of truth: that when you have decided
controversies among your brethren, God may have no controversy with you; when
you have witnessed what possessions belong to men, you may have a witness in
your own consciences, that your selves belong to God, and you also may follow
the blessed Lamb wheresoever he goes.

And let all of us be like Iethroes Judges, putting on courage to fight the
Lords battles, armed with his fear, girded with his truth as with a girdle,
hating the rust and canker of the unrighteous Mammon, that when God shall
finish our evil days of sin, he may be pleased to quiet our clamorous
consciences, to pardon our sins, to save our souls, and to receive both our
bodies and souls into his blessed kingdom, and all of us may follow the
blessed Lamb wheresoever he goes. That we may be filled with the glory of the
Father, be made partakers of an infinite happiness purchased by the Son, be
ravished with the ineffable comfort of the holy Ghost: to which holy, blessed,
glorious and immortal Trinity be rendered and ascribed of us, and all Gods
Saints throughout the world, all power, praise, glory, thanks and dominion,
from this time forth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

