A SERMON, POINTING OVT THE CHIEF Causes, and Cures, of such unruly Stirs,
as are not seldom found in the Church of God.

Preached at SAWSTON in the County of Cambridge, at the Arch Deacon of Elie
his Visitation held there, upon the nineteenth day of September, 1638.

By JOHN SWAN.

ACTS. 20.30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away Disciples after them.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. and are to be sold by Daniel Pakeman, at the sign of
the Rainbow in Fleet Street near the Temple gate. 1639.

A SERMON, POINTING OVT the chief Causes, and Cures, of such unruly Stirs as
are not seldom found in the Church of God.
ACTS 20.30. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away Disciples after them.


WHen I consider the course that was taken by the greatest Visitour that ever
was, I cannot but observe, that the only way to make Religion take the more
place among the people, is to cleanse the Church of ignorant, erroneous,
Schismatic, and vicious Priests. Luke 19.41.45.
For when Jerusalem was out of order, and that the Savior of the World sheds
tears at the sight thereof; he travels to the Temple (as pointing to the
cause) and there begins his zealous Reformation: in which I doubt not, but he
has set a pattern for after-ages, to see that those among us be likewise of
us; lest otherwise the Sheep which we are set to keep from wandering, do
stray from what is right.

I held it but my duty therefore to make choice of such a text, as in the
handling might somewhat serve to scrutinize the cause of such unruly stirs as
are not seldom found in the Church of God.

And not to be long before I bring you to it, it was (as you know) the fourth
Station mentioned in this Chapter, which was the most famous and remarkable.
For when Saint Paul was come to Melitum, and had sent for the Elders of Ephesus
thither, he sounds forth a Goncio valedictoria, or a patheticall Vale to those
Churches which he was then about to leave; and has it chiefly in his heart
and tongue, that They whom he left behind him, should both look unto
themselves, and the Cures committed to their charge: imitating herein that
fatherly love which careful Parents use to afford to their dear children.
Impii enim essent Parents, qui liberos a se genitos non etiam summa cura
alerent, and morituri, illis in posterum quoque non prospicerent. From which
this our Apostle was free enough: and therefore labors what he can to provide
well for the Church in the days and years which were to be after him.

He speaks to them all assembled; but chiefly to those who were not only
(...), but (...): which though Saint Hierom (writing to Evagrius) passed over;
yet it no way appears that either Sosipater, Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius,
Timotheus, Tichicus, or Trophimus (all mentioned at the fourth verse) were
departed from him: Doroth. Synops. ubi narratur quod Sosipater erat Episcopus
Iconii, Timotheus Episcopus Ephesi, and Tychicus Chalcedone Bithyniae.
Three of which are certainly known to be Episcopi; as Doretheus has
recorded. Nor was a fourth but a Bishop afterward; as in the same author well
appears: For Ephesiorum Episcopus post Timotheum, Gaius factus est.

Now, as in this his Sermon he uses many arguments to stir them unto heed
and watchfulness; so chiefly two, in which he prophesies;

First, that after his departure grievous Wolves should enter in among them,
not sparing the Flock.

And secondly, that from among themselves also should arise men speaking
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them.

My text then is the latter of these two Prophecies; and is so much the more
lamentable, by how much the parties pointed out are the nearer to that body
which they rise against.

I shall name it therefore in the general, Vaticinium pro certo flebile, a sad
mournful prophecy: and shall consider in it, First the persons seducing.
Secondly, the parties seduced


The persons seducing, Men that shall arise (...), from among your selves.

The parties seduced, The Disciples which they draw after them.

The first, as Ringleaders: The second, as they that follow. The first as
Heads: the second, as the Body of a fatal Faction. The first as those from
whom a man would think far better things should be expected: The second as
they who might have been far otherwise, if they had been (as is required)
better instructed.

In the first observe with me these five particulars.

1. The Denomination of the Agents. Men. 2. Their Manifestation. Shall arise.
3. Their Vnde or Original. From among your selves. 4. Their Qualification,
Actions, or Behavior. Speaking perverse things.
And all this [fiftly and lastly] to help forward their intention: which is,
To draw away Disciples after them.

And then secondly, for the parties seduced, we have also their Denomination
first; and their miserable condition next. For though they be entitled (...),
as were those of Christ's own school, yet are they but the Disciples of them
who vex the peace of their holy Mother, by speaking perverse things to draw
away Disciples after them.

These I make the parts. And of these as severally and distinctly as shall best
suit to the present occasion.

1. And lo, here is first of all an inviting title, a promising and fair
Denomination, Wolves in the former verse: Men in this. And though there the
name be enough to wipe away the hope of any gentle or humane actions; yet
here is a name, which (in it self) proclaims, invites, and calls to an
expectation of better doings.

2. But because a beautiful front may sometimes prove deceitful, and be (as
Pandora's box) fair without, and foul within, it is fit we take a second step,
viewing their persons as they come abroad to present themselves on the stage
before us. And sure, fair weather still appears: for Men may arise and show
themselves, and yet no danger.

3. No thirdly, though their Vnde or original be verily and indeed from among
our selves: For did not Moses arise and stand in the gap, to turn away the
wrath of God from his people? Nay, did not Aaron arise with a Censer in his
hand, take fire from the Altar, put Incense therein to make an atonement; and
standing betwixt the living and the dead, the plague was ceased? Phineas also
rose up in zeal, executed judgment; and so befriended the sad, sick;
sorrowful, dying multitude.

4. Thus they: And if all else could thus honor their Manifestation and
Original, there had been a want of those many wounds with which the Daughters
of Jerusalem do not seldom vex the quiet peace of their holy Mother. But the
text goes [fourthly] farther, clouds each fair former promise with a sad
Catastrophe; and though it be a fatal prophecy to relate of such an off
spring, yet Inimici hominis Domestici ejus, Our harms are foretold to be
wrought by home bred enemies: yea, those among us shall not be always of us,
but will sometimes arise to speak (as says the text) perverse things: Or, as
some gloss upon it, Verba distorta, obliqua, minimeque sincera. Which is
enough to show the ill qualited behavior of these Agents, and to point them
forth as the Churches enemies.

Should the words that they speak be spoken for and not against, I would be
willing to grant them truly zealous: but speaking to disturbance, harm, and
detriment, I cannot but affirm them truly viperous. For pitch but upon the
cause, and then go on.

Can that be zeal when Men arise, Ambition a cause.
because they find they cannot be raised? Or be those words warrantable which
be spoken against, because the speakers cannot, as they would be spoken for?
I cannot think it: nor should I make any mention hereof, but because I find
that the Heads of most Factions, have been fretted by the faylings of
ambitious hopes.

Thus does Eusebius tell us of one Thebulis, Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. Ecclesiast.
cap. 21.
who, in the Virgin days of the Churches purity, corrupted it, by reason of a
repulse from his wished preferment. The like is recorded of that heretic
Aerius, who taught for Doctrine, Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla ratione debere
discerni, Aug. Dehaeres. c. 22.
that by no means there was a difference to be made between Priests and
Bishops; And all this, because he himself was denied the place of a Bishop.
Theod lib. 1. cap. 2.
So also says Theodoret of the Arian heresy, that it was first set abroach
because Alexander had that dignity which Arius desired. And as for Donatus, it
was likewise so with him: For when he could not attain to the Bishopric of
Carthage, but saw Cecilianus preferred before him, he turns heretic, and
draws away no few Disciples after him. Nor do our own times but produce the
like presidents: For as we have lately heard the perverse words of that fiery
spirit, who (both in his pulpit Pasquil, and those seditious railing Pamphlets,
which came to the hands of many people) labored what he could to set all in
combustion: So have we also heard how he bemoanes himself as an outcast
Courtier; thereby betraying the true cause, which first moved him to cry aloud
among the people, and be the direful fomenter of unquiet stirs. And yet
(we thank our God) the mischief intended was prevented, He made his madness
to be manifest, and so (as the Scripture speaks) he prevails no further: 2.
Tim. 3.9.
for like Esops Camel, Dum cornua quaerebat perdidit aures.

But because all men are not proane to one vice, there be befide this, a
multitude of other causes. I list not to mention all, but touch at some.

And next after this already mentioned, Self-conceit a cause.
there is a Philautian Spur; Self-conceit; Immodicus amor sui, Immoderate
love of a man's self. This breeds him up in sin gularitie; This makes a man's
own fancies be the best pleasing: And then, from hence arises obstinacy,
pride and contention; dilating it self so far, that when others shall
oppose, or be unwilling to consent unto him, he shootes out his arrows, even
bitter words: he speaks (as says the text) perverse things.

To which may be added thirdly, Vain-glorie a cause.
that itching desire of vain tumid glory, with which whosoever is taken, he is a
man made fit for faction, applies himself to the people, speaks distort and
crooked words, tangs up and down to draw away Disciples after him; accounting
it as a jemme of admirable worth, to be gracious in the eyes of the common
multitude: and if Vox populi proclaim him Learned, no matter though the
Learned know him to be indeed the true-borne child of an Irnoramus. Fathers,
nor Councels, nor Schoolmen he may not touch: or if he do, it is not to
light His candle by Their torches; but to make the people believe that his own
Lamp has better light. Convince him therefore they that can, his timpany is
sure to ever swell; and though the bladder be broken by force of truth opposed
to his errors; yet seldom or never expect to see him yield: For (as one
truly speaks) Ex hac gloriae cupiditate oritur pertinatia nusquam
flexibilis, Alfons. de Castr. advers. haeres. lib. 1, cap. 2.
adeo etiam, ut cum in certamine suecubuerit, cedere tamen nolit. And again,
as says the same Authur; Qui cupidus est gloriae, quid pro hac assequenda
facere non audebit? ad illam metam gressus omnes dirigit, ad hoc loquitur, pro
hac re scribit, and hac de causa contentionem excitat. That is, He who is
desirous of vainglory, what will he not dare to do for the attaining
thereof? this is the mark to which he directs all his goings, to this he
speaks, for this he writes, and by reason of this he stirs up
contention; Yea, and so goes on, Populo ut placeret, that he may draw away
Disciples after him.

5. But is it not pity that the birth of the child should endanger the life
of the Mother? and that men of the Church should leave off to be the Daughters
of Jerusalem? Verily the quality of offenders adds not a little to the depth
of the fault, and makes it to worse taken at their hands, who should rather
reduce than be the Leaders to a fiery Faction. For, as when Caesar was slain
in the Senate, it troubled him much to see others rise up against him; but most
of all, that his own son Brutus should be one amongst them: whereupon he
cries out, Sueton in Julio Caesare.
(...), What? and thou my son? So also, that the Church be troubled by any,
is grief enough; but that They, who should be chiefly for it, that They
should rise up against it, is Infandum facinus, a wickedness which cannot be
uttered but with the highest and greatest detestation. It was not an open
enemy that did me this dishonor, for then I could have borne it; but it was
thou, even thou my familiar friend: as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 55.12.
And that thou should do it, is too too much: who could have thought it?
Christ I am sure has set a Copy to be better written: For perdidit vitam
potius, quam per deret obedientiam; He would rather part with his life than
lose his obedience. And yet these men had rather disgorge their stomachs to
excite their Disciples against Superiors, than study to reduce them to a more
quiet and dutiful way. They therefore startle them with fears, as if both
Tyranny and Popery were coming in; only because their Consistorian tenets
concerning Kings may not be allowed, nor They no longer suffered to violate
that decent Uniformity which best becomes Gods public worship.

I speak these things again of our present calamities: for these very days
of ours have as great a share in the truth of our Apostles prediction, as
almost any of the days that have ever been. And therefore we, as well as our
Fathers, can testify and say; Paulus verus vates, Paul is a true Prophet: for
as he has spoken, sowee find; that From among our selves do arise men
speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them.

And indeed they may draw them far enough, so easy are they to be set agog.
For that man among us who can but show his dislike of the Churches Hierarchy,
traduce the men thereof for unsound intentions, prefer Preaching before
Praying, soar up aloft into the high and deep points of Predestination,
detract from the honor of the House of God, and be homely bold in his holy
worship, shall not want a train to follow after him, from Parish to Parish,
from Town to Town, from City to City, from one Kingdom to another people;
yea, from one England to another.

But, though by such kind of means, these men may have a number both of He
and She-Disciples [ satis dicaculi, Plaus.
as the Comicke speaketh] who will be ready to prate and prattle enough in
behalf of their dear Masters, as if all but they were Arch-traytours to the
Faith, and Factours for the Sea of Rome; yet are these stout Champions for
Religion (to men of knowledge and moderation) no better then the bane and
Disturbers thereof. And therefore their silly Proselytes are too presumptuous,
nice, Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. cap. 2.
and credulous. They have superstitiosa timiditas it is S. Austins phrase: They
fear superstition but it is with a superstitious fear. And so, Dum vitant
stulti vitia, in contraria currunt; Jude, verse. 10:
speaking evil many times of those very things, which God almighty knows
they understand not: For if they understand them, why are they so wicked as to
speak against them? I say no more; it is time I show they are gone astray. For,

First, if they deny the divine right of the Churches Hierarchy, they do
more than was done by the holy Spirit it self, which, when the seven Churches
of Asia (mentioned by Saint John) were taxed for their errors used not one
word or other against the form of their government: whereas I do not doubt,
Revelat. in chap. 2. and chap. 3.
but if the Pillars thereof had wanted that, which we call a Ius divinum, the
breath of the Spirit had overthrown them. And indeed, Christ showed the
difference, in the Seventie and the Twelve: for he did at the very first so
order the matter in choosing Church officers, as that there were inferior and
superior Priests; Sheep and Lambs: for so he Math. 10.16 Luke 10.3.
styles them when he sent them. And lo here I find, that Rome has made many
things offensive to ignorant and vulgar ears. But then again As a man may not
loathe his meat, because some have surfetted; nor abhor his drink, because
many a Rioter has been drunken: no more may Romes arogancie cause us to
contemn or fight against Christ's ordinance.

And secondly, as for that bitter out-crie of unsound intentions, it is
(without question) a causeless and Panicke fear: for from the ignorance of
Antiquity proceeds that needless suspicion of a Popish Reformation. Whereas
on the contrary, if things be well looked into, the worst of Vipers (after all
their digging and delving into their Mothers bowels) may find enough to
confess their follies, and say with Nero, Nesciebam me tam pulchram Matrem
habere: I never knew till now that I had so fair a Mother. Yea, and each
Governor likewise, with other well-ordered person, may comfort himself and
say; Regium est andire male cum feceris been; si recte facis quid eos vereris,
qu^i non recte reprehendunt.

Then also thirdly, to prefer Preaching before praying, is to magnify the
means before the End. For, (as it is in Romans 10.13.) Whosoever shall call upon
the name of the Lord shall be saved. But then next, Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher?

Nor can Christ take it well to have his own words blotted. For though a
Sermonbell can tang more together, than a Bell that is tolled, and so be a
true token that there is some schism in the Church; yet remember what he
says. He no where tells us that his house shall be called the house of
Preaching: Math. 21.13.
But, Sic scriptum est; It is thus written, My house shall be called the house
of Prayer. And this, as to show the excellency of Prayer in general, so in
particular to express unto us the excellency of public Prayer in the
Congregation: the one a duty to be done of all that would have Christ to be
their Revel. 8.3.
Advocate: the other, of those who do not only aim at that, but take also the
right course in Gods service; neither letting private prayer be preferred
before the public, nor public prayer be either put down, or disrespected,
to let Preaching have the chief pre-eminence in the holy Temple. So also say
the Apostles, in Act. 6. at the fourth verse; But we (say they) will give our
selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministration of the Word. This was
their order, To prayer first; and to the Ministration of the Word, that came
next. And if so, then here we see, though Simeon be the elder brother, yet to
Judah is the Scepter given: And as of Judah came Christ the promised seed; so
to Judah, that is to Prayer (as one speaks worthily) is the Promise made.
Which I therefore note with him, because Simeon in his name signifies Hearing;
Judah Prayer and Praising.

And well do I give a touch at Praise as well as Prayer: for it is indeed a
part of Prayer, and one maine piece of our holy Service. The heavenly society
is frequent in it: and we on earth make Gods house then to be like the
heavens, when Prayer and Praise have chiefest place in the Congregation.

I reckon it therefore as a great offense for men of our C hing to let the
people turn all their members into ears. Is Religion nothing else but
hearing? have they no knees, no hands, no tongues? No knees to bend, no hands
to hold up, no tongues to speaking? A shame most certain. And though some men
among us may account it their glory, yet sure I am, it robs God of a great
deal of honor, which he expects and looks for at his peoples hands.

Not that I do hereby intend any thing to the prejudice of Preaching; it is
far from me: but to show the right order of Gods service; And so much the
rather, because there is scarce any place allowed (amongst too many) for Indah
to appear in the house of God. But did the holy Fathers thus? They were indeed
very frequent and fervent Preachers: and yet nevertheless no part of the
Liturgy was then omitted, but all performed from first to last: and why? they
measured their Sermons, not by their length, but by their strength; not by a
rude and indigested Chaos of many words, but by a sweet, concise, and apt kind
of speaking; as when we read them is apparent.

And last of all (for I Not that they were omitted when this Sermon was
preached: and yet omitted now, because I have written more fully of them in my
book entitled Prosano-Mastix.
omit the rest) to meddle more then is meet with the high and deep points of
Predestination, savours very little of that happy wisdom which they enjoy who
are wise unto sobriety. It is enough for us that we stir up our Flocks to
attend their Salvation, and to work it out with fear and trembling; and not
busy their heads with such thornie doubts and wounding questions as torment
their souls, and perplexe their consciences, and thereupon not seldom drive
them to Desperation.

The very heathens have taught us more discretion in such a case. For among the
wise Graecians (as Saint Austin writes) the difficult points of their
Religion, DeCivit. Dei, lib. 6. c. 5.
were never laid open to the discussing of the ignorant people. Nor would Varro
(that learned Roman) suffer the books of deepest questions, and highest
mysteries, to come to the sight of the commou multitude, but be kept in
private for the learned Schools. And I verily believe it as a thing
profitable, to forbear the discussing of some points in the open Pulpit, for
their sakes that are incapable. In absoluto ac facili est aeternitas, Hilar. de
Trin. lib. 10. juxta finem.
says a Father, God does not bring men to heaven by difficult questions: nor
can we edify as we ought, when we preach such desperate positions, and
lofty speculations, as are opposite to the receiving of Gods Promises in such
wise, as they are set forth to us in the holy Scripture; wherein his love to
Man kind is so made manifest, as that he plainly shows he would have all to
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. This is that which his 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 39. Ezekiel. 18.32. Ezekiel. 33.11. Joh 3.16. 1 John 2.2, Romans 1.32.
Joh. 12.47. Esa 65.2. 1 Chronicles. 28.9 2 Chro. 15.2 Luke 19.10. Joh. 5.34.40.
Mich. 7.18. Math. 23.37.
Word proclaims: and therefore they are but bold presumptions, which lead us
to the closet of his secret counsels.

Thus have I showed, not only a brief Catalogue of some of those causes, which
incite Men to arise from among us, and speak perverse things; but have also in
part declared the weak and feeble means, whereby they deceive their silly
Proselytes. And herein I cannot but grieve, that the poor Roes, and Hindes of
the field should be thus deluded. They are led up and down, as wanderers in
the dark by an Ignis fatuus; and are made thereby such instruments of
mischief, as draw up the sluices to let in confusion. Christ might therefore
well give it in charge to the Daughters of Jerusalem; yea, and charge them
likewise by the Roes and Hindes of the field, Cantic. 2.7.
that they stir not up, nor waken his Love until she please.

And (for application) let us, The Application.
my Brethren, attend his charge: for to men of our Calling he directs it most
especially, as one that knew what manner of men would sometimes arise from
among our selves.

And first of all, Let not ambition set her black foot within our hearts; for
it is a strong temptation, blind in what it pursues, knows nor reason nor
religion, but is the Mother and Nurse of many mischiefs. It is a dry
drunkenness, by the force whereof no few have reeled into a perverse and
factious way. Let it not therefore once come near us, let us be strangers to
it, oh! let it not so much as stick upon our fingers ends.

Howbeit, I do confess most freely that the Labourer is always worthy of his
hire, and cursed be they who scant or detain him from it. Men called to serve
at the Altar, are not to sterve at the Altar, but to live thereof. I do
therefore hold it as lawful to seek fairly for an augmentation of short
means, as to pray to God for our daily bread. I do also acknowledge that
Preferment is for Men of parts; and with such a difference likewise, as that
some are not only worthy of honor, but of double honor, as the Apostle
speaks. It is also found to be true, that Small Livings make wooder Priests;
or at the least a proud and an insulting people, which stick not to tread and
trample on their Pastors, according to the filthy affectation of their own
high hearts, and presumptuous spirits. Yet can this be no warrant for
ambitious hunting for Preferment; nor any thing of countenance to those who
arise, because they find they cannot be raised: who speak against, because
they cannot be spoken for. This first.

Let also Self-conceit not make us singular, Quem non gula vincit, Philautia
superavit, says Says Cyprian: and not unfitly. For such is the pride of
singular persons, as what they have once said they must and will maintain, be
it right or wrong. None may attempt to oppose such Men of parts: for like Cotys
King of Thrace, they are married to Minerva: and though stultitiam suam
produnt, yet move them not too far, lest you be sent to see, Number Dea in
thalamum, whether the Goddess of such wisdom be not come to their beds. 2
Kin. 9.22.
As therefore Iehu said to Iehoram, What peace can there be so long as the
whoredoms and witchcrafts of thy Mother Iesabel are so many? in like manner,
what peace can be expected, so long as singular conceits seize thus upon us,
and bewitch our minds with that fatal spirit of Separation, strife, harm,
and damage? But if this be the fruit of such a tree, principiis obsta; let us
learn to stay and stop betimes: and that for his sake, whose coat we know
was void of seame. Never let our Adversaries cast it longer in our teeth, that
we jarre and jangle for we know not what: but let us be so fast united each
to other, as that we keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: For,
Non habent Dei charitatem, Aug: de Bapt. lib. 3. c. 16.
qui Ecclesiae non diligunt unitatem. And therefore let us be so fast (I say)
united each to other, as that we keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. That is, Be sound and not fingular in our doctrine; be quiet and not
quarrelsome concerning such orders, as our Superior Fathers, and their
Officers, think fit either to command, or commend unto us; For thus shall we
win the people to godliness of life, holy reverence, and a true esteem of
holy things. But on the contrary, if we stand mooting of the matter with Mihi
videtur, and mihi non videtur, like Cato and Scipio in the Senate, then what
can be expected at the peoples hands but tergiversations, malicious
upbraidings, disobedient practices, and such a world of irreverent words and
actions, as must needs be abominable to the highest Majesty. I see then by
this, that if there be disaffection in the people, the cause flows first from
among the Priests; who either mar young ones in their making, or cherish old
ones in their peevish, perverse, and irreverent practice.

But because such Lights were never intended for the Sanctuary, let the golden
snuffers be assumed into the hands of our Governors, that therewithal they
may correct these obscuring Lamps, and make them shine with a better luster:
for as Saint Hierom truly speaks, Hier. Epist. ad Vigil.
Non est crudelitas pro Deo pietas. And therefore spare them not.

Yea, and last of all; as at the best it is but a pestiferous root, producing
branches of a pertinacious kind: so in conclusion it makes us unfit to be the
Masters of our own judgment; but blinds us from discerning truth from error,
peace from Faction, and will not let us see who they be that trouble Israel;
God not refusing to suffer those to go astray, who cared not in time to leave
and forsake this itching humor. Ex illa enim pessima radice, sicut oritur
pertinacia, ita and judicit fallacia, ut propter peccatum Deus permittat eos in
errorem duci; as one observes. It were indeed a praise to see a man amongst a
giddie-headded multitude be like the river Arethusa. which though it passes
through the Scicilian Sea, Virg. Eclog. ultima.
is not tainted with the saltness thereof. But to let the breath of the people
prevail above the breath of the Spirit, is to make that true which Pliny
mentions of a certain Nation, who do anhelitu oris enec^re homin^s ^^ll men
with the breath that comes from their mouths. Plin. in hist. not.
For thus, as we harm them by going about to draw them after us, when we
arise and speak perverse things: So they us, by the bewitching charms of
their commendation.

In a word, let me close with this; I mean the remembrance of our holy
Calling: for we are the servants of Jesus Christ by special commission, and
must not therefore be guided in our doings and sayings by popular humors: for
as Saint Paul affirms, Galat. 1.10.
if we should yet please men, we cannot be the servants of Christ. And
therefore with him again, 1 Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak one thing, and that there be no dissension among you: but be ye knit
together in one mind, and in one judgment. For as it is an honorable thing
to die for ones country; so much more noble must it needs be, mori mundo, to
die to the world, and restore (what we can) all ill affected people, to live
in obedience to their holy Mother. For as it is a zeal too preposterous to
shed the blood of war in peace: So do not think it any point of Piety to
break the orders of a well-ordered Church; yea, of such a Church, as strives
to be fashioned according to the patterns of the purest times. Oh think what
it is to be obedient: obedience is better than Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22.23.
but rebellion is like the sin of witchcraft: This being Gods own Sanction,
Romans 13.1. Heb. 13.17.
that Every soul be subject to the higher powers; that we obey them who have
the oversight of us, and stand to watch for the good of our souls; and
finally, Psalm. 122.6.
that Peace be both sought and prayed for, for Jerusalem. None of which is
then done, when discord is cherished, duty condemned, schism advanced, and
faction maintained in the Church of God.

But from the misery of all such evils, Good Lord deliver us, and so watch
continually over us, that we may be preserved, and defended from all our
enemies, and have such happy days as may advance the truth, and due decency
of Gods worship, from this time forth forevermore.

And now, if after all, there be a Plus ultra, yet that would be thought upon,
it is that I direct my speech to you (my friends) who be the Guardians of the
Church: ye are called hither, not to conceal, but to lay open the abuses and
disorders of your Parish. Look to your oaths, examine your consciences, and
acquit your selves from that foul sin of horrid perjurie. Let your Bills
give in a true and a just evidence: for you take the great God of heaven and
earth to witness, that you will saithfully perform the duties of your office.
Galat. 6.7. Exodus 20.7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked: he has plagues in store for such
offenders, as take in vain his holy name. And therefore, as it is not for us
to arise and speak perverse things, though we may draw away never so many
Disciples after us; so neither for you to dissemble what you know (though you
may gain never so many to applaud you for it) but uprightly to dicover what is
done amiss. Which if you did, and did it as you ought, there would not be so
great contempt of holy places, and sacred things, nor so slight regard of Gods
service; many, not only being tardie when they should assemble to confess
their sins amongst the rest of Gods people, but (as if that were not enough)
be frequently known to come dropping in, when all else is almost ended.

I pass by much more that I might relate, and shall only for the present
commend unto you that worthy resolution of an holy Father, whose words are
these; Greg. mag. lib. 7. Indict. 2. Epist. 78.
In causa in qua Deo placere cupio, homines non for mido: that is, In a case
(says he) wherein I desire to please my God, I may not be afraid of the
frowns of Men. And there is reason for it. Revel. 21.3.
For from the New Jerusalem shall be excluded, as well the Fearful as
Unbelievers. And yet that is the City of the great God, the eternal palace of
the heavenly King: where the Citizens all know without error, praise without
weariness, love without changeableness; enjoying that tranquillity which has
no disturbance, that gain which has no loss, that security which has no
alteration, that concord which is with full consent, that Music which is
sounded forth in the melody of blessed Saints and holy Angels, praising God,
and singing the Anthemes of an heavenly Quire. Whether he bring us, who has
so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, with the Father
and the holy Spirit, be ascribed (as is most due) all honor and glory, now
and for ever Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Tho. Wykes.
November. 9. 1638.
Perlegi hunc Tractatum, cui titulus Prophano-Mastix, dignumque judico qui
typis mandetur.

Tho. Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.
October 17. 1638.

