THE FREE CUSTOMS, BENEFITS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE COPYHOLD TENNANTS, OF THE
MANORS OF STEPNY AND HACKNY IN THE County of MIDDLESEX within this
Composition.

BEFORE WHICH IS PREFIXED AN ABSTRACT OR BRIEF RELATION OF THE ASSVRANCE GIVEN
BY THE Right Honorable THOMAS Lord WENTWORTH Lord of both the said Manors,
unto his Lordships said Tennants (within this Composition) for the ratifying
and perpetual establishing of the same.

Whereunto two Tables Alphabeticall are fitted, the one containing the names of
the said Copyhold Tenants, now having compounded: the other (with the marginall
notes in the book) serves for the ready finding of any note worthy matter
herein contamed.



At London printed by William Jones. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD WENTWORTH, Lord of the Manors of STEPNY
and HACKNY in the County of MIDDLESEX.
TO whom Right (Honorable) ought we more justly to dedicate this Collection of
our Customs and Privileges, then unto your good Lordship, the noble Patron
thereof. The Clouds of Differences are now ouerblowne; everlastingly may the
bright Sunshine of Peace beevpon these Manors: That their Customs may be as
famous, to the Right Honorable Family of the Wentworths, and sought for to be
Presidents to others, as were Solons laws, which the Senate of Rome sent
Deputies to fetch (very near four hundred years after the same had been
established at Athens) thereby to frame their twelve Tables. Many happy years
(Right Honorable) accompany your Lordships life, until eternal Glory, shall
make it perpetually blessed.

Your Honors most devoted Tenants.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE INDENTVRE OF COVENANTS.
WHEREAS of late, Differences The cause of the now compounding.
have arisen, between the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth, Lord of the
Manors of Stepny and Hackny and his Lordships Copyhold Tennants of the said
Manors, for and concerning some of the customs benefits and privileges of
the said Tennants. It has now pleased the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth in
consideration of three thousand pounds of lawful money of England, in the
thirtieth year of the The consideration given for it.
reign of our late sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth, by the Copyholders of the
said Manors Unto the Right Honorable Henry Lord Wentworth, his Lordships
Father satisfied and paid: As also of three thousand and five hundred pounds
more to him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth The Deed of Covenants.
now paid, by indenture bearing date the 20. day of June in the fifteenth year
of the reign of our sovereign Lord King James of England France and Ireland,
and of Scotland the fiftieth, made between him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth
Lord of the said Manors of the one part: And Sr John Iolls Knight, and diverse
others of the Copyhold tenants of the said Manors (whose names are
particularly in the said Indenture recited) of the other part: For the
appeasing and final end of the said differences, and for prevention of the
like, and all other which in time to come might happen, arise or grow, betwixt
the said Lord his heirs or assigns, Lords of the said Manors, and the said
Copyhold tennants their heirs or assigns, to covenant grant conclude and
fully agree to the effect following, that is to say,

Imprimis, That the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth That the Lord Thomas is seized in
Fee.
is, and until a perfect act of Parliament shall be had and made, whereby all the
liberties privileges, benefits, customs, immunities, discharges, additions,
alterations, enlargements, matters, and things, in the Schedules to the said
Indenture annexed mentioned, shall be for ever confirmed, shall be and
continue seized of a good, absolute and indefeazable estate of Inheritance in
Fee-simple to him and his heirs for ever in possession, of and in the said
Manors and either of them, and of the Copyhold lands, tenements and
hereditaments of the said Copyhold tenants before mentioned parties to the said
Indenture. And that he now has and then shall And has power to confirm the
following Articles.
have full power and lawful authority to ratitifie confirm establish and
make good, All and singular the covenants, articles, alterations, enlargements,
free customs, immunities, discharges and agreements, contained in the said
Indenture and Schedules, or either of them to the said Copyhold tenants
respectively, and to their several and respective heirs and assigns, of and
in the several and respective messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments,
whereof they are seized of any estate by copy of Court Roll.

And that the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his That these Articles shall for ever be
observed.
heirs and assigns, and all other Lords of the said Manors shall for ever
hereafter, observe, perform, fulfill, allow, ratefie, make good and keep all
the said Articles, certainty of Fines, vsages, customs, privileges,
benefits, immunities, discharges, compositions and agreements in the said
Indenture and Schedules contained: And shall not at any time hereafter, leauy,
take, require, or demand any other fines, suites, customs, works, or
services, or in any other manner, then in the said Schedules are specified; And
the Rents which for the said Copyhold tenements by the space of two years now
last past, have been yielded and paid by the Copyhold tenants thereof. And
also that the said tenants, their heirs and assigns shall for ever hereafter
peaceably and quietly have, hold, maintain and enjoy their several and
respective Copyholds, with their appurtenances, according to the several grants
thereof to them made, and under the several rents for the same respectively,
now due and payable according to the true meaning of the said Indenture and
Schedules without any let, suit or hinderance, interruption, alteration,
question, or contradiction, whatsoever of him the said Lo: Wentworth, his
heirs or assigns, or any other claiming any estate, right, title, use,
interest, office, profit, charge or demand under his Lordship, his heirs or
assigns, or under the said Henry Lo: Wentworth deceased: And that the said
Tho: Lo: Wentworth his heirs or That hereafter none of these lands shall be
severed from the Manor. See A^ricle 68.
assigns has not, nor hereafter shall grant, or convey, severed from the
Manor whereof, the same is now holden, any of the messuages, cottages, lands,
tenements, or hereditaments of the said Copyholders, for any other estate or
term, other then by copy of Court Roll, according to the custom of the said
Manors, except the freehold to be severed at the desire of such person, as
then shall be Copyholder thereof respectively. And that the certainty of Fines,
free customs, immunities, liberties, privileges, articles, discharges, and
agreements in the said Schedules contained, for and concerning the several
messuages, cottages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, whereof the said
parties to the said Indenture are Copyholders, or reputed Copyholders shall for
ever be, and be had, used, accounted, adjudged, taken and enjoyed, as the true
customs, vsuages, privileges, immunities, discharges and liberties of and
within the said Manors, and either of them, not to be violated, altered,
changed, or denied by the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or either of them
now or hereafter, at any time or times in any wise being.

Item, That for the better ratifyings, establishing, That a Decree shall be had
in Chauncery to confirm the now agreme^ts.
confirming, strengthening, perfecting and making good of all and singular the
said articles, covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, vsuages, customs,
inlargements, and alterations of vsuages and customs, compositions, liberties,
privileges, freedoms, immunities, discharges, matters, and things in the said
Indenture and Schedules contained: and for the setting forth of what estate the
said Tho: Lo: Wentworth is now, and then shall be seized of the said Manors
and premises, upon a bill of complaint against his Lordship, in his Majesty's
high Court of Chancerie to be exhibited, his Lordship will appear, and make
such answer, and further such proceedings, that thereupon a perfect decree
with the free consent and agreement of his Lordship may be had and there
enrolled against his Lordship, his heirs and assigns. By which the said
Articles, covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, vsuages and customs, and
alterations of vsuages and customs and all the compositions, liberties,
privileges, freedoms, immunities, discharges, matters, and things in the said
Indenture and Schedules, or any of them contained shall be decreed, ratified,
established, and made good, and be put in ure: used and enjoyed for ever.

Item, That he the said Thomas Lo: Wentworth his heirs and assigns, at his
and their That an act of Parliament shall be procured to confirm the same for
ever.
own proper costs and charges, will procure at the first Session of the next
Parliament of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his heirs or successors,
one statute or act of Parliament. By force whereof the said Articles,
covenants, agreements, certainty of fines, vsuages, customs, enlargement and
alterations of vsuages, customs, compositions, liberties, privileges,
benefits, freedoms, immunities, discharges, matters and things in the said
Indenture and Schedules or either of them expressed, shall be established,
ratified, enacted, and confirmed to be, and to continue for ever, of force and
to be put in ure and used for ever hereafter. in such state manner and form,
quality, condition and degree, as the same are in the said Indenture or
Schedules or any of them expressed, for and concerning the lands, tenements,
and The Tennants must pay twenty pounds toward the charge of i^.
hereditaments, whereof they now are copyholders, or reputed copyholders:
Toward the charges of the procuring of which said Act of Parliament, the said
tenants are to pay unto the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth, his heirs, or executors,
within one month next after the obtaining and passing thereof, the sum of 20.
pounds.

Item, That he the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth For better assuranc within five
years.
his heirs and assigns, at any time within five years, next ensuing the date
of the said Indenture, before such Act of Parliament as aforesaid had and
obtained, at the costs in the law of the said Copyhold tenants, or some of
them, upon request made unto him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his heirs or
assigns, by the said Sir John Iolles, William Gough, Edmund Barber, John
Eglesfield, Isack Cotton, Thomas Best, Richard Hoskins, George Saris, Henry
Dethick, John Howland, Thomas Yardley, John Lowden, Richard Cheyny, Gresham
Hoogan, William Palmer, Nicholas Dickens, Nicholas Diggins, Peter Sumner, John
Bennet, Richard Edwards, Michael Bonner, and Nicholas Hollam, or any ten of
them, or any ten of the heirs or assigns of them, shall and will make, do,
acknowledge, execute, and suffer all and every such further acts, deeds, and
assurances, for better settling, assuring, and confirming of the vsuages,
customs, benefits, liberties, privileges immunities, discharges, certainty
of Fines, compositions agreements, matters, and things in the said indenture
and Schedules contained, as by them, or any ten of them, or any ten of the
heirs or assigns of them shall be reasonably devised, advised, and required.
That leases may be let for 31 years and 4 months without lisence.


Item, That every one of the said Copihold tennants, their heirs, and
assigns, shall and may freely hereafter from time to time, grant, lease, or
demise, by deed, or otherwise, without See article. 38.
license or copy of Court Roll, such or so much of their said lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, to such person and persons, and for such term
and estate, not exceeding thirty one years and four months, in possession
from the time of the making of any such grant, or demise, as to them and every
or any of them respectively, shall be thought fit or necessary without any
forfeite of estate, seizure, claim disturbance, denial, or impeachment of his
Lordship, his heirs or assigns, or any of his or their officers. So always,
that such grant, lease, and leases so to be made, be at the first or second
general Court (for the manor whereof, the lands or tenements so happening to
be granted, leased, or demysed are parcel) to be holden next after the making
thereof be published in open court of that Manor before the homage there, and
a remembrance thereof to be required to be made in the Rolls of the said
Court, for the date term, and quantity of lands, cottages, or tenements so
granted, leased or demised: Which remembrance of the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth
couenanteth and grants, for him his heirs and assigns: To and with the said
Sr John Iolls and the rest of the said Copyhold tenants upon the tender of a
certainty thereof in writing, to the Steward, or deputy Steward of that Manor
for the time then being, together with six pence in money, for the entering
thereof, shall be in the Court Rolls of that Manor duly, and in convenient
time, and without delay enrolled, and a note thereof delivered by the Steward,
or his deputy, to the party so leasing, or any for him, without any other
consideration, fee, or reward to be given or paid for the same. Recital of
the Letters Pattens from the King to my Lord concernning the Freehold.


Item, That whereas the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth by his Highness letters
pattents under the great Seal of England, dated the 19. day of July, in the
thirteenth year o^ his Majesty's reign of England, etc. and forty eight of
Scotland. Has obtained license to grant to such of his Majesty's liege people
as he shall think fit, messuages, cottages, lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, parcel or reputed parcel of the said Manors; To hold to them
their heirs and assigns in free and common Socage respectively, of his said
Manors of Stepny and Hackny, by such and the same rents, and services, and
other profits, as in the conueyances thereof shall be expressed, and not to
hold of the King in Capite, nor of any of his Majesty's Honors or Manors in
Knights service, as by the said letters pattents more at large may appear. Now
if the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth shall not at the first If the Act of Parliament
be not Procured: then the Tennants upon request shall be made Freeholders.
Session of the next Parliament, procure such an act of Parliament to be good
and effectual in law for the purposes aforesaid: Then his Lordship will at all
times after the end of the said first Session of the next Parliament upon
reasonable request, and at the costs of the tennants, (whom it shall concern)
their heirs or assigns, make, do, and execute, such reasonable acts, devises
and assurances in the law, whereby the said Copyholders, their heirs or
assigns respectively, shall hold and enjoy their and every of their said
copyhold, messuages, houses, lands, tenements, cottages, and hereditaments,
with the like ways, easements, commons and commodities, as are thereto now
belonging, or now therewith used or enjoyed. And the freehold and inheritance
thereof, respectively to them and to their respective heirs and assigns for
ever. To be holden of such of the same Manors, whereof the same is now holden
in free and common Socage; for and under the several and respective yearly
rents for all services and demands, as they or any of them do now severally
and respectively pay for the same, as by them, or their council learned shall
be reasonably devised and required.

Item, That the said Copyhold tenants, their heirs and assigns respectively,
shall and may For enjoying the Common.
for ever hereafter, without any let, impediment, interruption, denial, or
contradiction of his Lordship, his heirs or assigns, or any claiming under
the said Henry Lo: Wentworth deceased, not only during the time they shall be
Copyholders, but also afterward when they shall have obtained the freehold
and inheritance of their several and respective Copyholds, peaceably hold and
enjoy, such and the like common of pasture and in such manner, in all the
Commons, Masts, and commonable places of the said Manors, as they or any of
them heretofore, have, had, used, held, taken, or enjoyed, or might lawfully
have taken or enjoyed. The Tennants not compounding are excepted from al
benefit hereby.
Nevertheless it is agreed, that neither the said Indenture and Schedules, nor
any covenant therein contained shall in any wise extend or enure to the benefit
or advantage of any other Copyhold tenants of the said Manors, other then the
said Copyhold tennants named parties to the said Indentures, their heirs and
assigns, and that for such and the same lands, tenements, cottages, and
hereditaments, with The enrolling of the deed.
the appurtenances only, as they or any of them now hold, or claim to hold,
by copy of Court Roll of the said Manors or one of them as by the said
Indenture (whereunto relation be And where it is left.
had) more plainly and at large appears.

Memorandum, That the said Indenture of the twentieth of June, together with a
duplicate thereof were acknowledged by the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth the 21. day
of July 1617. before Sir Matthew Carew Knight to be enrolled, and is enrolled in
the Chauncerie accordingly. The one part of which Indentures is left in the
custody of the company of Goldsmiths in the City of London: And the other in
the custody of the Brethren of the Trinity house at Ratcliffe, In trust and to
the use of the said Copyhold tenants named parties to the said Indentures.

The ninth day of July 1617. in the said fifteenth A statute of 12000. pound
for performance of covenants.
year of his Majesty's reign, to the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth acknowledged a
Statute of the sum of twelve thousand pounds of lawful money of England,
unto Alexander Prescot, and John Gore, Aldermen, Thomas Jones, common Sergeant
of London, Francis Fulner and Ceorge Whitemore Esquires, and Robert Mildmay
Grocer, In trust for and to the use of the use of the Copyholders warned in the
said Indentures, and thereof is a defesance by Indenture The Defeasance.
dated the same day to this effect (viz.) That if the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth
do perform the covenants and agreements contained in the aforesaid Indenture
of the twentieth of June: Then the same Statute to be void, and that the said
Conusees shall deliver up the same Statute to the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his
heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, so soon as the said act of
Parliament shall be procured, according to the intent and true meaning of the
said recited Indenture. To this end the Where it is left.
said Statute and Defeazance are left in the Chamber of the City of London, to
be kept in such sort as that the said Conusees may have the same to be
delivered according to their covenant. And the Chamberlain of the said City
has charged himself with the receipt thereof, by order of the Court of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, bearing date the two and twentieth day of July 1617.
Leman Mayor, Fish Chamberlayne. In Trinity Term, in the said fifteenth year
of The proceedings in the Chauncery.
his Majesty's reign to a Bill of complaint was by the Copyholders named
parties to the the said Indenture of the twentieth of June, exhibited against
the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth in his Majesty's high Court of Chancerie, whereto
the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth did appear, and by his answer confessed the
contents of the said bill to be true. Whereupon a perfect Decree with the free
consent and agreement of the The Decree.
said Tho: Lo: Wentworth, bearing date the two and twentieth day of July, in
the said fifteenth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James was
obtained. And by the same the said free customs, orders, immunities, etc. and
all and whatsoever contained in the said Indenture of the twentieth of June,
and the Schedules unto the same Indenture annexed, are for ever established and
confirmed. The said Decree is likewise there enrolled. The true copy of the
said Schedules follows.

14 SCHEDVLES containing the free Customs, Orders, Immunities, Discharges,
Benefits and privileges of the Manors of Stepney alias Stebunhuth and Hackney
in the County of Middlesex, agreed unto the approved, allowed, and ratified, as
well by the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth Lord of the said Manors, as
also by his Lordships Copyhold, or customary Tennants or reputed Copyholds or
customary Tenants of the said Manors, or of either of them, named parties to
the Indenture whereunto those Schedules are annexed. By which all and every the
same Copyholders or customarie Tenants, their and every of their heirs and
assigns, are to hold, use, and enjoy, inherit, alien, demise, or dispose all
and every or any the Lands, Messuages, Tenements, Cottages and Hereditaments,
which they every or any of them respectively do hold, claim, or enjoy, by
force or pretext of any grant heretofore made by the Copy of Court Roll of the
said Manors or either of them, the day of the date of the said Indentures,
That is to say, the twentieth day of June in the years of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord James by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland King,
defender of the faith, etc. the fifteenth and of Scotland the fiftieth.

IN primis, by the customs of the said Manors These copyholds are of
inheritance held of the Lord by the rod according to the custom.
and either of them, all the Copyhold Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which
the particular persons, (named parties to the Indentures, whereunto these
Schedules are annexed) do hold or enjoy, are, and (time whereof the contrary
has not been within the memory of man) have been Copyhold and customarie
lands, tenements and hereditaments of inheritance, demised and demisable by
copy of Court Roll of the Manors aforesaid, or one of them respectively,
according to the customs of the Manor whereof the same are holden; and all
copies of Court Rolls of the same Manors and either of them, by all the time
aforesaid, for the same lands, tenements, and hereditaments, have been made,
and ought to be made, to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custom
of the Manor whereof the same is holden, by the rents and services therefore
due and accustomed. And all the said lands, tenements, and hereditaments have
been passed and are to pass and go from such persons, as according to the
contents of these Schedules, have power and are How Surrenders are to be made.
See further in the 19 article,
enabled to make Surrenders, to any other person or persons by way of Surrender
to be made to the hands of the Lord, by the acceptance of the Steward of the
Manor, or his Deputy, for the time being, in Court or out of Court; or by the
acceptance of the Reeue of the Manor whereof the same are holden, or by his
Deputy, within the same Manor, or elsewhere, in presence of six customarie
Tennants, or by any Headborough of some Towneship or Hambler within that Manor
in presence of six customarie Tenants, in or out of the same Manors; which
Surrender or Surrenders have been, and shall and may be to the use of any
person or persons, and their heirs for ever in fee-simple, or any person or
persons in fee tail, or for life, or lives, with Remainders, or without
Remainders, as lands may be assured by the course of the common laws of this
Realm, or else to the use of the last Will and Testament of the Surrenderers
or of any other persons according to the intent and limitation of such last
Will and Testament.

Item, the rents of all the Tennants both Freeholders 2 Quitrents are to be
paid yearly at Michellmas.
and Copy holders which hold any Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments of the said Manors or of either of them, are yearly payable
only at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangell to the Lord and his heirs,
the same to be collected by the Reeues of the said Manors (severally and
respectively to be yearly chosen, as hereafter is expressed) or their
Deputies; And all and every the said customarie or Copyhold Tenants to pay the
several yearly rents, now yearly due and payable for their several
Copyholds: and if any of the said Copyholds for which any interequit rent is
now pa^d shall hereafter come into several hands, the rent thereof An entire
quitrent come into several hands shall be apportioned.
shall be then apportioned by the homage, at the Court of the Manor whereof
the same are holden, and so much only as by the homage shall be appointed to be
paid (prorata) shall be paid to the Lord for the time being.

Item, All and every Copyhold Tenant of the 3 At what Courts Tennants are bound
to appear*
said Manors or either of them, which now be, or hereafter for the time being
shall be, ought to appear yearly at two general Courts holden for the Manor
whereof his lands or Tenements are holden upon warning, as hereafter follows:
And also so many of them at all other set or appointed Courts, set, appointed
and kept for the said Manor whereof their lands are hold^n under the numb^r of
eighteen, as shall be for that purpose especially warned thereunto by the
Reeue, or his sufficient Deputy for the time being: And ^he said Tenants shall
there do their suites, and services, according to their tenures, except they
be essoined, licensed or have some other lawful excuse, upon the pain
hereafter following; which two general Courts have been commonly kept, and
are to be kept yearly the one of them on Tuesday, the ninth day after Easter
day, and the other about the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle upon reasonable
The two general Courts yearly held.
warning, That is to say, in the Churches and Chapels w^thin the said Manors
openly upon the Sunday seuennight, or Sunday fortnight before the day of such
Court to be holden.

Item, If any of the Coppyhold or customarie 4 Tennants f^iling to appear, and
not essoyned: or reason able excuse: shall be amersed.
Tennants of the said Manors, or of either of them do or shall make default of
their appearance at any of the said two general Courts, to which their suites
shall be due: Or if such Copyhold Tenants as shall be especially and lawfully
warned to appear at any of the said set Cou^ts, in form aforesaid, yearly to
be holden do make default (to which the said suite^s or shall be due) and
warning openly given as aforesaid of the day and place of the holding of the
same general Courts, and upon special and lawful warning to be given for the
said several set or purchased Courts, that then they that shall so make
default (except they be essoyned, or have some other lawful or reasonable
excuse) shall be amerced by the Homage of the said Court to be taxed and affered,
by two afferors of the said Court, That is to say by two Tenants of the Homage,
whereof the Steward of the said Manors, or of either of them, for the time
being, has always used to choose, and shall choose one for the Lord, and the
residue of the homage have chosen, and hereafter shall choose the other.

Item, If any Tenant be summoned to apeare at 5 What the tennants are to be
allowed at set Courts.
any set Court, or Courts to be holden within the said Manors, or in any of
them, and does appear upon the said Sommons, he ought, and is to have for his
pains four pence, and his dinner, or eight pence and no dinner, which ought
and is by the said custom to be paid by such person or persons who shall be
the cause that any such Tenants do appear for his or their matter, so it be
not any matter or cause that concerns an enqu^rie or presentment to be made
only concerning the Lord for the time being his heirs or assigns.

Item, The Coppyhold Tennants of the said 6 The like allowance for view.
par^icions and and other summons.
Manors; and of either of them, ought to have every of them like allowance
upon every view by them to be made, and upon every petition by them to be made,
or upon other Sommons to appear betwixt Tenant and Tenant, when they be
appointed thereunto by precept from the Steward of the said Manors or of
either of them for the being, or by his sufficient Deputy.

Item, The homage of the Court of the said 7 How tennants may be righted
against encroachments, annoyances etc.
Manors or of any of them, may appoint six or seven Tennants upon any
complaint to them made by any person or persons being Tenants of the said
Manors, or of either of them, in open Court, that he or they be wronged by
any incroachment, or any other annoyance to their Copyhold Tenements, which
Tenants shall after the said Court view the same encroachment, annoyance and
impediment, or place whereo^ any such complaint shall be made, and thereupon to
present or notify the same by a day to the Steward, or to the homage at the
next general court, that there may be set a pain or amerciament, or both for
the same, by the Homage at the said next court, according to the quality of
the offense.

Item, The Homage of either of the said Manors 8 The Homage at every general
count is to present deceased tennants.
are to make presentment at every general Court, to be holden for the said
Manors, or for either of them, of all the customarie or copyhold Tenants that
they shall know shall be deceased after the Court then last past, at or any
time before the said court, whose deaths were not then found and presented, and
that held any copyhold or customarie or reputed copyhold or customarie Lands or
Tenements of the said Manors or of either of them: And also as near as they
can present With their lands and heirs.
what Lands every of them dyed seized of, and of what estate, and when he dyed,
and who is the next heir or heirs to the same person or persons so dying
seized, and of what age or ages the said heir or heirs shall then be of, as
near as they can.

Item, The Homage likewise ought to present 9 Also they must present the deaths
of Freeholders etc.
the deaths of the Freeholders, and when they dyed, and who be their next
heir or heirs, and the ages of their heirs which held any Lands or Tenements
of the said Manors, or of either of them, and the nature of their tenures, so
near as they can, to the intent the Lord may have his relief, which is but
the value of one years quitrent of the Tenements holden of the said Manors,
or of either of them by Socage tenure.

Item, If the Homage at any of the said Courts 10 What shall be done, if the
next heir be not known.
of either of the said Manors shall not know who is next heir or heirs to
any of the said customarie Tenants so dying seized, when they shall make their
presentiments, That then they shall make their presentment so accordingly, and
then upon the said presentment at the next general Court then after, the
Steward of the said Manors of either of them, or his Deputy for the time
being, within the said presentment shall so be made, shall cause a Proclamation
to be made in open court to the intent every such heir or heirs may have
knowledge to come and take up the Lands and Tenements of his or their
ancestors, and so the Steward or his Deputy shall cause a Proclamation to be
made from general Court to general Court, until three open and public
Proclamations Three Proclamations shall be made in two years space for the
heir to take knowledge etc.
be made in full Court, at three several general Courts, which general
courts by the said custom are used to be holden commonly one half year
after another, or thereabouth: So that from the presentment made by the said
Homage of the dying seized of the said last Tenant, unto the last proclamation,
shall be fully two years: And if there shall come no heir of the said Lands or
Tenements, nor any for him or them, before the end of the court next after the
court, whereat the last of the said three Proclamations shall be made, to make
his or their claim, and prove himself or themselves to the Homage of the said
Court, in such sort as they or the greater part of them shall allow of to be
the next heir or heirs of the whole blood to the said Tenant deceased, or to
have title to the Lands and Tenements, nor to show and prove as aforesaid who
is or ought to be next heir or heirs of the whole blood to the said Tenant
deceased, or next heir or heirs expectant upon any estate determined; Then
the Lord of If none appear the Lord may then sease the land.
the Manor whereof the same Land is holden for the time being, shall and may
after the next court next after the said three Proclamations so to be made,
seize the Lands and Tenements which were the said persons so dying seized,
whose next heir or heirs, or such as shall have title thereunto cannot be
found, or shall not come and make his or their claim and proof as aforesaid;
and the same Lord then to take the issues and profits And keep it until an
heir do come.
thereof to his own use until such person or persons come that shall prove
him, or them next heir or heirs to the said person or persons so dying If no
heir com w^thin three years after the third proclamation, the land
seized. And if none shall come in, within three years next after the third
and last Proclamation made as aforesaid, that shall and can convey and prove
him, or them to be next heir or heirs of the whole blood, or show, or prove
who is or ought to be next heir or heirs, or to have title as next in
Remainder or Reuersion as aforesaid: shall escheate to the Lord.
That then the said Lands and Tenements be forfeited or shall escheate unto
the Lord of the said Manor or Manors for the time being. Except that if the
said Lands and Tenements, shall or ought immediately, to descend, remain,
reuert, or come to any woman Covert, or Infant within the age of one and twenty
years, or to any person or 1 Except women covert baron 2 Infants within age.
3 Prisoners. 4 Persons non sanae memoriae. 5 Persons out of the Realm.
persons being in prison, or any person or persons not of Sanae memoriae, or
that shall not be within the Realm at the time of the death of the said last
tenant dying so seized, or at the time of the first, second or third
Proclamation to be made as aforesaid: That then in every such case, the Lord
for the time being shall have but the profits of the said Lands and Tenements
until such persons, or his, her, or their heir or heirs, shall come and make
their claim, So the said claim be made by the said woman or her heirs within
five years Five years.
next after the death of her said husband, or by her husband and her self,
during the time of her Couerture. And by such person being within age or his
heirs before he shall or should accomplish his full age of one and twenty
years, or within five years then next after he shall or should accomplish his
full age of one and twenty years. And by the person of non sanae memoriae,
within five years next after he shall recover and become of Sanae memoriae and
by the heir of such person of non sanae memoriae within five years next after
the death of his said Auncestor or before: And by the said person that shall be
so out of the Realm or his heirs within five years after he shall return,
or if he shall not return by his heirs, within five years after his death:
and by the said person or persons in prison within one whole year next after
his 11 No dower for women: ^or Courtesy of England for men.
or their enlargement from such imprisonment.

Item, In the said Manors or either of them women ought not to have Dowers of
any customary lands or tenements within the Manors aforesaid, nor in any of
them, nor men to have any estate as Tennants by the courtesy of England.

Item, If any shall be seized of any customarie 12 Estates of inheritance shall
descend according to Gauelkynde.
lands or tenements holden of the said Manors or of either of them, of an
estate of Inheritance, and shall have two sons, or three sons, or more, or
having no sons, shall have diverse daughters, or having neither sons, nor
daughters shall have diverse Collatterall heirs in one neerenesse of blood, or
that are to make their resort, from those that were of the same neerenesse of
blood to the Tenant dying; They shall be all co-heires to their said Father,
Mother, or other Auncestor, touching the said customary lands and tenements,
according to the custom of Gauelkinde.

Item, If any man or woman die seized as aforesaid 13 Touching discents where
the tennant left issue.
of any customarie lands or tenements of any estate of Inheritance holden of
the said Manors or of any of them, and shall have issue two or three sons or
more, whereof one, or two, or more of them shall be married, and have issue in
the life of their Father or Mother, and shall die before his or their said
Father or Mother, or having no sons shall have diverse daughters, whereof one or
more shall be married and have issue, and dye in the life of the Father or
Mother, That then the said issue shall inherit, and be co-heire with the said
son or sons, daughter, or daughters that shall survive his, her, or their
said Father or Mother that so shall die seized as is aforesaid, whether the
said issue be male or female, according to the custom of Gauelkinde.

Item, If any person or persons die seized as aforesaid, 14 How lands shall
descend to those of the whole blood where the tennant left no issue.
and shall leave behind him neither son, nor daughter, then the next of his
or their kin, being of whole blood, shall be heir or heirs to the said person
or persons so dying seized, That is to say, his, her, or their brother or
brothers, brother or brothers children, or childrens children, according to the
custom of Gauelkinde, and so forth as long as any of that issue shall be on
live, being of the whole blood; and in default of such issue the sisters, and
sisters children, according to the custom of Gauelkinde, and so forth so long
as any issue shall be on live, and of the whole blood, and for lack of such
issue, the Uncles and their issues being of the whole blood, so long as any
issue shall be living. And in default of such issue, the Aunts and their
children, so long as any shall be living of the whole blood, and for lack of
such issue the next of kin of the whole blood, according to the custom of
Gauelkinde.

Item, If any person so dying seized as aforesaid 15 Males et Females of one
venture cannot join to be coheires.
without issue of his body, and having diverse brothers of the whole blood,
whereof the one or some of them shall have been married, and shall have issue.
and after issue had shall die, before the said brother dying seized as
aforesaid; That then the issues of the said brother or brothers so dying before
him that dyed seized as aforesaid shall join and be co heir with the brother
or brothers that suruiueth the brother that so dyed seized, as aforesaid,
whether the said issue be males or females: But males and females of one Venture
cannot join to be co-heires together, So that the course of discents is to be
observed by the said custom, according to the custom and nature of lands in
Gauelkinde.

Item, Likewise shall the issue of the daughter 16 Touching discents.
that shall die in the life of the Father or Mother be co-heire with the Aunt
that lives being of the whole blood.

Item, Likewise shall the Uncles and the Uncles 17 Discen^s.
brothers children being of the whole blood be coheires together as aforesaid.

Item, Likewise shall the Aunts, and the Aunts 18 Discents.
sisters children join and be co-heires as aforesaid, and so forth of all
further degrees, of all Collateral heirs being of the whole blood, which may
convey themselves to be any Cozens and heirs of the whole blood to any person
or persons dying seized of any of the aforesaid customarie lands, or tenements,
according to the custom of Gauelkynde.

Item, By the custom of the said several Manors 19 How Copyholders of
inheritance may Surrender.
every copyholder of Inheritance in fee-simple, may Surrender his said copyhold
lands and tenements, or any part, or parcel thereof unto the Lord to the use
of any person or persons, and to his and their heirs for ever, or to his or
their heirs, of his or their bodies or any otherwise in See also in the first
article. and in the 20 21 etc articles.
tail, or for life or lives, or years, or to any person or persons, and his
or their heirs; To the intent the said Copyhold Tennant may declare his last
Will and Testament upon the same Lands, and Tenements, or to any other use, or
uses, unless it be to any corporation or corporations, or bodies pollitique or
corporate, and every copyholder in tail, or for life, lives or years, of
either of the said Manors may in like manner by the customs of the said
Manors, and of either of them Surrender their Copyhold lands tenements or
hereditaments or any part thereof, according to the nature of their estates so
the same Surrender be made according to the custom concerning Surrenders as
before in these presents is specified, or hereafter ensues; And all the same
persons to whose use every Surrender shall be made, are to have their copies made
to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custom of the Manor, whereof
they been holden by the Rents and services therefore due and accustomed. Upon
every of which Surrenders the Fine and Fines for the same hereafter expressed,
is by the said custom to be paid, and to The fines must be entered into the
Coppyes. See act^: 26.
be entered into the several copies, or the margents of them.

Item, By the custom of the said Manors, and Surrenders taken by the
headborow or Reeue in presence of 6 tennantes.
of either of them, every Surrender taken out of the Court by the Headborow, or
Reeue, or his Deputy, and in the presence of six customarie Tennants of the
Manor of which the said lands or tenements Surrendered shall be parcel
witnessing the same surrender of any person or persons of his or their
customarie Lands or tenements holden of the said Manors or of either of them,
and being of the full age of one and twenty years or upwards, (except women
covert Baron, and such as are not of perfect mind) to the use of any person or
persons, are and ought to be as good, as if it were taken in open Court by the
said Steward of the Manors or of either of them, so that such surrender be by
the Homage presented as hereafter follows.

Item, The Surrender by a woman covert Baron 21 Surren of woman covert baron,
in extremity of sickness.
being of the age of one and twenty years made together with her husband of
the lands, tenements or hereditaments, whereof she is seized or estated is, and
shall be a good Surrender of her lands, tenements, and hereditaments holden of
the said Manors or of either of them the same Surrender being made in her
extreamitie of sickness or likelihood of death by the acceptance of the Reeue of
the Manor whereof the lands and tenements so surrendered are parcel and his
Deputy or either of them in the presence of six customarie tenants or by the
acceptance, of the Headborow in the presence of six customary Tenants, But if
any such woman Covert Baron so surrendering, do after that recover her health,
and do not at the next general Court then following ratify and confirm the
fame, before the Steward or his Deputy in the presence of the Homage: Then the
same Surrender is, and shall be void, and all other Surrenders made by any woman
covert Baron All other Surr: by women covert baron.
(except before the Steward of the Manor or his Deputy, where she shall be
soly examined, or in extreamitie of sickness as is aforesaid are and shall be
void.

Item, All Surrenders taken of women as aforesaid, 22 All Surrenders taken die
the Reeue or Head borough must be p^esented at the first or second next
general court.
or of men by the Reeue or his Deputy, or by a Headborough for the time being,
and in the presence of six customarie Tennants as aforesaid shall be and ought
to be by the Homage presented, at the first or second next general court holden
for the Manor whereof the same is holden after the taking thereof, or within
one year and a day next after the taking of the same Surrender, if any such
general Court be holden, within a year and a day next after the same
Surrender so taken: Or else if no such general Court be holden within a year
and a day, then to be by the Homage presented at the next general Court to be
holden for the same Manor, next after the same year and day, is and shall be
a good Surrender as if the same had been taken by the St^ward or his Deputy
of that Manor or woman examined as aforesaid in open court or otherwise, all
Surrenders taken by the said Reeue or his Deputy, or by a Headborough, Or else
they shall be void.
and in the presence of six tenants and not presented by the said Homage in
manner and form aforesaid are and shall be void: But when any when Surr: to the
use of the last will, must be presented.
Surrender shall be made by any person to the use of his or her last Will and
Testament, to the intent that he or she may thereby or thereupon make and
declare his or her last Will and Testament: That Surrender is to be presented
at the first or second next general Court of that Manor happening next after
the decease of the party so Surrendering perfectly known and not before. But
if the same be not at the first or second court next after the death of the
same party presented: Or if the same party has before in his life time made
any Or else void.
other Surrender of the same Lands or tenements and the same to be presented:
Then the said Surrender to the use of such last Will and Testament is and
shall be void. 23 The homage must write Billa vera upon their presentiments and
good Surrend


Item, The Homage must write Billa vera upon every Surrender by them presented
when they find the same Surrenders agreeable to the custom, and also upon
every other of their presentiments shall make Billa vera when they be agreeable
to the said custom: Or else if the said Homage receive any Surrender or other
bills to them exhibited, which be doubtful or repugnant to the custom of the
Manor whereof the land is holden upon every such Surrender or Bill Ignoramus
shall be made, or the like superscription to the intent And Ignoramus on the
contrary
it may be known to be doubtful or naught or else return the same naughty
Surrenders or Bills back again to the parties that exhibited the same. 24
Women covert baron may turrender with heir husbands etc.


Item, Every woman being Covert Baron of the age of one and twenty years or
upwards, having any customarie lands or tenements to her, or her heirs or for
life, lives, or years, and holden of the said Manors or of either of them,
may together with her husband by the hands of the said Steward, or his
sufficient Deputy Surrender all her said Lands and Tenements, interest and
term of years to the use of her said husband, or to any other person or
persons, at their will and Soly examined before the Steeward or deputy.
pleasure: So as she be solie and secretly examined before the Steward or his
sufficient Deputy.

Item, All Surrenders taken out of the Court by the Steward of the said
Manors, or of any of 25 Surrenders taken out of court by the Steward or his
deputy.
them, or his sufficient Deputy of any person or persons, being of the full age
of one and twenty years or more, and of Sanae memoriae of any of their
customarie lands, and tenements holden of the said Manors, or of either of
them, be good by the customs of the said Manors, and of either of Must be
presented at the next general court.
them, and the same ought to be published and notified to the Homage at the
next general Court; Or else those Surrenders are also void.

Item, All the Fines upon admittances, for any 26 The fines are certain and
not arbitrarie.
the now lands, tenements, or hereditaments, of all and every the persons named
parties to the said Indenture holden by copy of Court Roll, are and ought to
be certain, and not arbitrarie or at the will of the Lord. And the Lord or
Lords of the said Manors, or of either of them, ought to have and take Fines
upon admittances, as hereafter What fines are due.
follows, and not other or greater, That is to say, upon the admission of the
heir or heirs after a descent, for every acre of land of what nature or kind
so ever sixteen pence, and so after that rate for greater or lesser quantities
of Land. And upon admission of one person only after any Surrender the like
sum of sixteen pence for every acre, and so after that rate for every
greater or lesser quantity of land; But if more then one person be admitted
after or upon any Surrender: Then If more then one Person be admitted then etc.
every of the same persons are to pay half so much as one person ought to pay
and not more. Likewise upon admission of the heir or heirs, after a descent
for every Message customarie, with the Courts, Yards, Easements, Orchards, and
Gardens thereunto belonging, for a Fine the sum of thirteen shillings four
pence, and not more. And for a dwelling house called a Tenement, with the
Courts, Yards, Orchards, Easements and Gardens thereunto belonging, the sum
of ten shillings, and not more: and for a cottage used for dwelling, with
easements and gardens thereunto belonging, or without garden, and not demised
for more then three pounds by the year, the sum of twenty pence: But for a
building not used for a dwelling house so much only as according to the
quantity of the land after the rate of sixteen What fine for a building not
used for a dwelling house.
pence the acre: And for greater cottages used for dwelling, and which shall be
let for above three pounds by the year, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards,
Gardens, and Easements thereunto belonging, the sum of ten shillings. And the
like is of Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages hereafter to be built: And upon
or after any Surrender, at the admission the like Fines are to be paid for one
person. But if any Surrender be made by Admission of man and wife, a whole fine.
any person, or persons, to a man and his wife, then a whole fine is to be paid
for the husband, and half a fine is to be paid for the wife: And if more
persons be admitted upon one Surrender, then every of the same persons are to
pay for Fine half so much, as one person ought to pay, and not more. All acres
are to be accounted according to the statute or ordinance de terris
mensurandis, and orchards and gardens not belonging to such Messuages,
Tenements or Cottages, are to pay as lands according to the quantity thereof,
according to the rate aforesaid. And parts of Messuages, The fines must be
entered in the margent of the coppies. see article 19.
parts of Tenements, and parts of Cottages are to pay for Fines respectively,
in regard of the whole, according to the rate of the whole. And all fines paid
are to be set down and expressed in the copy of the Court Roll thereof, or in
the margent of the same copy. And if any question or doubt shall hereafter
arise, about the discerning and true estimation, what or which be, or ought to
be accounted a Message, and what, or which a dwelling house called atenement,
and what or which a Cottage; The same is to be referred to the Homage of the
Manor at the next general Court, and by the same to be tried. ordered,
determined, and presented, and according to such presentiments, fines are to be
paid. 27 The Lord is to allow of all Surr: made according to these articles.


Item, The Lord or Lords of the said Manors or either of them, and their and
every of their Stewards for the time being shall and ought to accept and allow
of all and every Surrender and Surrenders to be made of any the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, whereof any of the persons named parties to the
said Indenture, are seized as copy holders, according to the tenor, intent and
true meaning of these Schedules, and the Articles therein contained. So as the
parties Surrendering, be not before that time by the Homage of the same Manor
presented, and found to have made or committed some matter of forfeiture of
those lands and tenements so Surrendered, contrary to the customs and articles
in these Schedules expressed, or some or one of them. And the Lord of the same
Manor by his Steward for such fine as in or for such things is before
expressed shall grant the same copyhold Lands Tenements and hereditaments so
Surrendered, according to the tenor use and intent of the same Surrender. And
shall duly admit such person or persons to whom, or to whose use, such
Surrenders shall be made.

Item, If the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, 28 If the Lord refuse to
admi^^ then etc.
or either of them, or his or their Steward for the time being shall refuse to
admit any person or persons, to whom or to whose use such Surrender. as in the
precedent Article is expressed shall be made, or shall refuse to admit such
person or persons, to whom any of the said copyhold, or customarie, or reputed
copyhold, or customarie, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, shall descend
according to the custom of the said Manors, and true meaning of these
Schedules. Then the person s^ not admitted paying or tendering to the Lord or
his Reeue, fine or fines for the same, according to the true meaning of these
Schedules, shall and may into such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so
surrendered, or descended respectively enter, and the same quietly have, hold
and enjoy as freely and in such sort as if he or they had been thereunto
lawfully admitted, and not otherwise.

Item, If any man make a Surrender only to 29 Surren: to make the wife a
ioincture
the intent to make his wife a ioynture, or to assure it to his wife for term
of her life, or during her widdowhood, not altering the estate of the
Inheritance, then for the fine of the same, or any admittance thereupon, there
shall be paid but half a fine for the same, things so Surrendered; That is to
say, half so much as one person should pay upon admittance, according to the
true meaning of these Schedules: And the like is to be used where the husband
and wife make a Surrender of the lands of the wife, to the end only to make an
estate thereof to the husband jointly with his wife, or to the husband for
term of his life in possession or Remainder: And likewise by the said custom
for every Tenant that shall be admitted in Reuersion, or Remainder expectant upon
the estate of any particular Tenant for life, in tail, or for years, granted
by copy, the same is but half so much as it is upon other admittances, upon
alienations, Surrenders, or dying seized as aforesaid.

Item, Every person that exhibiteth or delivers 30 Duties to the homage and
tennants for bills and Su^:
any Surrender or Bill to the Homage, ought to give and pay to the same Homage
for every such Surrender or Bill four pence; and every of the said six
Tenants, and also the Hradborough or Reeue which shall be at the taking of any
Surrenders as aforesaid ought to have four pence a piece of the parties that
make the Surrender, if the same Surrender be taken within the said Manors, or
in either of them. But if they go out of the said Manors or either of them
for the taking of the same, then to have eight pence a piece, and their charges
if they shall go further off. And the party that procures the said Surrender
ought to give to the said Tennants four pence besides the said fees, which
four pence is to be delivered with the said Surrender, or else he that
brings in the said Surrender without the said four pence, shall pay it of
his own purse to the Homage.

Item, If it chance at any time upon the death of 31 Though an heir be
admitted yet upon a new claim the homage shall enquire etc. for a coheire.
any Copyholder or customarie Tenant, that there is an heir or heirs found
and presented by the Homage, and after is or are admitted to the lands or
tenements of the said Copyholder, and at that time no other heirs shall be
known, and after it shall chance that one or other comes, and claims to be
co-heire with the said heir that is admitted, then the homage ought thereof to
enquire, and if they find his claim true, they ought to present the same, and
then he or they so claiming shall be likewise admitted and pay his Fine, and
have his part of the premises notwithstanding the former admission.

Item, If any man be admitted to any possession, 32 Where tennan^s is admitted,
and after that an other claims the whole, the Homage is not bound to enquire
but he is driven to his fuite.
or to any Reuersion, or Remainder of any Lands or Tenements, whether they be
to him descended as shall be supposed or to him Surrendered by any other person,
and after that comes another person or persons who pretends a title to the
whole premises, or to any part thereof, and desires that the Homage may
enquire thereof. In this case the said Homage is not bound thereof to enquire,
but he or they are driven to his or their suite or plaint, whether his or their
title be right or wrong Exceptin such case where any person or persons shall
claim as in the next precedent Article. And yet if any shall require the
Homage to find whether he or they were the son or sons or daughter or
daughters of such a one or no, and the homage knowing or well informed of the
truth, that he or they shall be the son, or sons or daughter or daughters of
him or her that dyed seized of the lands then in question. The Homage ought
therein to present the truth But not to present whether he or they ought to
have the premises or any part thereof to the which another person is already
admitted. But in such case he or they shall be driven to his or their suite or
plaint as aforesaid for the recovery of their said right if any right they
have; Except in such case where any person or persons shall claim as in the
next precedent Article.

Item, After the death of every person being a 33 How lands descended are to be
taken up.
customarie Tennant of the said Manors, or of either of them, the next heir
or heirs ought to come and take up the Lands and Tenements whereof his or
their ancestors so shall die seized At fourteen ^ee^es he is to be admitted
in his own person.
of what age soever he be of. And if he or they be of the age of fourteen
years or upwards he is to be admitted in his own person within a convenient
At fourteen years is to be admitted in his own person.
time after he or they shall be presented: Or else if he or they be under the
age of fourteen years, then to come and take it up by his Guardian Under 14.
years by Guardian.
until he be of the age of fourteen years as aforesaid, and to pay for his
fine according to the rates expressed in these Schedules, and the Gardean to
Guardian 3 shill^ngs 4 pence.
pay but three shillings and four pence at the most for his fine for the
Gardeanship or less, as the Steward or his Deputy shall think fit. And for
Lands descended from the part of the Father, the Who shall be Guardian.
next Cozen of the part on the Mother not able to inherit those lands, ought
to be Gardean. And if See ariicle. 37.
the lands came from the part of the mother, then the like cosen of the part of
the Father ought to be Gardean if that person will accept thereof; and upon
their refusal or not praying to be admitted Gardean, at the first or second
Court after that infant ought to be admitted; then may the Steward admit any
other of the kindred of the Infant to whom his Lands cannot descend to be
Guardian. And if none of the kindred will accept of the Gardianship, then may
another be admitted. And every The Guardian shall account.
Guardian shall account to the heir of the profits, and repair the Copyhold
Tenements of him whose Guardian he is, And upon admittance shall be bound to
the Lord for the time being, with And shall be bound to the Lord to perform the
same
condition for performance thereof in such sum as the Homage of the said
Court, or the greater part thereof shall like off. And of the lands of every
Infant under fourteen years of age that shall be a purchasor a guardian shall be
admitted and shall so demean himself in such manner as for the Guardian of an
Infant having Lands by descent is limited and appointed.

Item, Every person to whose use any of the said 34 They to whose use Lands are
surrendered, ought within 3. years after the presentment to take them up.
Lands or Tenements shall be Surrendered ought to come within three years after
the same be presented and take up the same by himself if he be of age, and to
be admitted as aforesaid, and to pay his fine or else by his Guardian as
aforesaid.

Item, If any of the said heirs, Alienees, or Gardians 35 The Lord may
distraine for the Fines. Or by de fault of distrese self the lands.
do not pay their Fines within one month after the same fines be extracted,
and the extracts delivered to the Reeue or his Deputy for the gathering
thereof, and by them or either of them demanded, then it shall be lawful for
the Lord or Lords of the said Manor or Manors for the time being, or his or
their officers to distraine; and auow as for rents, and for want of distress
to seize the Lands and Tenements for the which the said fine or fines are to be
paid, and to enjoy the same to his or their own use, until he or they shall be
fully satisfied and paid the said Fine or Fines to be paid by him or them that
so ought to pay the same.

Item, If any customarie, or copyhold Tennant 36 The like he may do for non
payment of the quitrent.
of the said Manors or of either of them, shall not pay his rents for his
copyhold for which the same is due, and demanded by the said Reeue, or his
Deputy: Then it shall b^e lawful for the Lord or Lords of the said Manor or
Manors for the time being or his or their Officers to distraine and anow, and
for want of sufficient distress to seize the lands and tenements out of the
which the same ought to be paid, and to take and enjoy the rents issues and
profits of the same to his or their own use, until he or they shall be fully
satisfied and paid the same rents by him or them that so ought to pay the same.

Item, That when any Tenant dies seized leaving 37 Who shall be Guardian.
his heir under the age of fourteen years the next of the kin to whom the
said Lands and Tenements cannot descend shall have if he shall require it the
custody of the heir, and of his lands and tenements committed unto him for
the use of the heir until he come to the age of fourteen years as is
aforesaid, and then he to choose his own See article. 33.
Guardian, and the former Guardian at any time after upon reasonable request to
yield account to the heir of the profits of his lands received.

Item, If any person or persons be disposed to let his or their customarie
Lands or Tenements to any other person or persons, and to their executors 38
Tennants may let leases for 31 years and four months without any lysence or
Fine:
and assigns for the term of one and thirty years, or less, the same
person or persons have and shall have full power and authority to set or let
to farm his or their Copyhold Lands or Tenements to any person or persons,
their executors administrators and assigns, for the term of one and thirty
years, and four months or less, in See the abstract of the indenture. page
7.
possession from the time of the making thereof, by writing, without any
license to him or them to be granted, and without paying any fine to the Lord,
or incurring any forfeiture, or seizure of or for the same. So as the same
lease do not exceed one and thirty years and four months from the time
of the making thereof. But such lease is and If such leases be not pres^nted to
the homage within on year after the making they shall be void.
ought to be presented to the Homage of the Manor whereof the Lands or
tenements so leased are held within one year after the making thereof, or else
the same lease so made, and not presented as aforesaid shall be void, and of none
effect.

Item, The custom of the Manor is to give to 39 Either manor is upon every
chaung of Lord to pay five pounds for recognition money.
the Lord of every of the said Manors, upon the change of every Lord at the
next Court after the first entry bona fide ten pounds of lawful money of
England, That is to say, out of each Manor five pounds for the Recognition
and* acknowledging the services which is to be leauied and collected by the
Reeue for the time being, amongst all the Copyholders of the said Manors
respectively according to the rates they shall be taxed at by the Homage at the
next Court to be holden after the coming of the new Lord.

Item, The Homage of every of the said Manors 40 How the Reeue of either manor
is to be chosen.
ought yearly at the general Court to be holden next after Michaelmas to
elect and choose several Reeues for every of the said Manors: That is to say
to elect and choose two customarie Tenants either of the said persons named
parties to the said presents their heirs or assigns, or of others not named
to bear the Office of the Reeue for each of the said Manors, namely he that
was before in election if he be alive and one other, or if he be dead two
other, to the intent the Lord of the said Manors, or of either of them or his
Steward may appoint, the one of them so elected for one whole year, that is
one to serve for each of the said Manors. So he be appointed within that
Manor of which he is a tenant, and for which he shall be so chosen, which Reeue
being so appointed He shall serve one whole year
ought to take upon him the said Office for one whole year then next ensuing,
to execute the same by himself or his Deputy for whom he shall answer, and
to be subject to account and answer What sine he shall pay if he refuse.
for the same, as in the said presents is set down: And if a Copyholder
shall be duly chosen and appointed by the Homage to be the Lords Reeue as
aforesaid, and according to his turn presented by the Homage and shall refuse
to serve the said Office by himself or his Deputic, then every such person so
refusing within the said Manor of Hackney, shall pay for a fine six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence. And every such person, so re^using within
the said Manor of The homage shall chose another until one do accept and
serve-
Stebenhuth shall pay for a fine ten pounds to the Lord of the Manor whereof
his Lands are holden. And the Homage of the same Manor shall be charged from
time to time, to choose another Reeue in the place of him that so shall refuse,
until such time as for the same Manor one be chosen, that shall and w^ll
serve the said Office. And every Copyholder that shall be chosen and appointed to
the said Office as aforesaid and shall refuse to serve the same office shall pay
the fine aforesaid to the Lord of that Manor for his refusal the one half
The half of fines paid by refusers shall be allowed him, who next shall serve.
of all which fine or fines of Tenant or Tennants so refusing to accept and
execute the said office of Reeueship, according to the true meaning of these
Schedules, the Lord or Lords of the said Manors or either of them of whom
respectively such tenant or tenants so refusing shall hold ought, and shall
from time to time allow unto such person or persons as being chosen and
appointed to be Reeue as aforesaid, and shall and will next after the refusal
of any one or more of the said tenants so chosen, accept and serve the said
office, the moyetie of the said Fine or Fines respectively to be by him
defaulked and retained in his account, and by the Lord of that Manor upon the
same Reeues account And be by him retained at his accompting.
whenever he shall account for the same to be allowed.

Item, If any Copyholder that shall accept and 41 In what cases the Lord may
seese the Reeues lands.
execute the said office of Reeue shall refuse to satisfy and pay unto the
Lord the yearly quitrents and Fines for admittances upon alienations or
discents wherewith such Reeue shall or may be lawfully charged by and according
to the true meaning of these presents; Or shall refuse to account with the Lord
within two months next yearly after Michaelmas having had the Rentall and
estracts of Fines upon admittances as aforesaid for that year by the space of
two months. Every such Reeues lands and tenements that shall refuse so to
account, and pay the said rents and fines which he shall or may have collected
as aforesaid, shall be seized into the Lords hands, and the Lord shall and may
take to his own use the issues and profits of his said lands and tenements,
until he shall pay unto the Lord, the rents and fines aforesaid, and until he
has also satisfied, and paid the Lord for And what he shall pay for his
offense.
his said offense (viz.) being Reeue of Hackney, six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence. And being Reeue of Stebunhuth ten pounds.
Nevertheless the Reeue ought not, nor shall be charged, or chargeable to
answer any quitrents contained in any rentall or estracts, unless it appear
unto him He is not to answer any quitrents, unless he know the tennant or where
the land lies.
by the rentall of the former Reeue, or otherwise be made known unto him by
some of the Lords officers who is the tenant, or where the land lies, for or
in respect of which the same quitrents ought to be paid.

Item, No copyholder of the said Manors or of 42 No Reeues within this
composition, shallbe charged with the Leet, or court baron otherwise then in
the 41. article.
either of them, being named parties to the said Indenture nor their heirs or
assigns ought or shall at any tune be charged to collect or gather any of the
amerciaments, fines, or other issues or profits of the Courts Leetes, or Courts
Baron holden within the said Manors, or of either of them, or be chargeable to
answer or account for the same, to the Lord of the said Manors, or of either
of them, otherwise then in the last precedent Article is mentioned, nor to
provide or allow for any dinners, Nor provide for any dinner^.
either on the day or days the Court Leete shall be holden upon, or on the day
or days of the two general Courts. But are and shall be thereof for ever freed
and discharged. Except that such tenant Except etc.
or his heirs shall hereafter purchase or have other customary lands then
those that the said persons named parties to the said Indenture, or some or one
of them the said persons do now hold, which shall be worth to be sold at the
least two hundred pounds of lawful money of England, or shall be of the clear
yearly value of twenty pounds of like money.

Item, Every one of the said customarie tennants 43 What tennants may be chosen
Recues.
named parties to the said Indenture whose lands Tenements and Hereditaments
holden by Copy of Court Roll of either of the said Manors, are worth
sixeteene pounds of like money as aforesaid by the year to be let, or two
hundred pounds to be sold, by the estimation and presentment of the Homage of
the same Manor shall bear the office of Reeue of and for such of the said
Manors whereof he shall be a Tenant by copy of Court Roll, and for which he
shall be chosen and appointed Reeue as aforesaid, when his or their time and
course does come.

Item, Every of the said Reeues, is to be allowed 44 What allowances the Reeue
is to have of the Lord.
of the said Lord or Lords for the executing of the said office for one year
as follows: (viz.) the Reeue of Stebunhuth three pounds six shillings and
eight pence, and six shillings eight pence more for and in respect of an
allowance of a coat cloth to the said Reeue. And the Reeue of Hackney fifty
three shillings and four pence, and six shillings eight pence more, for and
in respect of an allowance of a coat cloth to the same Reeue, and all other
commodities due and incident to the said office, for either of them, or used
heretofore to be paid to the said Reeue, by any the Tenants of the said Manors
respectively.

Item, The Reeues of the said Manors, and of either of them shall at the next
general Court, after 45 The Reeue to deliver the Rentall to his Successor. To
be amerced
his year of service expired deliver the rentall by which he made his account
to the Reeue that shall next succeed him upon pain to be amerced or fined by
the Homage if he shall not so do.

Item, All the customarie Tenants of the said 46 Copyholders may break and
dig their grounds, fell down timber and woods: suffer howsen ^^ decay:
without forfeicture.
Manors and of either of them may break and dig their copyhold grounds
holden of the said Manors and of either of them at his and their pleasure, and
fell and cut down their timber and woods growing, or that shall grow upon the
same, and convert it to their best use and profit, and may also suffer their
Copyhold Tenements and houses to decay without incurring any seizure or
forfeiture of their estates therefore, or other pain, and may take and pull
down their said Tenements, and erect or set them up again, either where they
stood before, or upon any other lands holden by copy of Court Roll of the said
Manors, But may not pull down howsen to set them upon free hold land
or of either of them. But they may not, or shall not take or pull them down
to set them or any part of them upon their own Free-holds, or upon the
Freeholds of any other. 47 Copyholders may lopp trees growing upon the wast
before their howsen.


Item, Every of the said copyholders, or reputed copyholders named parties to
the said Indentures may lop and shred all such trees as grow before their
houses or Tenements upon the waste ground, and the same convert to their own
use May dig gravel etc. upon the wast.
without any offense so the said trees stand for the defense of their houses,
yards, or gardens, and also may dig gravel, sand, clay and lome upon the
said waste grounds to build or repair any of their copyhold Tenements within
the said Manors, or in either of them without any license. So always as every
of the said copyholders do fill up so much as shall be dug by him or them.

Item, If any person or persons being Tenant Letting of lands for more then 31
years 4 months is a forfeicture.
customarie shall without license by Indenture or other writing or otherwise
let his said customarie Lands or Tenements for more years then one and thirty
years and four months, it shall be a forfeiture of his estate by the custom
of the said Manors, and of either of them being found and presented by the
Homage, or else otherwise lawfully and sufficiently proved.

Item, For Treason or Felony whatsoever that shall be committed by any
Copyholder of the said 49 For what offenses these copyholders shall forfeit
their estates.
Manors or of any of them for which he shall be lawfully attainted, he shall
forfeit his Copyhold Lands and Tenements to the Lord of the said Manor. And
for all other offense, or offenses, act or acts whatsoever, for which a
Freeholder ought by the common laws of the land to forfeit his freehold
lands and tenements, there a Copyholder of the said Manors, or of either of
them shall forfeit as a Freeholder ought to forfeit in like case his Free
hold. But if a copyholder be outlawed for any cause saving Treason or Felony,
the Lord Outlaw^ie, unless for treason or felony, shall be no forfeiture
shall not have the issues or profits of his lands. And if a copyholder make a
Feoffement of his copyhold, gift in tail, or lease for life or lives by Deed
or without Deed, by liuerie and seizin thereupon, or shall suffer a Recovery
at the Common More forfeitur of estate. viz. making a Feoffements gift in
tale, lease for lives, suffering a Recoldy at the common law.
law* levy a Fine, or wilfully refuse, and deny to pay, do, or perform his
rents, fines, suites customs and services at any time hereafter due to the
Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or of either of them, for their said
copyholds, the same wilful refusal being presented to the Homage by the
Leuijng a fine or wilful denying to pay the rents, fines etc.
oaths of three customarie Tennants with the Reeue or his Deputy, (the said
Tennants or Reeue, nor his Deputy being none of the Lords servants) and being
found and presented by the homage, the same shall be holden and reputed a
forfeiture of his estate, whatsoever he shall have by copy of Court Roll, at
the time of any such act, committed or done in so much of his and their
copyhold Lands and Tenements as he shall have committed any such act and only
for so much of his lands and tenements out of the which the said quitrent and
other duties is demanded, and shall be due, and wilfully denied by the said
Tenant or tenants as aforesaid. Or if any copyholder shall in the Or
disclaiming to hold of the Lord.
Lords Court or elsewhere in any Court of Record disclaim to hold his said
copyhold Lands and tenements of the Lord of the Manor whereof his Lands and
tenements are holden, or shall by pleading in the Lords Court, or other Court
of Record Or claiming their copy-holds to be free holds.
wilfully claim their copyholds to be Free-holds, or willingly and wittingly
plead in any Real action at the common law in chief as a Freehold Or plead
wittingly in a real action at common law in chief as a Freeholder.
Tenant or shall willingly and wittingly do any other act, or things in or
concerning his now Lands and tenements which shall be a disseisin or
disinheritance of the Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or of either of them,
their heirs or assigns Or do any other act which shall be a disseisin of the
Lord.
(other then such acts as in these Articles are especial mentioned or
dispensed withal) that then he shall forfeit his and their estate of and in
the same Lands and Tenements so disclaimed to be holden or claimed to be
Freehold, or for which he shall plead in chief or do any such other act or
thing as is aforesaid. Finally, the Lord of the said What other forfeictures
the Lord shall have.
Manors, or of either of them shall have all such other forfeitures, issues,
profits, and advantages of the said Copyholds as shall grow due to him by any
Statute, Laws of this Realm being not against and contrary to these Articles
and customs here expressly set down.

Item, If any person or persons having any estate 50 The act or neglect of
tennant for lives or years shall not prejudice those in remainder.
of any copyhold lands or tenements holden of the said Manors or of either of
them for term of life, or lives, or for term of years, or in the right of
their wives of any estate although he, she, or they, shall do or suffer, or
neglect to do any act or acts, during the time aforesaid, in or upon the said
Copyhold Lands, or Tenements, which may or shall be contrary to the custom of
the said Manors, or of either of them. The same act or acts, so being done
shall not prejudice or be hurtful unto the next person or persons to whom the
said customarie Lands or tenements should or ought to remain, reuert or come,
nor to the said wife or her heirs, not being party in Court, or consenting in
Court to the said act or forfeiture, nor that the Lord of the said Manors, or
of either of them shall take any longer advantage, issues, or profits of the
same Copyhold Lands or Tenements then during the time of such estates as is
aforesaid, of the party committing, doing, or assenting, to such act or acts.
So that after his or their decease or estates determined the said Lands and
Tenements shall remain, reuert, or come to the next person or persons, or to
such person or persons, to whom the same should have comen or remained, or go,
or reuert immediately after such estate or estates ended or determined, as
though there had been no such act or acts done, contrary to the tenor or true
meaning, of these presents by any such person or persons.

Item, The particular or private act or acts of any 51 The private act of any
tennants contrary to these articles, shall not extend to be a breach of the
customs to the hurt of the rest.
customary Tennant or tenants of any of the said Manors which shall happen to
be done* wilfully by or between them, or any of them, and the Lord or Lords of
the said Manors or either of them, and his or their Reeue, or of either of
them, contrary to the Articles, and true meaning of these presents neither
does nor shall extend to be co^strued to be a breach of the ancient Customs of
the said Manors or of either of them, to the hurt or prejudice of the rest of
the customarie Tenants but of themselves only doing the said particular act.
52 Tennant for life or years, making wast, shall be fined by the homage.


Item, That if any Tennant for term of life, or lives only, or for term of
years of customarie Lands shall make any waste, Then he shall be fined by the
Homage, the third part of which fine, shall be to the Lord, and the other two
parts shall come to him in the Reuertion or Remainder of the said copyhold.

Item, The Lord for none payment of amerciaments 53 For non payment of
amerciame^ts the Lord may distraine, but not seize.
may distraine his said Tennants parties to these presents, and auow for the
same as for Rents. But he cannot seize any of his or their Lands or Tenements
parties to these presents for non payment thereof until he be paid.

Item, Upon the admission of any co-heires, joint Tennants, or Tennants in
common if they cannot 54 How partition is to be made between co-heires joint
tennants or tennants in common.
agree to occupy their Lands and Tenements together, or to make partition
among themselves, then he or they that be grieved may by the custom of
either of the said Manors have a precept from the Steward directed to seven
customarie Tennants, or more of the said Manors within which the said Lands
and tenements do lie; and they shall make partition thereof, and the same
return to the Steward of the said Manors again to be enrolled in the Court
Rolls of the said Manors, whereof the said Lands or Tenements beholden.
Whereupon the said heirs shall go to the Steward of the said Manor within which
the said lands or tenements shall lie. And then elect and choose their parts in
form following ( That is to say, the youngest son to choose first, then he
that is next to the youngest to choose next, and so after that rate unto the
eldest (how many soever,) which eldest shall choose last. And likewise the same
order is to be observed amongst daughters if there be no sons. and amongst
all other degrees of heirs touching the customarie Lands and Tenements holden
of the said Manors or either of them. And upon every such partition, they
shall pay for a fine to the Lord two shillings and six pence or less at the
discretion, of the Steward, according to the quantity of the Lands or
Tenements so parted between tennants in common, and joint tenants for the like
fine the said division to be by the said Tenants without election of the
parties themselves but by casting of lots, if they cannot otherwise agree.

Item, If any customarie or free Tenants cattle, 55 These copyholders shall
pay but one penny for poundage.
or the cattle of their Farmers, be brought to the Lords pound. The said
Tenant or his Farmer shall pay for all his cattle if they be a hundred heads
or upwards or under for the poundage thereof but one penny, and he that is no
Tenant shall pay for every distress of cattle so pounded four pence. 56
Cattle impounded to be delivered by two copyholders.


Item, If any cattle be impounded within the Lords pound, by any person or
persons being a customarie Tenant or Tennants of the said Manors or of either
of them for any trespass committed or done, within the said Manors or in
either of them upon their Copyholds, that all such Cattle being so impounded
may by two of the said customarie Tenants of such of the said Manors, or of
either of them wherein the said trespass shall be committed which will
answer for such Damages and costs as shall be recovered in the said Court
against the owners of the same Cattle for the said trespass be delivered out
of the said pound unto the owner of the said Cattle, by the custom of the
same Manors and of either of them.

Item, No customarie Tenant shall sue, vex, or 57 No su^tes for title of
copy-holds out of the Lords court without license.
trouble any other customary Tenant for any Title of lands or tenements lying
and being within the said Manors, or in either of them being copyhold lands
or tenements of the said Manors, or of either of them, out of the Lords Court,
without the special license first had and obtained of the Lord of the said
Manors, or of either of them, or of his Steward for the time being. If any
person do the contrary, he shall have his Lands or Tenements seized into the
Lords hands, until he pay a fine to the Lord for the same offense, (viz.)
such fine as shall be ceased by the Homage at the next general Court of the
said Manor or Manors.

Item, That no customarie Tenants of the said 58 Cattle offending shall be
driven to the Lords pound.
Manors or of either of them, for any offense to be done by any man's cattle
within the said Manors or in either of them, shall drive the same cattle to
any foreign pounds, but to the Lords pound being within the said Manors or in
either of them, if any man do the contrary to be amerced at the next
general Court by the Homage. So always as there be asufficient pound of the
Lords there.

Item, That no tenant or any other person shall 59 How stakes marks and mears
between tennant and tennant ought to be set.
set any stake, mark, or meare, between tennant, and tennant, or between
tenant, and any other person that lies next unto him, without the parties do
thereunto agree, unless an order be appointed by the Homage, or the greatest
part of them that it may be first viewed, by twelve Tennants of the said
Manors, or of either of them where the stake, or meare is to be set, and there
to set the stake or mark indifferently between both the said parties, and so
to continue it upon pain of amerciament by the Homage. 60 Driuers of commons
when to be chosen,


Item, The Homage do and shall yearly use at the next general Court holden
the Tuesday the ninth day next after Easter day to Elect, and choose out of the
Hamblets within every of the said Manors certain customary tennants to be
driuers and viewers of the wastes and commons of the said Manors and of either
of them for one whole year, which tenants so elected have authority by the
said custom to drive the commons at any time when they find it surcharged,
and to impound the cattle by them so taken, and no other to drive the said
common then the persons so chosen as aforesaid.

Item, If by their driving the surcharging cannot be remedied, then they ought
to inform the homage 61 How surcharging the common is to be, remedied.
thereof at the next Court, that they may amerce the offenders, whether the
offenders be tenants or no tenants And also to put a pain or an a merciament
upon their heads, that they shall not likewise offend.

Item, If the said driuers receive by the said poundages 62 The driuers shall
account to the homage.
and more money then they spend in their travel, the rest shall be employed to
the scowring of the common Sewers, which be upon the said wast grounds and
commons, and laying of bridges over the said common Sewers, and shall make
their account in that behalf to the Homage at the general Court, when the
year for which they were chosen shall expire. 63 The homage may make Bylawes
which shall bind the tennants.


Item, The copyhold and customarie Tennants may make by laws at their general
Courts when need shall require, which custom shall be so continued, and the
said by laws so by them made shall bind all the Copyhold Tenants of the said
Manors or of either of them, so the same be not contrary to the true meaning
of these Articles.

Item, By the custom of the said Manors, and of either of them Tennants in
tail of customarie 64 Recoueryes may be suffered to bar intailes.
lands and tenements may suffer common recoueries within the said several
Manors with single or double vouchers or by agreement forfeit the said lands
and tenements into the Lords hands for the cutting of the estate tail, which
custom by these Articles shall have still continuance, and such Recoueries and
forfeitures, are and shall be good to bare the said in-taile.

Item, Whenever there shall be any Court or 65 Tennants not appearing at set
courts shall not be amerced above 4 pence,
Courts Baron (or other then the said two general Courts) kept within the said
Manors or either of them no copyholder ought nor shall be amerced above the
sum of four pence for any default of his appearance at any the same Court or
Courts (except the said two general Courts) neither shall incur any
forfeiture, or seizure of his Copyhold lands or tenements, or any other Damage
for any such default. And the said Amerciament to be taxed by the Affurors
tenants of that Court.

Item, The Steward or his Deputy is to have 66 The Stewards fees.
such Fees and allowances as hereafter are expressed, (viz.) for every
Surrender taken out of Court five shillings, and nothing for any Surrender
taken in Court, (for every woman covert Baron) that shall be examined, six
shillings eight pence, for every admittance of every person two shillings, for
entering every Surrender and making the copy of Court Roll thereupon six
shillings eight pence, for every precept for a view of partition and entering
the same, and the return thereof upon the Court Roll, and the copy thereof
two shillings six pence. And if it exceed two sheets of paper then for every
sheet over and above two sheets twelve pence more. For searching the court
Rolls for every year four pence. For every purchased Court thirteen
shillings four pence: For entering a note of a Lease granted of any Lands or
tenements containing the date, quantity of lands or tenements, and certainty
of term and to whom the same shall be granted, and for a note thereof to the
party six pence. For these things before expressed the Steward shall have
only such Fees as before is declared, and for all other things he shall have
as formerly has anciently been used and not more.

Item, All Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages 67 Buildings to be erected, shall
pay fines as those allreadie built.
that shall hereafter be built upon any the copyhol Lands, whereof the
customs are hereby meant to be declared, shall be held and enjoyed by the
copyhold Tenants thereof under the same customs and Articles herein declared
as the Lands whereon they shall be built are holden and enjoyed. (But shall pay
such fines) therefore as is before declared for Messuages, Tenements and
Cottages 68 The Lord shall not sever from the manor any of these copyholds, to
any persons in fee simple, or other estate of freehold etc.
that shall be new built.

Item, The Lord of the said Manors, or of either of them, their heirs or
assigns shall not at any time hereafter grant or convey severed, from the
Manor whereof the same is now holden, or ought to be holden any of the
Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenemements or Hereditaments whereof any of the
said persons named parties to the said Indenture hereunto annexed is now
copyholder or customarie Tenant to any person or persons in Fee-simple,
Fee-taile, or for term of life, or other estate of freehold, or for any
estate, or term other then by copy of Court Roll, according to the customs
of the said Manors, and true meaning of these presents, and the Iudenture
whereunto the same are annexed, except the Freehold to be granted or severed at
the petition and desire of such person or persons as then shall be copyholder
thereof, according to the true meaning of these presents. And it the Lord has
granted away the Freehold of any the copyhold Lands or Tenements whereof the
custom is hereby meant to be declared, he shall get, and take the same back
again, and the same shall notwithstanding such grant or alienation be annexed
to the Manor whereof it was, or is held, and shall be held and enjoyed by the
Tenant his heirs and assigns thereof, by copy of Court Roll of the same
Manor under the rents, services and customs in these Articles expressed, and
not otherwise. And also that the Lord shall admit by his Steward or his Deputy,
all such Tenant and Tenants that ought of right to be admitted upon the
presentment of the Homage.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE COPYHOLD TENANTS OF THE MANORS OF
STEPNEY alias STEBVNHVTH, and HACKNEY for whom the said Decree concerning the
customs aforesa^d was made in Chancerie the two and twentieth day of July in
the fifteenth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King James against the
said Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth then Lord of the said Manors.
A
VIncent Amcots Limehouse. Jacob Ashley Limehouse. William Adams Limehouse.
Will. Ardington White Chapel. Thomas Abbot Popler. Jane Alder Popler. Nicholas
Ask with Hackney. William Alder of Ratcliffe highway.
B
William Bygot Ratcliffe William Barnet White Chapel. Robert Borne Pop. Hugh
Bullock and vxor. Henr. Banister Esquire Hackney. William Bird and vx. Hackney:
Nicholas Burton Hackney. Edward Brown Hackney. Gyles Bynckes Hackney. Gyles de
Budt Hackney. Edmond Barbor Oldford.
Henry Barbor Francis Barbor. Tho: Baxter and vxor, Bow. Michael Bonner, Bow.
John Briggs and vxor, Bow. Christopher Baker Ratcliffe.
William Brown Robert Benns Peter Baker Alice Bland Raph Bowers Thomas Best.
Quescell Bratost, alias Lee Limehouse.
John Ball John Bennet Robert Bradshaw Matthew Barret Richard Bromfield
Elizabeth Bedford John Bigot.
C
Thomas Commins. Nicholas Cosens Thomas Crane. Richard Catcher. Edward Catcher.
Thomas Croxall. William Cook and vxor, Walter Henley in Reuersion. Thomas
Catcher Hackney.
John Catcher Richard Cheyney Francis Clerkevid. John Catcher William Catcher
Thomas Catcher. John Cowper White Chapel.
Tho: Coxan. Walter Cook Ratcliffe.
Walter Coal. Peter Croxall. Mary Cope Limehouse.
Elizabeth Clerk. Marion Crispe Popler.
Mary Carpenter. John Chandler Bow.
William Clarke George Cook, Inholder Isaac Cotton. Richard Catcher, fill.
Tho: John Coleman; White Chapel.
D
Nicholas Diggins, Mileend. William Dickinson Hackney.
James Deane William Dauis. Nicholas Dickens, Stepney. Hugh Dauis, White
Chapel. Alexander Dauison Popler.
James Dauies George Dethicke Gilbert Dethick Henry Dethicke. John Day, Bow.
Rachel Dauison. Robert Dixon, White Chapel.
E
John Eaglefield, and Jane his wife. Bow
Richard Edwards Alexander Elcock. Richard Elcock. George Edwards, Shorditch.
William Ewens. Limehouse.
John Euans. John English.
F
Raph Flauell, Ratcliffe. John Flint, Limehouse. John Forster, Bow. John Fell,
Hackney. Fuller widow, Ratcliffe.

G
William Gough, Bow William Goddard Vincent Goddard. John Garland Bow.
Richard Gouge. John Graves Limehouse.
Michael Geere. John George. Roger Gunston Ratcliffe.
Roger Glouer John Gunston. Thomas Goddard. John Gruit and vxor. Richard Glouer.
John Francis Robert Thomas
H
Sir Ferdinando Heyborne Hackney.
Gresham Hogan Henry Haynes Thomas Hawks Richard Harrison. Sr Tho: Hardresse
Mileend Mileend.
Robert Heart Thomas Hog Will: Herendin Robert Hunt. Richard Hoskins Limehouse.
Walter Hendley. Richard Hale Ratcliffe.
Robert Henricke. John Howland White Chapel.
Cord well Hamond Geor. Houghto^ and vx. Thomas Halbrooke Nicholas Hallam
Thomas Hartis Waiter Hallyley Elizabeth Hide.
Dorothy John Hills. Popler.
John Harbert Rob. Hickes Will: Hanford. Robert Hudson. John Hither, Bow.
Francis Hollyday. The heirs of Haggis. The heirs of Tho: Hardcastle.
I
Sir John Iowles Knight Bow. William Iuie Limehouse.
Roger Jones Margaret Jorden. Michael Jones, et vxor Bow. Thomas Jones
Ratliffe.
John Ienks Jonas James. Nicholas Isack. Adam Johnson Shoraitch. Jones widow,
Limehouse.

K
John Key Miles, Hackney. John Killingworth, Shorditch. John Knowles, Popler.
William Kattle. John King, Limehouse.
L
Robert Lineage. Robert Lambard Bow.
John Lowden. Thomas Lawrence Ratliffe.
George Linum. Richard Leigh, et vxor. Dame Margaret Lake. Richard Lowfield.
John Lowfield. William Lowfield. Humfry Lowfield. John Linkes. William Lyones
Mil^nd.
John Lyones.
M
Sir Will: Martin Knight Hack:
Elizabeth Mackeris. William Mansbridge. Richard Mills, John Maynard Limehouse.
John Mynshawe Isabell Moore John Moore Michaell Merrial. William Millar
Shorditch.
George Michell. Thomas Mould Stepney.
Edward Mathewes. Thomas Maning, Ratliffe. Henry maybancke whitechap:
Samuel Marsh Thomas Marsh. Eme Melsham vid. Thomas Michell. Anne Michell
Popler.
John Manshippe. Francis Moore, Bow. Richard Merit. Tho: Marsh Esquire Milend.
Thomas Milton. Ioane Manly.
N
John Newet Hackney.
William Newman John Nichols Barbara Nichols. Edward Nichols, Ratliffe Laurence
Netmaker, Shorditch. Thomas newport, Limehouse. Thomas Nichols Shipwrite.
P
William Phillips sen: Bow. William Philips iun. Lime:
Richard Parkes William Pond William Peacocke William Pointell Giles Patricke,
et vx. William Palmer, Bed. Green. Thomas Peirepoint, Whitechap: Thomas
Peirciuall, Bow. Henry Parsons, et vx. Shorditch. Henry Parsons Hackney.
Miles Pressick Vincent Parrit, Popler. John Pettit. Thomas pinnock. Richard
Pointell. Thomas Pie. Christopher Potkin, Hackney.
Q
Matthew de Quester.
R
Samuel Rowley Whitechap.
Roger Robinson Anne Riland late wife of Will: Haggis. Richard Rooding, Bow
William Roberts. Henry Reynolds, Popley. Edward Russell Ratliffe.
Robert Rickman Edmund Rolfe John Rolfe. Thomas Railton, Popley.
Catherin Rushbrooke Henry Rivers. Richard Row, Hackney. John Row. John Rich
Limehouse.
Edith Read. William Reeue Elizabeth Rider Bridget Rider Katherin Rider
Grissingon Rider. Roger Rose, White Chapple. Roger Rose and Hackney.
John Rose. William Swain Hackney.
John Steward John Shelley John Snape Barthol. Smith. George Saris, of London,
Limehouse and Ratliffe. William Simons, Limehouse: Peter Sumner Bow.
Thomas Salter, et vx: Thomas Scorier Edward Smith James Short, Shorditch:
Thomas Saunderson Ratliffe:
John Sadler senior: John Stokes: Richard Simmes, milend: John Smith Popley.
Samuel Soame John Swain: Robert Sheffield Jeremy Swanley.
I
John sweet, Bednall green. George Smith White:
John Smith his son: Anthony Skinner: Paul Smith, White Chap: John Sadler
iunor: Nicholas Simondson, Rat: Samuel Sayers, Hackney.
T
William Thorn Popley.
John Thorn Robert Thorn: Edward Thickins White:
Henry Tyler: Morgan Thomas, Shorditch: Henry Troutbeck Bow.
John Thorowgood Stephen Trafford: Richard Tiler Limehouse.
Peter Tailor.
V
Thomas Usher Hackney:
Thomas Valentine.
W
John West Popley.
Thomas Wats John Walden Thomas West. Edmond White, Hackny. Tho: Walker
Barthol: Walker Eliz: Walker Margaret Walker. Milend.
Emery Wilson. Eliz: Wilding wid. Jane Wilding Jane Willson. John Watts.
Ratliffe.
Wattkyns Wid. Abraham Wakefield White Chapel
Thom. Wilson et vx. Laurence Wyneall. Alice Williams: John Wild, Shorditch.
Elizabeth walker Lime:
Henry Walker John Walker Matthew Woodcott Anne Woodcott, vid. Walter Whiting.
Thomas Whitebread Bow.
Andrew Wilmer: John Wilkinson: Smith Wilkinson: Henry Watley: John Watley:
John Wright: Edward Wyborne: John Wyborne.
Y
Thomas Yardley, White Chap:
ANOTHER TABLE ALPHABETIcall, for the ready finding of the several customs,
privileges and note-worthy matters, contained in this Book.
Act or neglect of tennant for life or years shall not prejudice those in
remainder, article 50. Act private of any tennants contrary to these articles
shall not extend to be abreach of customs to the hurt of the rest, article 51.
Admission denied by the Lord, see article 28. How lands descended are to be
taken up, article 33. 34 See Dissents, and Surrenders. Amerciaments, the Lord
may distreyne for, but not seize, articles 53. Annoyances, how to redress, see
article 7. Appearance: at two general Courts yearly, article 3. Failing to
appear shall be amerced, article 4. Failing at any Court (other then the two
general Courts) shall not be amerced above four pence article 65. Buildings
hereafter to be erected shall pay no other fines then in these articles, art.
67. Bylawes, may be made by the Homage which shall bind the Tennants, art:
63. Courts, see Appearance. Commons surcharged how to remedy, art: 61. see
Driuers. Courtesy of England, none for men here, art: 11. Claim by diverse,
and suite for Copyhold, art: 31. 32. 57. Change of Lord, see Recognition.
Coheyres, see Discents and Partition. Copyholders, may not pull down housen to
set them upon Freehold land, art: 46. See Forfeitures. Copyholders May break
and dig their grounds. May fell down timber and woods. May suffer housen to
decay without forfeiture. May loppe trees upon the wast before their housen.
May dig gravel, sand, clay and loame upon the wast to build or repair, art:
46. 47. See Leases. Discents. art. ^0. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 33. Dower
n^ne, art: 11. Dryuers of the Common, art: 60. 61. 62. Enchroachments and
annoyances how to redress, art: 7. Escheate to the Lord for want of Heir,
art: 10. Estates of Inh^ritance, art: 1. Fines due to the Lord upon admissions,
art: 19. 26. 35. 67. Forfeitures of Estate, art: 48. 49. Fees to the Homage,
art: 56. 30. Fees to the Steward, art: 66. Guardian of the Heir under age, art:
33. 37. Gauelkinde. art: 12. Homage, their charge and duty, etc. art: 8. 9.
23. 31. 62. 63. What fees are due to the land, art: 5. 6. 30. Heir not knowing
what shall be done, art: 10. Headborough may take Surrenders art: 20. 22. Last
will and Testament. See Surrenders. Leases, Tennants may let for thirty one
years and four months in possession from the making without Lysence art: 38.
but may not let for longer time upon pain of forfeiture, art: 48. Leet: these
tennants (being Reeues) are not to be charged with the Leet book, art: 42.
Marckes, Meares and Stakes, how to set betwixt Tennants, art: 59. Partition,
how to make betwixt Coheires, Ioint-tennants, and tennants in common, art: 54.
Pownd of the Lord and cattle impounded how to deliver, article 55. 56. 58.
Quit-rents when to be paid, etc. art. 2. 36. 41. Reeue, to take surrenders,
art: 20. Surrenders taken by him when to be presented. 22. How to be chosen,
40. How long to serve, Ibidem. His fine for refusing to serve, Ibid. A new to
be chosen upon refusal, Ibid. The succeeding Reeue shall have half of the
fine of the former refusing and detain it in his account. Ibid. His lands
shall be seized for not paying rents and fines. 41. His forfeiture for not
paying, Ibid. He is not to answer any quit-rents unless he know the
tennant or the land. Ibid. Discharged of the Leet book, Court Baron and
dinners. 42. Who may be chosen Reeue, 43. What allowance and fees he shall have
for executing the office. 44. He must deliver the Rentall to his successor or
shall be amerced. 45 Recoueries to bar Intailes, art: 64. Recognition, money
at the Caunge of the Lord, art: 39. Surrenders, how they are to be made, art:
1. 19. How to be taken before Headbrough or Reeue. art: 20. How to be taked of
women covert baron, art: 21. 24 When surrenders are to be presented, art: 22.
25. Surrenders made according to these articles are good, 27. Surrenders to
make the wife a Ioincture. art: 29. Those to whose use lands are surrendered
ought within three years after the presentment to take them up, art: 34.
Stakes, marckes and meares betwixt tennants, art: 59. Stewards, fees
particularly set down, art: 66. Seuering, the Lord of the Manor may not sever
any of these Copyholders to any person in fee, art: 68. Titles in controversy
how to decide, see Claim. Women covert baron, see Surrenders. Wast, tennants
for life or years making wast, shall be fined by the Homage, art: 52.

FINIS.
LONDON

Imprinted by WILLIAM JONES, with consent of the said right honorable THOMAS
LORD WENTVVORTH, the fourth day of December. 1617.

Anno. 21. Jacobi Regis.
MEMORANDVM, that according to the former Couenaunts and agreements in this
Book contained, his said Lordship has Honorably procured the Act of
Parliament, (so long desired) for perpetual establishment of the said
Customs, benefits, and privileges, togegether with certain expositions,
enlargements, and explanations thereunto added. The copy of which Act Verbatim
is as follows. viz.

An Act for confirmation of the Copyhold estates and Customs of diverse
Copyholders, of the Manors of Stepny and Hackney, according to certain
Indentures of agreement, and a Decree in the High Court of Chauncery, made
between the Lord of the said Manors and the Copyholders.

IN most humble manner, do beseech your most Excellent Majesty, Your Highness
most humble and loyal subject Thomas Lord Wentworth, Lord of the Manors of
Stepney alias Stebenheath and Hackney, in Your Majesty's County of Middlesex,
and Your Highness most humble and obedient subjects, Sir John Iolles knight, and
all the other Copiholders and customary Tenants of the said Mannours, or of
either of them, being parties to certain Indentures: bearing date the
twentieth day of June, in the fifteenth year of your Highness Reign of
England, made between the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth, of the one part, and the
said Sir John Iolles and diverse other Copyholders and Customary tenants of the
said Manors in the same Indentures named, of the other part, and all the now
Copi-holders and customary tenants of the said Manors and of either of them,
claiming by from or under the said Copyholders and Customary tenants parties
to the said Indentures. That whereas heretofore (...) of the Indenture o^ the
^0 of ^un^. se^ (...)
diverse questions and Differences have arisen and been moved, between your
said subject Tho: Lo: Wentworth, and the Copyholders and customary tenants of
the said Manors for and concerning the Copyhold lands, tenements hereditaments
and estates of and within the same Manors, and diverse customs, benefits,
privileges, discharges, and other matters concerning the said Copyhold
estates and premises: For appeasing whereof and for prevention of the like and
all others which in time to come might happen or grow between the said Lord
his heirs or assigns, and others Lords of the said Manors, and the said
Copyholders and customary tenants named in the said Indentures, and others
tenants of their tenements that shall be hereafter. The same Indentures,
together with certain schedules thereunto annexed, were by the mutual consent
and agreement of the said Lord and tenants made sealed delivered and duly
enrolled in Your Majesty's High court of Chauncery: In which said Indentures
and schedules are contained and comprised diverse customs, orders, immunities,
discharges, benefits and privileges, by which the said Copyholders and
customary tenants their heirs and assigns, were and are to take, hold use and
enjoy, inherit, alien, demise and dispose all and every or any the lands
messuages, tenements, cotages and hereditaments, which they, every or any of
them respectively then held claimed or enjoyed, by force or pretense of any
grant before that time made by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manors or either
of them. And diverse other agreements, between the said Lord, and Copyholders
or customary Tenants, as in and by the said Indentures and schedules more at
large it does and may appear. Which said Indentures and schedules, The
Indenture of the 20: day of June was decreed in Chancery. See Page: 12.
and all the matters therein contained, in or shortly after Trinity term in
the said Fifteenth year of Your Highness reign, upon a bill exhibited into
Your Majesty's said court of Chauncery by the said Copyholders against the
said Lo: Wentworth, and upon the same Lords answer thereunto, were duly
confirmed, established, and Decreed by the Decree of your Majesty's said court
of Chauncery as by the said bill, answer and Decree remaining of Record in the
said court it does also appear.

And whereas in the said Indentures, one Recital of the clause for making of
Leases. See Page: 7. and Page 39.
Clause or Article is contained in these words following: And the said Thomas
Lord Wentworth, for him his heirs and assigns does by these presents grant
and agree, to and with the said Sir John Iolles and all other the persons named
to be parties to these presents, and to and with the heirs and assigns of
every of them, that every one of them, and every of their heirs and assigns
shall and may freely hereafter from time to time grant, lease or demise by Deed
or otherwise without license or copy of Court roll, such or so much of the
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, or any part or parts thereof, of which
they or any of them are Copyholders or customary tenants, or reputed to be
Copyholders or customary tenants to such person and persons, and for such
term and estate, not exceeding Thirty and one years and four momonethes in
possession, from the time of the making of any such grant or demise, as to the^
and every or any of them respectively shall be thought fit or necessary,
without any forfeiture of estate, seizure, claim, disturbance, denial or
impeachment of the said Thomas Lo: Wentworth his heirs or assigns, or any of
his or their officers. So always that such grants, lease and leases so to be
made, be at the first or second general court for the Manor whereof the
lands or tenements so happening to be granted leased or demised are parcel to
be holden next after the making thereof be published in open Court of that
Manor before the Homage there, and a Remembrance thereof to be required to be
made in the Rolls of the same court for the date term and quantity of lands
cottages or tenements so granted leased or demised. Which remembrance the said
Thomas Lord Wentworth couenanteth and grants for him his heirs and assigns,
to and with the said Sir John Iolles and all other the said persons named
parties to these presents, and their and every of their heirs and assigns
upon the tender of a certainty thereof in writing to the Steward or Deputy
Steward of that manor, for the time then being, together with six pence of
lawful money of England for the entering thereof, shall be in the court rolls
of that Manor duly and in convenient time and without delay enrolled, and a
note thereof delivered by the Steward for the time being or his Deputy, to the
party so leasing or any for him, without any other consideration fee or reward
to be given or paid for the same.

And in the said Schedules one other article Recital of the 38 article see
Page: 39.
to the like effect is contained in these words following. Item, if any person
or persons be disposed to let his or their customary lands or tenements, to any
other person or persons and to their executors and assigns for the term of
one and thirty years or less, the same person or persons have and shall have
full power and authority to set or let to farm his or their copyhold, lands
or tenements to any person or persons their executors administrators and
assigns, for the term of one and thirty years and four months or less in
possession from the time of the making there of by writing without any license
to him or them to be granted, and without paying any fine to the Lord, or
incurring any forfeiture or seizure of or for the same: So as the same lease
do not exceed one and thirty years and four months from the time of the
making thereof: But such lease is and ought to be presented to the Homage of
the Manor whereof the lands or tenements so leased, are held within one year
after the making thereof: Or else the same lease so made and not presented as
is aforesaid shall be void and of none effect, as in and by the said
Indentures and Schedules appears. The intent and true meaning of which said
Indentures, The intent of the Clause and Article was to make good all leases,
not exceeding 31. years and 4. months.
and of all and every the said parties thereunto was and now is: That the said
clauses and articles should and shall be taken and construed to be to confirm,
allow, and make good all and every leases and grants made and to be made and
entered as aforesaid, although any such lease or grant, leases or grants, has
or have been or shall be made or limited to commence or begin from after or
at any day or time after the making or date thereof so as the whole term
granted or to be granted in or by such lease or grant leases or grants,
together with the time incurred or to to incur from the day of the date or
making thereof, until the day or time limited or to be limited for the
beginning or commencement thereof do not exceed Thirty and one years and four
months in the whole.

And the said several limitations and provisions contained in the said first
recited clause or article for or concerning such publishing of the said leases
or grants, and such requiring of a remembrance thereof to be made in the said
rolls, and such tender of the Certainty thereof inwriting, and of the said six
pence for the entry thereof as in and by the same clause or article is
prescribed or metioned. And the said limitation or provision contained in the
said last recited clause or article for or concerning such presenting of such
leases to the said Homage as in and by the same last recited clause or article
is prescribed or mentioned were inserted into the said several clauses or
articles, respectively as is aforesaid: To the only intent And to prevent
frauds etc.
and purpose to prevent frauds to be used by any Copyholders of the said
Manors or either of them in letting his or their Copyhold lands or tenements
for years at a small rent or otherwise, and afterward surrendering the same
to the use of some other person or persons for money or other considerations,
as if it were in possession and not charged with any such Lease or grant: But
not with any purpose, that the neglect or omission of publishing any such Lease
or But not to give any forfeictur to the Lord, for neglect.
grant in the court of the said Manors or either of them, or of any request to
be made for any such remembrance thereof to be made in the Rolls of the said
Court or of the tendering of a certainty of any such lease in writing to the
said Steward or Deputy Steward of any of the said Manors, or of the said six
pence for entry thereof or of the presenting thereof to the said Homage as in
and by the said recited clauses or articles is limited or mentioned, should
give or be any cause of forfeiture or seizure of any of the said copyhold
premises so to be leased or granted, to the Lord of the said Manors or either
of them for the time being, but only to make such Leases and Grantes, for and
in respect of such neglect or omission as is aforesaid utterly void and of no
e^^ect, which said intent and true meaning of the said Indentures and of the
said parties thereunto is testified, agreed and declared in and by certain
other Indentures made between the said parties to the said first recited
Indentures, and bearing date the last day of The Indentures of the 30: of June.
June in the said Fifteenth year of your Majesty's Reign. May it therefore
please Your most excellent Majesty, at the humble suite of your said subjects,
and for the settling of perpetua^l peace and quietness amongst them in and
concerning the premises: That it may be enacted by your highness with the
assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and be it enacted by the Authority of the same: That the
making of any Lease or grant, leases or grants sithence the making of the said
first mentioned Indentures, or of any Lease or The Act that Leases may be let
for 31: years 4. months from the making, without forfeiture.
grant, leases or grants at any time hereafter to be made for any term or
terms of years not exceeding one and thirty years and four months from
the making or Date thereof by any the Copyholders or Customary Tenants parties
to the said first mentioned Indentures their heirs or assigns, or others that
hereafter shall be Tenements by Copy of Court Boll or Customary Tenants of any
of the Lands or Tenements that were any of the said persons named to be
parties at the time of the making of the said first mentioned Indenture, from
time to time shall not be any forfeiture, or cause of forfeiture, or seizure,
to or for the Lord of the said Manors, or either of them for the time being,
or to or for any other person or persons lawfully clayming from by or under the
same Lord or Lords allthough such Lease leases or grants has been or shall be
made without any license of the Lord of the said Manors or either of them or
has not been or shall not be published in the Court of the same Manors or
either of them, and allthough no request has been or shall be made for any
remembrance thereof to be made in the Rolls of the said Court, or any such
tender of a certainty of any such lease or grant, leases or grants, or of six
pence or any other sum for entry thereof, and although any such Lease or
grant, leases or grants has not or have not been or shall not be presented
to the said Homage as in and by the said clauses or articles is prescribed or
mentioned. And although any such Lease or grant, leases or grants has or have
been or shall be made or limited to commence or begin from after or at any
day or time after the making or date thereof, so as the whole term granted or
to be granted in or by such Lease or grant together with the time incurred or
to incur from the day of the date or making thereof until the day or time
limited or to be limited for the beginning or commencement thereof do not
exceed, Thirty one years and four months in the whole, and that the neglect
or omission of any such publishing, requesting, tendering, or presenting as is
aforesaid neither is nor shall be any forfeiture or cause of forfeiture or
seizure of the Lands or Tenements so Leased or to be leased or granted or any
of them: But if any such neglect or omission has been or at any time
hereafter shall be, But the Leases to be void, if they be not presented at the
first or 2. general Court next following.
then every such Lease of or concerning the which such neglect or omission has
been or shall be had, shall be utterly void and of no effect.

And be it further enacted by the authority of Both the Inde^ters Schedules,
Decree, and present explanation of the said clause and Art. enacted to stand
forever.
this present Parliament: That as well the aforesaid two clauses or Articles
herein perticulerly recited with such alteration or addition, and so explaned,
construed, and enlarged as is aforesaid: As also all and every other the
Clauses, Articles, Agreements and matters in the said several Indentures,
Schedules, and Decree and every or any of them contained shall be ratefied,
allowed, and confirmed by the authority of this present Parliament, and that
the same several Indentures, Schedules, and Decree so explained, confirmed and
enlarged, as is aforesaid: and every of them shall be of force to bind and
conclude, all and every the said parties thereunto or to any of them, and their
and every of their heirs executors administrators and assigns, and all and
every person and persons clayming or which shall claim from by or under them
or any of them in all things, according to the purport effect and true meaning
of the same several Indentures, Schedules, and Decree, and of every of them,
and of this present Act: And that the same several Indentures, Schedules and
Decree, and every of them and every Clause, Article, and sentence in them and
every or any of them contained with such alteration and enlargments, and so
explained as is aforesaid, shall for ever from and after the making of the same
Indentures, Schedules, and Decree, stand be and remain, and shall be adjudged
and taken to stand and be of such and the same force and effect to all intents
and purposes as if the same several Indentures, Schedules and Decree, so
explained, construed and enlarged, as is aforesaid and every of them and every
Clause, Article and sentence in every of them contained were specially and
perticulerly expressed and enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament.

And whereas sithence the making of the said Those which have compounded since
the first Indenture; shall enjoy the like benefit as the former.
first mentioned Indentures Your most humble Subjects, Sir Thomas Hardresse
Knight, Richard Catcher son of Thomas Catcher monyer, John Wright butcher,
Thomas Pynnocke, Elizabeth Hide, Dorithy Hide daughter of Edward Hide, Walter
Whiting mariner, Giles Patrick and Sibell his wife, Michaell Merrioll, John
Bigate, Anne Ryland late the wife of William Haggis, Thomas Wilson gentleman,
and Katherine his wife, John Crane, Giles de Bude, Sara Hill, Constance Clarke,
Mary Simondson, Thomas Denham, Samuel Crowther, John Crowther, Joseph
Crowther, Mary Tinesty, Thomas Ieffery, George Needham, William Lock, Peter
Pierce his heirs, Thomas Damport gentleman, Richard Bradley, Thomas Paramore
Esqtuer, John Robothom gentleman, Richard Alsop, John Vassoll, William
Speering, George Speering, Walter Whiting, Richard Paramore, John Robinson,
Griffine Ellis, Joseph Thornton, Beniamine Thornton, Tobias Thornton, Matthew
Graves, William Philips Mariner, JOHN GALE gentleman, WILLIAM GALE gentleman,
HYMFRY WESTVVOOD, GEORGE SMITH gentleman, CHRISTOPHER POTKIN, EDWARD BVRLEY,
FELIX WILSON gentleman, and ANNE his wife, ARTHVR WINGHAM, RICHARD WINGHAM and
THOMAS WINGHAM her sons, WILLIAM DOVE gentleman Anne his wife, and JOHN PEASE
her son, WILLIAM CHAPEL and HENRY JOHNSON Brewer, ROBERT KEALE* gentleman,
THOMAS CHAPMAN IOANE his wife, DANIELL BASSANO, JOHN HODGSON, HELKIAH READ,
CORNELIUS GODFREY, THOMAS THORNTON, PHILLIP JOYCE and ELIZABETH his wife,
THOMAS THREDDER, being Copyholders and Customary Tennants of Diverse
messuages, Lands, and Tenements, some o^ them being percell of or within the
said Man nor of Stepney alias Stebenheath, and the residue thereof being
parcel of or within the said Manor of Hackney, have likewise sithence the
said first mentioned Indentures compounded, and agreed with Your said Subject
Thomas Lord Wentworth, to have and enjoy to them, their Heirs and Assigns,
such the same and the like Customs, Orders Immunities, discharges, benefits
and Privileges, of in for and concerning All the Messuages, lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, which they the said Copyholders and customary Tenants last
before named and every or any of them respectively do now hold claim or enjoy,
by force or pretense of any grant heretofore made by Copy of Court Roll of the
said several Manors, or either of them, as the said Sir John Iolles and the
rest of the said Copyholders being parties or named parties to the said
several Indentures, their heirs and assigns by the intent and true meaning
of the said several Indentures Schedules and Decree, and of this present Act,
have and enjoy, or are to have and enjoy of in for or concerning their said
several Copyhold messuages, lands Tenements and Herediraments. It may further
please Your most excellent Majesty for the like settling of a continual peace
between Your said subjects Thomas Lord Wentworth and the said Sir Thomas
Hardresse knight and other the last named Copyholders aforesaid: That it may
be further enacted by Your Highness with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled.

And be it enacted by the authority of the same Parliament: That as well the
said several Indentures Schedules and Decree, and every of them with such
exposition, enlargement, and explanation as aforesaid: As also this present Act
of Parliament, shall extend unto and comprehend, and shall be taken and
adjudged to extend unto and comprehend the said Sir Thomas Hardresse Knight and
other Copyholders aforesaid before mentioned to have compounded and agreed
with the said Lo: Wentworth, sithence the making of the said first mentioned
Indentures for and concerning all the Messuages lands Tenements and
Hereditaments which they the said last mentioned Copyholders or any of them
respectively do now hold, claim or enjoy by force or pretense of any grant by
copy of Court Roll of the said Manors or either of them, as fully and amply,
and in as large and beneficial manner, to all intents and purposes, as if the
same last mentioned Copyholders and every of them had been parties and party
to the said several Indentures and either of them, and as if their said
several Copyhold Messuages lands Tenements and Hereditaments had been by
apert and presize words contained or comprised in the said several Indentures
Schedules and Decree. and in this present Act of Parliament, and every of them:
And that the said last mentioned Copyholders and every of them, and the heirs
executors administrators and assigns of them and every of them, and all and
every person and persons clayming or which shall claim from by or under them
or any of them shall and may forever hereafter, have take an enjoy such the
like and the same benefit profit and advantage by the said several
Indentures, Schedules, and Decree of, for, and concerning, all and every the
said Messuages and Premises, which they and every or any of them respectively
do hold, claim, or enjoy by force or pretense of any grant, by Copy of Court
Roll of the said Manors: or either of them, and as fully and amply, as the
said parties: to the said several Indentures, their Heirs and Assigns, by
the intent and true meaning, of the said several Indentures, Se edules and
Decree, and of this present Act may have take or enjoy, or are or ought to
have, take or enjoy.

Provided always, that this Act or any None but those who have compounded,
shall have benefit by this Act.
thing therein contained: shall not extend or be any wise construed, or
expounded, to extend to any Copyholders, other then such as are named parties
to the said first recited Indentures, and the Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, of every of them, and all and every person, and persons, lawfully
claiming, or which shall claim, from, by, or under them: or any of them, And
other then such Copyholders who are before named in this Act, and who have
sithence compounded, and agreed with the said Thom. Lord Wentworth, as is
aforesaid, and their Heirs. Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and all and
every person and persons, lawfully clayming: or which shall claim, from by or
under them, or any of them. Neither shall this Act extend to N^^ they, but for
the Lands etc, for which they compounded.
any copyhold, messuages, Cottages, lands, tenements or Hereditaments, other
then such, whereof the said Copyholders or others, clayming under them: were
respectively seized or possessed at the times of their said several and
respective agreements, for or concerning the same: with the said Lord, or now
are under the said agreements, seized or possessed, as aforesaid. But this Act
shall extend to all and every the Copyhold messuages, Cottages, lands
Tenements, and Hereditaments, whereof the said Copyholders or any others
clayming under them, were respectively seized, or possessed at the times of
these several and respective agreements, for, or concerning the premises, with
the said Lord, or now are under the said agreements, seized or possessed as
aforesaid. Saving Nevertheless to Your Highness, Saving to the K. and all other
their Particular rights.
Your Heirs and Successors, and to all and every person and persons, bodies
Politic and Corporate, their Heirs and Successors, other then the said Lord
Wentworth, his Heirs and Assigns, and all and every person and Persons
lawfully clayming from, by, or under them, or any of them, and other then the
said parties to the said several Indentures: and the said Copyholders before
mentioned to have compounded with the said now Lord Wentworth, and every of
them, and the Heirs and Assigns of every of them, and all and every person
and persons lawfully clayming from, by, or under them, or any of them. All such
actions, estates, possessions, rights, Titles, Interests, Services, Rents, and
Demands, Profitts, commodities and aduantatages whatsoever, as they or any of
them, have, shall, may, or ought to have of, in to, or out of all, or any of
the Premises, in such and the same estate, degree, plight, manner and form to
all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never ben had or made.

The Contents of this Act.
Leases may be let for thirty one years and four months from the making
without forfeiture* Page 77. But the Leases shall be void, if the prescribed
rule, be not observed. 79. The Indentures of the twentieth and thirtieth of
June. Anno 15. Iacobi Regis: with the Schedules, and the Decree in Chauncery,
with the present explanation of the thirty eight article are all enacted to
stand firm for ever. 79. Those which have compounded since the first
Indentures, shall enjoy the like benefit, as the former. 80. None but those who
have compounded, shall reap any benefit by this Act. 84. Nor they but only for
the Lands etc, for which they have compounded. 85. Saving to Kings Majesty,
and all others their particular rights. 85.

An Alphabeticall Table of the names of the Copyhold Tenants which have
compounded since the first Indentures, and are enabled by this Act, to reap
the like benefit with the former.
A
Richard Alsop.
B
John Bigate. Giles de Bude. Richard Bradley. Edward Burley. Daniell Bassano,
C
Richard Catcher son o^ Tho: Catcher monier. John Crane. Constance Clarckes
Samuel Crowther, William Chapel. Thomas Chapman and Ioane his wife.
D.
Thomas Denham. Thomas Damport, Gent. William Dove Gent. and Anne his wife.
E.
Griffin Ellis.
G.
Matthew Graves. John Gale Gent. Cornelius Godfrey. William Gale Gent.
H.
Sir Thomas Hardresse K. Elizabeth Hide. Dorothie Hide. Sara Hill. John
Hodgson.
I.
Thomas Ieffery. Henry Johnson Brewer. Phillip Ioice, and Elizabeth his wife.
K.
Robert Keale Gent.
L.
William Lock.
M.
Michaell Merrioll.
N.
George Needham.
P.
Thomas Pynnock. Giles Patricke and Sibell his wife. Peter Piers his heirs.
Thomas Paramore Esqu. Richard Paramore. Willi: Phillips Mariner. Christopher
Potkin. John Pease.
R.
Anne Ryland. John Robotham Gent. John Robinson. Helkiah Read.
S.
Mary Symonson. William Speering. George Speering. George Smith Gent.
T
Mary Tinestey. Joseph Thornton. Benjamin Thornton. Tobias Thornton. Thomas
Thornton. Thomas Thredder.
V
John Vassoll.
W
John Wright Butcher. Walter Whiting Mariner. Thomas Wilson Gent, and Katherine
his wife. Walter Whiting. Humphfry Westwood. Felix Wilson Gent, and Anne his
wife. Arthur Wingham. Richard Wingham. Thomas Wingham. her sons.
FINIS.

