WATERS OF MARAH, AND MERIBAH OR, THE SOVRCE OF BITTERNESS, AND STRIFE,
SWEETENED AND ALLAYED, By way of Advice, Refutation, Censure, Against The
Pseudo-zelots of our Age:

By HVMPHREY SYDENHAM, Master of Arts, late Fellow of Wadham College in OXFORD.

Disposui nasum secare faetentem, timeat qui criminosus est; quid ad te, qui te
intelligis innocentem? De te dictum puta in quodcunque vitium stili mei mucro
contorquetur.

HIERON. ad MARCELLINVM. LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Allde, for Nathaniel
Butter. An. Dom. 1630.

TO THE FRIENDS INDEED, both of my Name, and Fortunes, Sir Ralph Sydenham, and
Edward Sydenham Esquire, Servants to his Sacred Majesty.
My dearly honored,
WHilst I labor to join you so closely in my respects, let me not sunder you
in your own, like two greatmen, who the nearer they are in place, the farther
off in Correspondence. I presume it is no Solecisme to link you together in one
Dedication, whom Nature has twisted so fast in one Blood, and Education in one
virtue, and Familiarity, (a knot, I hope, indissoluble) in one heart; It is not
my lowest glory, that I can boldly, and in a breath, speak Kinsman and Friend,
and Patron, and these three in two, and these two, but one; A rare harmony,
where Affections are so strung, that touch them, how, and where, and when you
please, they are still unisons. I have hitherto found them so in all my ways,
both of Advancement and Repute; and these set me up in a double gratulation,
and applause; in my Hosanna's, for you to my God, and then in my Reports to
men. This is my All of requital yet, and yours (I believe) of expectation,
which looks no farther then an ingenuous acknowledgement of your Favors, such
as the procliuity of your own worth has suggested, not any industrious
proseqution of mine, which could have been contented to have worn an obscurer
Title, but that it must now vaunt in a Rich one, That of

Your Servant Kinsman, HVM: SYDENHAM.

WATERS OF MARAH, AND MERIBAH.
TEXT, Romans 12.1. I Beseech you, Brethren, by the mercies of God, to offer up
your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God which is your
reasonable service,


THe Text has a double forehead, one looks toward the Letter, the other,
the Allegory; that of the Letter glances on the Legal Sacrifice, by the Jew;
that of the Allegory, on the Spiritual, by the Christian; the one was a
carnal oblation of the Body only, the other a Mystical, of the Affections;
That spoke in the rough Dialect of the Law; Horror, Blood, and Death; This, in
the sweet language of the Gospel, Brethren, and Beseeching, and Mercies of
God. Here then is no Hecatombe or slaughter of the Beast, no Bullock or Ram,
or Goat slain for immolation, as of old; but the Sacrifice required here,
must be Living; it is a Body must be offered, and not a Carcass: here is no
death but of in bred corruptions; no slaughter, but of carnal lusts, and
concupiscences. Affections must be mortified, and not the Body; that subdued
only, and chastis'd, not flaine; and yet still a Sacrifice, a Living
Sacrifice, a Sacrifice so living, that it is both Holy and Acceptable to God,
and so acceptable to him that he accounts it not only a Sacrifice, but a
Reasonable Service.

The words then, as they lie in their mass and bulk, are a Patheticall
persuasion and incitement to the mortification of the old man; pressed on by an
Apostolical power and Jurisdiction and that of the great Doctor of the
Gentiles, Paul; Where you may observe, first, his manner of persuading, I
Beseech; Secondly, the Parties to be persuaded, Jew and Gentile, under an
affectionate, and charitable compellation, Brethren; Thirdly, the Argument or
motive, by which he does persuade, By the Mercies of God; Fourthly, the
Substance or Matter of that which he labors to persuade, To offer up your
Bodies a Sacrifice to God; Fifthly, the Modus or manner of it; that is various,
expressed by a threefold Epithete; Living, Holy, Accepble, Lastly, the
Antithesis, in the words following, (...) Reasonable Service.

These are the Parts offered to my difcourse, which upon the first perusal and
Survey, I thought particularly to have insisted on; But finding that I had
grasped more Materials, then I could sow and scatter in the Circuit of an
hour, I was enforced to bound my Meditations for the present with the two
former, leaving the remainder, till a second opportunity should inuit me
hither; And at this time only, I beseech you Brethren.

(...), in the Original, not Obsecro, Pars prima.
as the vulgar reads, but, Exhortor: Beseeching is too Calm and Gentle, and
therefore rather, I Exhort, Obsecro nonsatis apt. Annot. Beza in cap. 12. Romans
v. 1.
says Beza: But Exhortor used only in this place, elsewhere, Precamur, and
that from the same Idiom, by the same Translator. And indeed, Fairly and
Plausibly to exhort, is in a manner to beseech: Hortamur etiam sponte
facientes, quod decet. Bez. ibid.
For not only the Refractary, but the facile, and spontaneous, the voluntier
in goodness, we Exhort, and Beseech in the same Word. And if Multitude or
Number, do not too much alter the nature and signification of things or
Language, we shall make Beza's Exhortor, and Ierome's Obsecro, all one by the
same Pen, and Dialect; For in this place to the Romans, (...) in the Singular,
(which is rendered by Exhortor) to the Thessalonians, (...), in the Plural, is
translated, Precamur, by the same Beza, (...), we beseech you, brethren, 1
These. Vide Bez. ibid. ot in cap. 12. Romans v. 2.
5.14. So that it is probable, the Greecke word fignifies Both, but, here more
openly to Beseech, then to Exhort, For Obsecro comes nearer to Misericordia, in
the Text, then Exhortor does, we Beseech ever by the mercies of God; but,
sometimes we exhort by his Justice; And in this sense, the Miracle of the
Greek Church, Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Aquin. Estius in cap. 12. Rom v. 1.
will interpret it, and that for three Reasons, here Aquinas tells me; first,
to specify and open our Apostles humility (for so the Wise man) Cum
obsecrationibus loquitur pauper. The Rich man answers roughly, v. 23.
But, the poor man uses entreaties, Pro 18. Entreaties, not for his own
sake, but for Gods, And therefore Obsecrare (says he) is nothing but, Aquin.
vtsupra.
Ob sacra contestari. Secondly, that He might rather out of love, move them by
gentleness and request, then, out of fear, command them by his power. And
this is not only his practice, but his precept, You that are spiritual,
restore him that is fallen, v. 1.
by the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. Thirdly, for the reverence he owed to the
Roman Iurisaiction, the great Senate to which he wrote (where there was both
gravity and State,) which he labors to win by persuasion, and not by violence.
And this also is not only his Custom, but his Advice; Rebuke not an Elder,
but Beseech him as a Father, v.
1 Timothy 5. So that whether in matters natural, or Civil, or Apostolical, the
Obsecro is both opportune and necessary: But in this last more especially: For
I Beseech you; is more insinuatiue, then I Exhort; and I Exhort, then, I
Command; And yet (as Aretius pathetically) In Apostolo obsecrante, Jn cap. 12.
Romans v. 1.
Deus est mandans, and obsecrans: In that the Apostle beseeches, God both
commands and beseechs too; not immediately, but by way of a Substitute: so Saint
Paul testifies of himself, We are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
(...), As though God did beseech you by us. We are the Instruments, He, the
mouer; we but the pipes and Conuoy, He, the Source and Cisterne: The waters of
Life run from him, by us; not by him. And therefore the Greek text has the
particle (...), Quasi, as it were, Bez Annot. in 12. Romans v. 1.
because God does not really beseech us, but As it were beseech us in the
Person of his Ambassadors, for so it follows, We pray you in Christ's stead,
2 Cor. 5.20. So that there are Two here which beseech; God, and his Apostle.
Either had lawful authority to command; He, as a Creator in full right: This,
Aret. vtsupra.
as a Legate in his name; but they had rather win fairly by a co^passionate
persuasion, then harshly induce by a rigorous command. And this way of
instruction best suites with the stayednesse and te^per of Gods Ministers. Ne
pro imperio dictatorie prae ipiant, and rigide postulent, quod lenitate, and
precibus facilius obtinent ab auditoribus. So Pareus. It Is true, In cap. 12.
Romans v. 1.
that the Law, and the Interpreters of it, the Prophets, not only not Beseech,
but Command and terrify; and 'twas the way then; for stiffe-neckes and stony
hearts, (as the Jews had) required both the Yoke, Pet. Mart. in locum.
and the Hammer, Neither did Christ himself (for any light we have from the
Evangelists) ever use this humility of Language. For He taught as one that had
authority (says the text) and not as the Scribes But after Christ, the
Apostles; Mar. 1.22.
and after them the Fathers made it their Rhetoric, the chief Engine of
their persuasion through the general Current of their Epistles: And indeed, a
true Servant of the Lord (...), must not strive: Non oportet litigare, Vide
Bez. Annot. in 2 Timothy 2.24.
says the vulgar, Non pugnare, Beza, Must be no Wrangler, nor fighter. 2 Timothy
2.24. A striker in the Church is dangerous: dangerous? into lerable, no less
then He that is contentious; For certainly they are Both of an Alliance,
Graee. Interpr.
Qui litigat verbis, pugnat: there is as well a striking with the Tongue, as
with the Hand, and sometimes a Word is smarter then a Blow, especially if it
do proceed from a mouth inured to bark, which can naught but rail, when it
should beseech; A Servant you know, should imitate his Lord: Now, the Lord is
not the God of Tumult, but of Peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. And therefore, his sincere
and faithful Servant Saint Paul beautafies with a threefold Epithete (...), 2 Timothy 2.24.
Gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient; Rare eminencies, and in that Orb
they move, spangle, and shine gloriously; He must be gentle, not to some only,
but to all (so says the text) to all, of all sorts, not the particulars of his
own Cut and Garb, but even to those Without. Next Teaching and not barely so,
but Apt to Teach, Estius in cap. 2. Epist. 2. ad Tim. v. 24.
Apt as well for Ability, as Will; and to Teach, not to Compel; and sometimes
to learn too, as well as to Teach. Sic etiam Aug. lib. 5. de Bap. cont. Donat.
cap. 29.
So Saint Cyprian tells Pompeianus, Oportet Episcopum non tantum Docere, sed
and Discere, quia ille Melius Docet, qui Discendo proficit. Lastly, Patient;
patient two ways; in respect of Occurrences and Men: of occurrences, first;
Persecutions, Scoffs, Detractions, are the Liueries of the Multitude, which He
wears with as much humility, as peace; 2 Cor. 4.12.
and of This, our Apostle, I know not whether Complains, or Glories,
Maledicimur and Benedicimus, We are reuil'd, and yet we bless, which some
Translations read, Vide Pet. Mart. in cap. Romans v. 1.
Blasphemamur and Obsecramus, We are blasphemed, and yet beseech; So that
Reuiling, it seems, is a kind of Blasphemy, and Beseeching, a kind of
blessing, He that reuiles a good man, blasphemes him, and he that beseeches an
evil, in some sort blesses him. Patient next, in respect of men; not only of
the Good, for they seldom provoke distaste, but even of the wicked and
malicious, Non vt vitia palpet, aut dissimulet sed vt eos quamuis a veritate
proteruos, and alienos, Estius in 2. Tim. 2.24.
mansuetudine vincat; Not that He should dissemble or bolster vice, but that
the Strag gling and Perverse he might reclaim with more facility and
meekness. Thus the Intelligent man ever applies his Sails unto the wind,
and as that turns, and blows, so He steeres. And this was the Spiritual
policy of Our great Doctor, Factus sum infirmus infirmis, vt infirmos
lucrifacerem, 1 Cor. 9.22. To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the
weak; not weak indeed, (though the two Fathers, Cyprian, and Augustine read
it so,) but weak, Cyp. in Epist. ad Antoninum. Aug. Hpist. 9. ad Hieronym.
that is, As weak, the Original using the Aduerbe, (...), Tanquam, as tho
weak. For weak really he was not; So he professes of himself, We that are
strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1. Ambros. in
Psalm. 104.
Strong there; and yet, weak again, 2 Cor. 11. with a Quis infirmatur, and
ego non infirmor? Who is weak, and I am not weak, who is angry, and I burn
not; But this Infirmor hatha Tanquam too, Estius in Epist. 1. ad Co cap. 9. v.
22.
as well as the former, or whether it have or no, it Matters not, seeing the
sense is one; For He says, He became weak unto the weak; or else, as it
were weak, that is, like unto the weak; Like two ways; In mind and work;
In mind, by an Affect of Commiseration; In work, by a Similitude of Action;
as a Nurse does with her Child, or a Phisician with his Patient; And in this
sense, his Omnibus omnia factus sum, is to be understood also, I am made all
unto all, 1 Cor. 9.22. All unto All? how? not that he did Idot it with the
Superstitious, or Lewd it with the Profane, played the Cretian, with the
Cretian, or the Jew, with the Jew; Estius, vtsupra.
But, He was made all unto All, partly by commiserating them, partly by doing
something like Theirs, which (notwithstanding) did not oppose the Law of God,
or else, (as Saint Augustine paraphrases it) Compassione misericordiae, non
similitudine fall aciae, or else, Non mentientis actu, sed compatientis
affectu, Augusi. ctiam, lib q. 83. q.
in his ninth Epistle to Jerome, and more voluminously, in his book contra
mendaeium, 12. v. 1.
chapter.

Neither was he all, to All, in way of Conversation only, but also, in matters
of Discipline, and Advice; in which he deals with the Delinquent, as a
disereet Husbandman with a tender plant, or tree; He waters it, and digs about
it; and, if then it leaf, and bud only, and not fructify, He puts his Axe
unto it; not to root and fell it, but to prune it; He lops off a sprig, or a
branch, but He preserues the body; Thus, the Inordinate must be admonished
only, not threatened; (...) (says the Greek;) not, Corripite, or, Castigate
(as Castellie, and Erasmus would have it) but, Monete, says Beza, Eez. Annot.
in 2. These. 5.14.
warn them that are unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. So also, the Feeble-minded must
be solac'd, and encouraged, not rebuked; (...), Consolamini; Comfort the
Feeble-minded, the same chapter and verse. Lastly, the Weak must not be
depressed but supported; Support those that are weak among you; (...),
Subleuate; hold up, Sustinete, infirmu-opitulamini; sic ex Ambros and Tertul.
Bez. vt supra.
as a Crutch does a Body that is lame, or a Beam a house that is ruined; which
word has reference to that (...) in the Acts, Suscipere Infirmos, or
Sustinere; I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to
Support the weak, Act. 20.35. Here then are Weak, and Feeble-minded, and
unruly; and these must be supported, and comforted, and warnd; no more; I find
no authority for Indignation; I do, for patience; for patience to all these;
nay, to all men; in the heel and cloze of the same verse, (...). Be patient
toward all men, 1. These. 5.14. and not only so, but to all men, with all
patience too; so Timothy is advised (...), Exhort with all long suffering, and
Doctrine, 2. Tim. 4.2. And indeed this Doctrine of Long suffering, is a
Merciful Doctrine; we seldom find true patience without Commiseration; Mercy
is the badge and Cognizance of a Christian; It marks him from a Caniball, or a
Pagan; And doubtless, Those that have not this tenderness of Affection,
whether in the Natural, or in the Spiritual Man, are but (...), of Savage and
barbarous Condition, Tigers, and not Men; And therefore as Mercy diuides a Man
from a Beast, so does it a Christian from a mere Man. He must be Merciful,
Mar. 6.
as his Father which is in Heaven is Merciful. O how beautiful upon the
Mountains (says that great Oracle of God) are the feet of him that brings
glad tidings of good things, Esaias 52.7.
that preaches peace, that publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, Thy God
reigns? Esaias 52.7. Those were said to have beautiful feet amongst the
Hebrews, whose Messages were shod with loy, Estius in Romans cap. 10. verse. 15.
who spoke comfort to the people, and not Terror. Now, what such Joy and
Comfort to the Children of Sion, as the glad tidings of good things, those
excellent good things, Preaching of Peace, and Publishing of Salvation? How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that does it? Aug. lib. 32.
contra Faust. c. 10.
Quam speciosi pedes? (as Augustine reads it) how Precious? or, Quamtempestiui
and Maturi? (as Tertullian) how Mature and timely? Tertul. lib. 5. contra
Marcionem. cap. 2. and 5.
(...) says the Septuagint, Quam pulchri? quam decori? how Fair, and Comely?
which some of the Ancients, (and with them, Leo Castrensis in Esaias 52.7.
S. Jerome) have read (...) (cutting off the three latter vowels) which they
expound sicut Hora, that is (as they say) sicut tempus opportunum, or, tempus
vernum, as the Spring time, when all things flourish; so that (making the Text,
mutilated, and impersect) they would have the words run thus: Schol. Roman.
sequens septuagint.
Sicut horaa super montes, sic Pedes Euangelizantis Pacem: As the Spring upon
the mountains, so are the feet of him that preaches peace; where all things
are green, and fragrant, when we are led into fresh, and sweet, and pleasing
pastures, the pastures of the Spirit; the Staff and Rod of the Lord to comfort
us, his Peace, and his Salvation, whereby we may walk cheerfully in the paths
of Righteousness, and so following the great Shepherd of our Souls (who will
feed us as his chosen flock) we shall graze at length upon the Mountains,
the euer-springing mountains, the Mountains of Israel.

And are the feet of him that preaches peace, that publishes salvation, so
beautiful? beautiful on the mountains too? what shall we think then of the
feet of those, the Black feet of those, who, like the possessed man in the
Gospel, Mark 5.2.
still keep among the Tombs? tread nothing but destruction, and the grave?
and as if they still walked in the vale of darkness, and the shadow of death,
beat nothing but Hell unto their Auditors, which by continual thundering of
Judgments, so shake the foundations of a weake-built faith, that they
sometimes destroy the Temple they should build up; and in this harsh and
austere manner of proceeding, they oftentimes exceed their Commission, when
pressing too far the rigor of the Law, they trench on the liberty of the
Gospel, as the Disciples did, Luke 9.55.
who requiring fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, they text it with
the severity of Eliah: 2. King. 1.10.
As Eliah did unto the Moabites. But the Lord of mercy is so far from
approving this fiery zeal, that He not only rebukes it, but the spirit that
suggested it. You know not of what spirit ye are, for the Son of Man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.56. And doubtless, the
destroying spirit is not the right Spirit: The Holy Ghost (you know) appeared
in the form of a Dove: and as the Dove is without gall, so should the Organ of
the Spirit be, the Preacher. Detrabendum est aliquid sever itati (says
Augustine to Boniface) vt maioribus malis sanandis, Aug. ad Bonifacde Cor.
Donat.
charitas sincera subueniat. Who would not tax it in a Judge as a crime and
custom too unjust, to be moved to choler against a Delinquent or Malefactor,
when charity should guide him, and not passion? He doubles the offense, that
does both exaggerate, and punish it; That Divine labors too preposterously the
reformation of his hearer, that chides bitterly, when he should but admonish,
and admonish, Isid. lib. 3. de sum bone. cap. 2.
when he should Beseech. Qui veraciter fraternam vule corripere infirmitatem,
talemse praestare fraternae studeat vtilitati, vt quem corripere cupit, humili
cord admoneat, says Isidore, Sweet and mild persuasions, and the admonitions
of an humble heart, work deeper in the affections of men, then all the
batteries of virulence, and Inuection. Oil (you know) will sink into a solid
and stiff matter, when a dry and harder substance lies without, and can
neither pierce, nor sosten it; That which cannot be compa'st by the smoother
insinuations of Advice and Reason, shall never be done by force, or if it be,
it is not without a tang of baseness: There is Something that is servile in
Rigor and Constraint, Char. lib. 3.
and takes off from the Prerogative and freedom of humane will. The Stoic
tells us, Facilius ducitur, quam trahitur. Seneca.
there is a kind of generousnesse in the mind of man, and is more easily led,
then drawn; impulsion is the child of Tyranny, and holds neither with the
laws of Nature, nor of Grace. Deus non necessitat, sed facilitat. God does not
necessitate, or if necessitate, not compel man to particular actions, but
supples and faciles him to his Commands. And (doubtless) he that would
captiuate the affections of his hearers, and smooth and make passable what he
labors to persawde in the hearts of others, must so modifie and temper his
discourse, that it prove not bitter or distasteful; like a skillful Apothecary,
who to make his Confections more palatesome, and yet more operative, qualifies
the malignity of Symples, by preparing them, makes poison not only medicinable,
but delightful, and so both cures and pleases. I write not these things (says
Saint Paul to his Corinthians) to shame you, 1. Cor. 4.14.
but as my beloned sons, I warn you. He will not shame them, and at
roughest, He will but warn them, and that as Sons too, as beloved Sons;
And if this will not suffice, he will beseech them also: 1. Cor. 4.16.
I beseech you be followers of me, as I am of Christ, in the 16. verse of the
same chapter. Calmer admonitions are for the most part seasonable, when
reproves ouerrough and blustering, not only not conform the hearer, but
exasperate him; and therefore what our Apostle advised the natural parents, I
may without prejudice, the spiritual. Parents, ne prouocetis ad iracundiam
filios vestros: ne despondeant animum: Parents, provoke not your children to
anger, lest they be discouraged, Coloss. 3. For certainly, words are the image
of the soul, and if they flow from a gentle and meek mind, they produce the
like effects, Gentleness, and Meekenes; But from a swelling and tempestuous
spirit, they recoyle, as a piece that is over charged, and start back as a
broken Bow; They provoke, nay, they discourage, and find no better
entertainment then the strokes of a hammer upon an anuile, which the more
violently they are laid on, the more violently it rebounds: and therefore Saint
Patol is so far from obiurgation, Philem. 7.8.
or menacing, that he will not so much as enjoin his Philemon, but labors
with an Obsecro, when he might have used a Mando: Though I might be much bold
in Christ to enjoin thee, yet for loves sake, Iorather beseceh thee, Phil.
7.8. So that where Love is, there is still an Obsecro, and where it is not,
there is commonly a Damno. Hence it is, that the Pulpit is so often the Mount of
Terror and of Vengeance, the Throne of personal eiaculations, the Altar, where
some belch nothing but fire and brimstone, vomit the Ite maledicti too
uncharitably, and (which is worst) too particularly; who scare and terrify,
when they should entreat, and in stead of Beseeching fall to Reuiling; Romans
12.11.
who under a pretense of feruency of the Spirit, and serving the Lord
sincerely, ransacke Gods dreadful Artillery, and call out all his Instruments
of Justice to assist them; his furbisht sword, and glittering spear, his bow
of steel, and sharpe-set arrows, his horse with warre-like trappings,
neighing for the battle, his smoking jealousy, and devouring pestilence, his
flaming metecrs and horrid earthquakes, his storm, his whirlwind, and his
tempest, floods and billows, and boylings of the deep, his cup of
displeasure, and vials of indignation, his dregs of fury, and besome of
destruction, his hail stones and his lightnings, his coals of Juniper, and
hot thunderbolts. Thus in fearful harness having mustered up all Gods
Judgments in a full volly, they (at once) discharge them against the pretended
corruptions of particular men, whom their vivulence labors rather to traduce,
then their Devotions to reform; And this is but a spiritual distraction, a
devout phrenzy, a holy madness, through which (like the Lunaticke in the
Gospel) they fall sometimes into the water, Mark 9.22.
sometimes into the fire; Nothing will satisfy them, but floods and flames;
floods to o'er-whelme the sinner, or flames to martyr him; But Quis furor, o
ciues; quae tanta dementia?

Public reproves, when they are clothed with Terror, not only disparage,
but dis-hearten; They break the bruizedreede, Esaias 42.3.
and quench the smoking flax, run many on the shelues of despair, where they
make an unhappy shipwreck of their faith; and not of their faith only, but of
their body also, exposing it to poison, or the knife, to strangling, or to the
flood; to the wilful precipitation of some Tower or Cliffe, or the unnatural
butchery of their own hands; and so tormenting the body for the soul, by a
temporal death, at length they feel the torments both of soul and body by an
eternal death. Thus if Incisions be made too deep in the ulcers of the
Soul, and the spiritual wound searched too roughly, it more relishes of
cruelty, then of Love; and he that does it, rather preaches his own sin,
then endeavors to cure another, Qui delinquente^ superbo vel odioso animo
corrigit, non omendat, sed percutit: Jsid. lib. 3. de summo Bone. cap. 51.
Rebukes which taste of envy or superciliousnesse, do not reform, but wound,
and in stead of lenitying and making more tractable indifferent dispositions,
they stubborn them, knowing that reproves too tartly seasoned: are the
services of Spleen, and not of Zeal: it is called (...), Zeal, from (...),
the seething and boiling of a pot; Now, a pot (you know) not temperatly fired,
boyles over; and certainly if Moderation sometimes blow not the Cole, but we
make virulence the bellows of our zeal, it not only seeths and rises to
passion and distemper, but boyles over to Envy and Uncharitableness, And
therefore our Apostle (dividing the properties of true Charity from a false
zeal) makes this one Symptom of that great virtue, Charitas non aemulatur,
Eslius in 1. Cor. cap. 13.3. Cyplib. de zelo and Liuore.
1 Cor. 13.3. (...) in the Original, non zelat: That is (as Cyprian reads)
non inuidet, enuies not; for zeal in her perfection, and as it leanes to
virtue, is but emulation, but screwed up to vice, it is envy; Envy? Nay it is
fury: Isid. lib. 3. de summo Bono. cap. 91.
Quicquid proteruus vel indignans animus protulerit, obiurgantis furor est, non
dilectio corrigentis, says the Father: what in way of Admonishment passion
produces, is Reuiling, and not admonishment, and does not touch so properly on
sincerity, as malice; And therefore Enuies and Evil speakings, are linked with
Guile and Hypocrisy. By Saint Peter, Lay asside all guile, Hypocrisies, and
Enuies, and evil speakings, 1 Pet. 2.1. A temperate reproof will mould and
work us to reformation, when an Inuectiue fires us: In cap. 5. Luae.
Ill a pudorem ineutit, Haec indignationem mouet; faith Ambrose: That touches
us with remorce, and slumbers, and becalmes all passion; This kindles our
Indignation, and with that, our stubbonrnesse, For certainly harsh speeches
do not so properly move, as startle us, and are like sharp sawces to the
stomach, which though they sometimes stir the appetite, yet they gnaw; And
for this Error, some have censured Saint Chrysostom himself, That if He could
have moderated his zeal, and tempered his reproves with a little mildness,
(especially to the Empress Eudoxia) He might have done more service to his
Church, and refcued his honor from the stain both of Imprisonment and Exile.

I press not this so far (Beloved) to fat and pamper vice, or rock and lull
men in a careless sensuality; Though I do Beseech, yet I would not fawn:
This were to kill our young with colling them, and with the Iuie, barren and
dead that tree which we embrace. I know, a Boanerges is sometimes as well
required, as a Barnabas, a son of Thunder, as of Consolation; But these have
their vicissitudes, and seasons. There is an uncircumcised heart, and there is
a Broken Spirit: There is a deaf Adder that will not be charmed; and there are
good Sheep that will hear Christ's voice, For these, there is the spirit of
Meekness; for the other, loud and sharp Reproves; If Nabals heart. be
stony, the Word is called a Hammer, let that batter it. If Israel have a heart
that is contrite and wounded, Gilead has Balm in it, and there is oil of
comfort for him that mournes in Sion. Thus, as our Insirmities are diverse, so
are the cures of the Spirit, sometimes it terrifies, sometimes it Commands,
sometimes it Beseeches; But let not us terrify when we should but Command, nor
Command when we should Beseech, lest we make this Liberty a Cloak for our
Maliciousness. 1. Pet 2.16.
In all exhortations, first make use of the still voice; and if that prevail
not, Cry alowd unto the Trumpet; and if that be not shrill enough, raise the
Thunderclap; Aug. l b 2. de sermote Domini in monte se m 1.
But this latter, Raro and magna nece ssitate (says Augustine) seldom, and
upon great necessity; It a tamen, vt in ipsis etiam obiurgationibus non nobis,
sed Deo seruiatur intestinus; If we must needs lighten and thunder, let it be
as from God, not us, who are to scourge the sin, not the person, except upon
capital offenses, open blasphemies, Acts 15.
wilful prophanations. Saint Paul then may call Elymas the Sorcerer, the child
of the Devil, and Peter say to Simon Magus, Thou art in the gall of
Bitterness, and the very bond of Iniquity. Rebukes (I confess) too merciful
for the grand Disciples of Sorcerie, and Magic, and yet sour enough for
those other Nouices and Babes in the school of Christ; Though such also are
not only open to the Check, but to the Rod, Vultis vt in virga veniam? Shall
I come to you with the Rod, or in Love? 1 Cor. 4.21. To wound and offend a
little, to profit much, is to love soundly; Habet and amor plagas suas, Ambros
su^er 1. cap. ad Cor.
quae dulciores sunt cum amarius inferuntur: Love it self has her whips and
thorns, and the more they are laid on, the less they wound, to our Ruin, tho
not our Smart. There is a sharpness of speech used to Edification, not to
Destruction, (says Says Paul,) 2. Cor. 13.10. A religious chastisement,
sometimes more profits, then a partial conniuence or remission; This may
perchance soften and melt a perverse nature, The other skums it; There is as
well a Cruel mercy in remitting offenses which should be punished, as a
merciless Cruelty in ouer-punishing others which might have been remitted;
And therefore it is an Euangelic all Commandment, Sipeccauer it in te frater
tuus, corripe eum, If thy brother sin against thee, reprove him; Reprove him?
how? openly? No, Secreto corripe (says Augustine) Reprove secretly. Aug de
Verbis Domini super illa verba, Sipetaueriit te frater suus.
For if thou art knowing his offense, and by way of a taunt or exprobratio do
diuulge and blazon it, Non es Corector, sed proditor, (says the Father) Thou
art not a Corrector, but a Betrayer; or as Origin aggrauates it, Non
reprehendentis hoc, sed infamantis, Orig. in Leuit. cap. 23.
This is no part of Reproose, but of Defamation. A wholesome holy Reprehension
may be viciously applied, especially not ballac'd by those two great weights,
Charity, and Judgment: Judgment to mould it, and Charity to sweeten it,
otherwise we may Wound perchance, when we desire to Heal, and in stead of
reproving others, condemn our selves; And therefore that of Saint Augustine is
very Energeticall, Cogitemus cum aliquom reprehendere nos necessitas coegerit,
Aug. lib. de fermon. Domini in monte. ser. 1.
vtrum tale sit vitium quod nunquam habuimus, and tuunc cogitemus nos hon. ines
esse, and habere potuisse; vel quod tale habuimus, and iam non habemus, and
nunc tangat memoriam communis fragilitatis, vt ill am correctionem, non odium,
sed misericordia praecedat When necessity impels us to reprehend another (as
the Father will have no reprehension without necessity,) let us consider,
whether it be such a vice as we never had, and then, weigh that we are but men,
and might have had it; or whether such a one as once we had, and now have not,
and then let it whisper to us the common frailty of mankind, that so Mercy and
not Hatred may be the Pule and platform of our Reproof. It Is true, the words
of the Wiseman are compared to Goads and Nails; and the Reason, or Moral
rather, Greg. Hom 6. super Euang. in illa zerbae.
Gregory affords, Culpas delinquentium nesciunt calcare, sed pungere: Lapses
and deprauations, they will prick, and not smother. But take heed how they
prick too far, left bleeding them, they rankle. Applications come too late,
when the part begins to gangrene; And therefore sometimes our Balsames are
opportune, sometimes our Corrasiues; How to time, and qualify them, the Divine
Moralist will prescribe you, Greg. Moral. lib. 29.
Regat Disciplinae vigor mansuetudinem, and mansuetudo ornet vigorem, and sic
alterum commendetur, ex altero, vt nec vigor sit rigidus, nec mansuetudo
dissoluta: Discretion must be the Guide to decline hatred, and avoid
negligence, to blunt and meeken Rigor, and to edge and embolden Softness;
that so we may not only rebuke Delinquents, as men merely, but sometimes
encourage them as Christians, and not always terrify them, as Aliens and
enemies to the Church, but, now and then Beseech them as our Brethren; so the
Charity of our Apostle runs in the words following, I beseech you Brethren.

Brethren? how? by Nature? or Country? Pars 2.
or Alliance? Neither; For the Roman Church was then a mixed Church, Aquin.
part 3. q. 28. Art. 3. ad 5.
a Throng of Jews and Gentiles promiscuously; And these could not be properly
his Brethren, either in respect of Parents, or Nation, or Consanguinity; and
therefore, Brethren, by Affection, Singulari affectu, Aretius in cap: 12. Romans
Pareus Ibid.
(says Aretius,) And so Pareus too, Fratres compellat, vt de amore eius frater
no non dubitet, He uses this sweet Compellation, Brethren, not (perchance) that
they were so, either by Grace, or Nature; but, Brethren, that they might not
distrust his brotherly affection; For though of old the word Fratres was a
common Attribute and name to all Believers; yet, not used to the Romans (here)
because, Believers, Sed vt fraternam beneuolentiam, Carthus. in cap 12. Romans v.
1.
and charitatem, in illis declaret suam, says Carthusian; Not so much to
manifest their faith, as his Charity; For though many of them were strangers to
him, and some his sworn enemies, yet notwithstanding their extremity of
hatred, he would not refuse to call them Brethren, that would be his
Executioners; Nay, such were his ouer-flowings of Zeal and Love; Love toward
them, for Gods sake; and Zeal toward God, for theirs, that he will not only
expose his Body to tortures for them, but (if it were possible) his very Soul;
And left this should be thought a Flourish merely, He calls his own Conscience
to witness it, My Conscience bearing me record, that I could wish, Romans 9.8.
that my self were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my kinsmen according
to the flesh, Rom 9.3.

Thus, the great Lamps and Beacons of the Church, as they have abounded ever in
Grace, so in Love too; their Charity went hand in hand with their Zeal, and
sometimes out-stept it; and indeed Charity is the very Salt of Religion, the
seasoner of all our Spiritual and Moral Actions; without which, even our
Devotions are unsavory, our Orisons distasteful; and therefore to this great
virtue, some have made three Stories or Ascents; Polan. Syrtag. lib. 9. cap. 10.
Dilection, Love, Charity; Dilection at the foot; Love in the midway; Charity
at top; That, the groundwork or foundation; The Other, the walls and body,
This, the roof and battlement; Dilection (say they) includes the Judgment of
the Chooser, and a separation of the thing chosen from others which are not;
Love follows Dilection, by which we are united in affection to the thing we
chose, and so love; But Charity is greater then both, by which we so embrace
the thing loved, that we endeavor always to preserve it in our love Dilection
is an Effeminate, light and transitory affection; Love more Masculine, though
somewhat violent, and so unstable too; Charity, sober, and hung with gravity,
and inuolues both strictness of Tie and inuiolablenesse. Thus the Moralist
will Cryticke on the words; the Divine is not so curious, But if he find any
difference. He makes Love and Charity toward God, Polan. Syntag. lib. 9. cap.
10.
the causes of Dilection, and This the effect of the other Two, so Polanus. But
indeed Charity includes all, has a diverse Aspect, and casts every way, like a
well-arted eye in a curious Statue, stand what side of it you please, It seems
still to glance and dart upon you; Sometimes It looks ad nos, to us, and that
is our home- Charity, Charity to our selves; Sometimes supra nos, above us, and
that is toward God; Sometimes praeter nos, beside us, and that is toward our
enemies; Sometimes iuxta nos, with us, and that is toward our neighbor;
Sometimes extra nos, Aug. lib. 1. de Doct. Christiana. cap. 23.
without us, and that is toward the Infidel; Sometimes infra nos, below us,
and that is toward the world. What? Charity toward our Neighbor, the
unbeliever, and the world? and none toward the Text here, Our Brethren? Yes,
Charity toward our Neighbor includes that; or if it did not, Charity toward
God commands it, Hoc mandatum habemus a Domino, This command we have from God,
that he that loves God, should love his brother also, 1 John. 4.21. So that
this Diligere Deum, presupposes diligere fratrem; and this diligere fratrem,
diligere proximum; and this diligere proximum, diligere omnem hominem: so Saint
Augustine, upon our Saviors Diliges proximum tuum, thou shall love thy
neighbor, Manifestum est omnem hominem proximum esse deputandum, Aug. vt supra.
1. Book de doct. Christ. 30. cap. So that, to love God, does insinuate to
love every man by the rules of Charity; not every man for himself only, but
for God, and therefore for himself, because for God; according to that of the
same Saint Augustine, Charitas est motus animi ad fruendum Deo, propter ipsum,
and se; atque proximo, Aug. lib. 3. de Doct. Christiana. cap. 10.
propter Deum Charity is a motion of the mind, by which we enjoy God for
himself, and our selves, and our Neighbor for our God. Thou shall love thy
God (says Christ) with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. As thy
self? how is that? with all thy heart too: so that He shares in thy whole man,
as well as God; but not so Extensiuely; God principally, thy Neighbor in
Subordination to him. And questionless, Ratio diligendi proximum, Deus est;
hoc enim in proximo debemus diligere, vt in Deo sit: God is the Reason why we
love our Neighbor; for in this respect we ought to love our Neighbor, that
he be in God; and therefore it is manifest that the same Act in Specie (says
Thomas) is, by which we love God, Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 25. Art. 1. Constable.
and by which we love our Neighbor, and so the very Habit of Charity must not
only extend it self to the love of God, but to the love of our Neighbor also.

Neither is this great virtue terminated here, but extends also to our very
enemies; and that not only out of command, because God enioynes it, but out of
Necessity, because Charity will enforce it. The very Laws of Charity will have
us love our Enemies, but not merely, as our Enemies; for that were to love
another sin; but, in universally, as men, and partakers of our Nature; and, not
only, in this Generality of love neither; Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 25. Art.
2.
but sometimes, more personally, In articulo necessitatis, secundum
praeparationem animi (as the Schools flourish it) In an Article of Necessity,
by some mental preparation; To wit, That our mind should ever be so
prepared, that if Necessity did comply, we could love our enemy in Singulari
too, more specially, more particularly.

And not only, Thus, to our enemy, but the Wicked enemy, Charity binds there,
too; but there as before, Non culpa, qua peccatores, sed natura, vt diuinae
beatitudinis capaces. For there are two things considerable in the wicked man*
Nature, and Sin; According to Nature, which he has from God, he is capable of
Beatitude, and so, the Object of our Charity; But according to Sin, by which
he stands in Diameter, Debemus in peecatoribus odire quod peccatores sunt, et
diligere, quod homines sint beatitudini capaces. Aquin. secunda secundae. q.
25. A. 6.
and direct opposition to his God, and so finds an impediment of this
blessedness, he is rather the But and Aim of our hatred, then Commiseration.
And therefore, whereas the Prophet is often violent against the wicked man,
debarring him (as it were) of all Charity, with his Conuertentur peccatores in
Infernum, The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. It Is spoken per
modum praenunciationis, non imprecationis, by way of Prophecy, not Curse; and
therefore it is not Conuertantur peccatores, Psalm. 50.10.
Let the Sinners be turned; but Conuertentur, in the Future, They shall be
turned; or perchance too, per modu^ optationis; by way of wish; yet so, that
the desire of him that wishes, be not referred to the punishment of man, but the
Justice of him that inflicts it; Because God himself punishing, does not
rejoice in the destruction of the wicked, but his own Justice; or else, that
this desire be referred to the remotion of Sin, not the very Act of
punishment, that so the Transgression be destroyed, and yet the Man remain.
Secunda secundae. q. 25. A. 7. ad 3.
And there is Charity in this too, great Charity, that we wish the preservation
of the Sinner, when we desire the destruction of his Sin; But this is
Charitas secundum naeturam also, which is not only exposed to Man, and the
worst of men, but to Creatures reasonlesse, nay, to the very Devils themselves,
whose nature we may even (out of Charity) love, forasmuch as we would have
those spirits to be conseru'd in suis naturalibus, Secunda secundae. q. 25. A.
11. Genel.
as they are naturally spirits, to the Glory of that divine Majesty that
created them, so Aquinas, secunda, secundae, quaest. 25. Art. 11.

Thus we have followed Charity in her largest progress, through heaven and
Earth, to the Horrid pit; From God, by men, to Spirits; if there be a place or
subject else where Goodness may reside or pitch on, Charity will dwell there
also: It bears all things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things; Are there
Prophecies? They shall fail. Are there Tongues? They shall cease. Is there
Knowledge? 1. Cor. 13.8.
That shall vanish; but Charity shall never fail, never in matters of Nature,
or Grace, or Glory; of the Law, the Gospel, or their Consummation; Charity
fulfils the Law, comprehends the Gospel, and compleats Both. All the Moral
virtues lie shrin'd here; Secunda secundae quaest. 65. Art. 3. Concl. August.
Sermon. 46. de Tempore. 1. Cor 13.23.
so Aquinas; all the Cardinal, says Augustine; all the Theological, Saint
Paul, though not ex confesso, yet by way of Intimation; for Faith and Hope are
not only with it, but under it: The greatest of these is Charity, 1. Cor. 13.
vlt. The greatest of these? All these, they are all in Charity, and Charity in
God; In God? God it self, God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells
in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

It Is plain then, where Charity is, there is an habitation for the Lord; and
where it is not, there is a Thorow-fare for the Devil; Religion is but
rottenness without it, and all this front of holiness, but dross and
Rubbish: Tell me not of Faith, without thy works; nor of Prayers, without thine
Alms; nor of Piety, without thy Compassion; nor of Zeal, without thy Charity;
what is Devotion when it is turbulent, or Conscience when it is peevish? or
Preaching, when it is Schismatic? I love not Divinity, when it is stipendary;
nor purity, when it is factious: nor Reprehension, when it is Cruel; nor
Censure, when it is Desperate: Orall vehemence has more tongue then heart: and
therefore that Zeal which is ouer-mouth'd, we may suspect either for
counterfeit, or Malicious.

Believe not every spirit (says Saint John) but try the spirits, whether they
be of God or no, 1. John 4.
for many false Teachers are gone out into the world: Into the world, in all
Ages, and all Churches: Let Us particularize in some, in that of the Apostles
first, when under a pretense of sincerity, and suppressing Innovation;
(laboring to establish the Jewish ceremonies more firmly,) there were some
that subtly cried down the very seeds of Christianity, as those false
apostles did, which came from Judea, unto Antioch, and taught the Brethren;
That except they were Circum ised after the manner of Moses, Acts 15.
they could not be saved; whom Paul and Barnabas first; and afterward Peter
and James, and the rest at Jerusalem, both zealously did resist, and in their
Synod, or first convocation, powerfully suppress. But this Pseudo-zeale in the
time of the Apostles, did but smoke and sparkle (like fire under green wood,)
In that of the Fathers, it brake out into flames, when someturbulent and
discontented spirits, burning in hatred to the true Professors, or leaning
partially to some faction against the Church, notwithstanding out of a mere
tickling and itch of glory, offered themselves unto death, for the confession
of the name of Christ, Vide Estius in c. 13. ad Romans
as the Montanists, Nouatians, Arrians, Donatists, whom the Catholic Church
never honored with the Title of Martyrs, but reprobated and cast out as the
wilful Patriarchs of Schism and herefie; as Saint Augustine, and Saint
Cyprian more voluminously; The one, in his Disputation against the Nouatian;
the other, against the Donatist. And doubtless, Suffering is not always the
way to Glory; It Is not Passion, but the Cause of it, that both creates, and
crowns our Martyrdomes. Timeo dicere, Hieron. in cap. 5. ad Galat.
sed dicendum est; Jerome is loath to speak it, but he must: That those
Corporal tortures which for Religion we undergo, even Martyrdom it self;
if it be therefore undergone, to purchase Admiration and Applause of men,
frustra sanguis effusus est, That blood was spilt in vain. We honor not
Martyrs, because they suffer, but because for Christ, and his Church, they
suffer. It Is not thy carcass then, but thy Charity that casts up the grateful
Incense; and therefore those that glory in their wilful passions under a false
name of Martyrdom, Hear how Saint Augustine descants on: Ecce, venitur ad
passionem; Aug. sermon. 50. de Verbis Dom.
venitur and ad sanguinis effusionem; vennuur and ad corporis incensionem; and
tamen, nihil prodest, quia Charitas deest, We offer our Bodies to the stake,
our Blood to the flames, our Lives to the fury of the Tormentors, all this is
nothing without Charity, it is that makes the Suffering glorious. 1. Cor. 13.4,
5.
If I give my Body to be burned (says Saint Paul) and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing, nay had I all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have not Charity, I am nothing; Not, Nullus sum, but Nihil sum, Not so
much, not a Man, as not a creature, nothing.

Hearken then, thou son of Tumult, whose lips enter into contention, and
whose mouth calls for strokes; Thou which raisest tempests in Religion, Pro.
8.5.
and sowest thy Tares of Faction amongst the multitude; thou which bring in
the strange Leaven of New Doctrines, and colourest them with thy probable
allegations, whereby the Consciences of the Simple are entangled, and the peace
of the Church disturbed, though otherwise perchance, thou art punctual enough,
both in thy conversation and thy Tenants, have the gifts of Prophecy,
vnderstand'st all Mystertes and all Language, yet, because in some things thou
have made a breach of this Harmony in the Church, Schismatici, qui extra
Ecclesians Catho icam, praesentem finunt. vilam, in ignens eunt aeternum. Aug.
seu potius. Fulgent. de fide ad Petrum Diaconum, cap. 38
thou art a Rebel both to it, and thy Christ; and except by Retractation and
Submission thou art recald to the Fold from which thou have wandered, thou
stand'st out-lawed and excommunicate to Heaven, and neither Imprisonment nor
Death can make atonement for thy Mistreadings. Is this harsh? It Is Saint
Augustines, and he will yet go farther: A Schismaticke brought unto the take;
not for that Error which did separate him from the Church, but for the truth of
the Word and Sacrament which he does else maintain, suffering the Temporal
flames, to avoid the Eternal, and bears it patiently; though that Patience
be commendable, and a gift of God, yet (because in part a Schismaticke) not of
that kind of gifts which are imparted filijs Ienusalem, but to those also which
are filij concubinarum (says the Father) which even earnall Jews, and
Heretics may have; and concludes at length, that This suffering and patience
nothing profits Him toward Heaven; but supposes that the great Judgment will
be in this more tolerable to Him, Aug. lib. de Patientia, cap. 26.27.28.
Quam si Christum negando torme ta mortemque vitasset, Then if by denying
Christ, he had euaded the cruelty of his Death and Torment: in his Book de
Patientia, 28. chapter.

You have heard what primitive times have done for the bark and outside of
Religton; the very skin and shell of Christianity; Let us now compare them a
little with our own; and we shall find, that they have not any-whit gone
beyond us in the External profession of sincerity, tho in their suffering and
Tortures they have much. We have deceitful workers as well as they, 2. Cor.
11.13.
Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.20.
which glory in appearance, and not in heart.

We abhor, That Age should out-doe ours, either in Hypocrisy or
profaneness, we have our Donatists and Catharists, and Anabaptists, as
plentifully as they; and some besides, They had not; the Brownist, the
Barrowist, and the Familist, and one more that both fosters and incloses all
these, (may he be whispered without offense, my Brethren) the Puritan; but he
will not be Titled so; the very Name hangs in his Jaws, and the chief way to
discover him, is to call him so; That fires and nettles him, and so repining at
the Name, he ownes it; and questionless it is his, though he shroud and veil
it under the word Brethren in the Text; whose Purity consists much in washing
of the out-ward man, Vide To. Art 19. A. 1. prop. vbi cirat H. N. 1. exhort c.
13. 10. the Brewaists to Cartwright, page 39. Barrow in his discovery, p. 33.
whilst their Tenants look toward a Legal righteousness, and a triumphant
and glorified condition of man here upon earth; professing by their open
Pamphlets, that the visible Church, the true visible Church, is deuoid of Sin
and Sinners, and for Manners cannot err; and therefore Paradox it, That the
Assemblies of good and bad together, are no Church, but Heaps of profane men;
as if in one field, Math. 25.
there were not as well Tares as Corn, in one house, vessels of wood and
earth, as of gold and silver; a Mixture of good and bad, Math. 23.
in all Congregations; which as an Emblem of the Church visible, our Savior
types-out in the parable of the Sower, the Marriage, and the Virgins; Math. 13.
Nay his Blessed Spouse, of her self, freely professes her deformity, Tho I am
comely, I am black, Cant. 1.5.
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, black as the Tents of Kedar. And yet These will
have her all clean and lovely, like a face without spot, or wrinkle; when we
know a Mole or Wart (sometimes) beautifies a feature, and in this War of
opposites, there is both gracefulness, and Luster; and therefore I suppose the
Church was first compared unto the Moon, not so much for change, as
obnubilation, being obuious to clouds, and Eclipses; and when it is at clearest,
it is not without a mole in her cheek neither, at least-wife, to an ocular
apprehension or if it were all fair and Lueid, yet, it is by way of Influence,
beamed from a greater light, borrowed, not her own; so is this of the Church
too; one un of righteousness enlightens Both, and therefore, Woe unto them,
that call Light, Darkness and Darkness, Light; make a Church of it self shine,
which cannot, or not shine, which might, if they were not, by others;
dogmatically, and pere^ptorily laying down, that where Errors are there is no
True Church (when there was never any, nor will be, whilst it is militant,
without them,) But They are no more of the substance of our Religion, or any
Essential part of our Churches Doctrine, To. Artie. in the Preface.
then ill humors which be in, are of the Body, or Dregs in a vessel of wine,
part of the wine, or vessel.

It Is true, some Ceremonies we retain yet, as matters of Indifferency, and not
of Substance, and these (forsooth) are so heinous, that they are Thorns in
their sides, and prickles in their eyes; matter of Ceremony, is now matter of
Conscience, and rather then subscribe, Silence, Suspension, Imprisonment, they
venture on, and sometimes suffer too; where A Brethren-Contribution more fats
them, then all the Fortunes they were masters of before; and this (beloved)
cannot be zeal, but Schism, or if it be zeal, (...), Romans 10.2.
it wants Eyes, and Intellectuals, it is not according to knowledge; For what
Judgment would expose our Body unto prison? our Calling to the stain of
Separation, and Revolt, for a thing merely of indifferency and Ceremony? No,
there is more in it, then This; the Rochet, Tippet, and the Surplesse is not
that they shoot at, but the thing called Parity; Moses and Aaron they like not
for the Ephod, and the Rod; they speak power, and command, and so intimate
obedience; But these struggle for equa lity; the Ecclesiasticke Hierarchy they
would demolish, Episcopal corruption is the great Eyesore; Down with it,
down with it, even to the ground. And yet I dare say, there are some subtle
Pioners, and secret Mutiners in Commonwealth, pretending plausibly to the
flourishing of Religion, which if they could once glory in that Babel they
endeavor to erect, they cared not, if erusalem were An heap of stones; It Is
impossible, that Civil Authority can ever subsist without the other; and if
there be once a full rent and flaw in Church-policy, what can we expect from
that of State, or either, but vast Anarchy, and Confusion?

Thus, he that strikes at the Myter, God grant he catch'th not at the Scepter,
and (if he could graspe it) the very Thunderbolt; no Bishop, no King, and so by
consequence no God; He proclaims himself the God of Order, and These would
make him the Father of Confusion; and so, in circumstance disgod him too,
seeing his greatest glory consists in the Harmony of his Creatures, the Peace
of his Church, and unanimity of his Saints and Servants; and therefore
(brethren) let me beseech you in the words of the Apostle, Mark them which
cause Divisions, Romans 6.17, 18.
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have heard, and avoid them.
For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly,
and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16.17, 18, ver.

I have yet but Beseech't you in the words of an Apostle; Let me warn you also
in the Language of a Savior, Beware of Those which come to you in sheeps
clothing, with such a Cast of Mortification and Integrity, as if their
conversation spoke nothing but Immaculatenesse, when within they are ravening
wolves: such as will not only tondere pecus, and deglubere; but deuorare too;
subvert whole houses for filthy lucre: Tit. 1.13.
You shall know them by their fruit; Their fruit unto the eye beautiful and
glorious, but to the finger, Dust and Smoke; or if not by their fruit, by
their Leaves, you may, a few wind-falne virtues which they piece and sow
together to cover their own Nakedness. Will you have them in their full
Dress and portraiture? Take the draught and pattern, then from the Pharisee,
Matthew 23. There the character is exact; where if you observe, They are twice
called Blind Guides: Blindness of knowledge brings on Blindness of Heart; and
therefore twice also Fools, and Blind; ver. 17.19. To this Blindness of
Heart, Pride is annexed; They make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the
Borders of their Garments; ver. 5. To this Pride, vainglory; They love
greetings in the Alarket, uppermost rooms at feasts, and chief seats in the
Synagogues; ver. 6.7. To this Vainglory, Hypocrisy; They make clean the
outside of the cup and platter, and for a pretense make long prayers; and all
to be seen of men, v. 14.25. To this Hypocrisy, Spiritual malice; They shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, for they neither go in themselves, nor
suffer them that are entering, to go in, ver. 13. Lastly, to this Malice, there
is uncharitableness; They bind heavy Burdens, and grievous to be borne, and
lay them on men's shoulders, but they Themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers, ver. 4. Rare perfections, doubtless, for the Sanctified Child
of God! Observe the Catalogue, Blindness of Heart, Pride, Vainglory,
Hypocrifie, Malice, and Uncharitableness: Let us make it out, Envy, and all
Uncharitableness, and then Libera nos, Domine, Good Lord deliver us; deliver
us from all false-hood in his Services, and faction against his Church, that we
may be his Ministers in Sincerity, and not in show, as those false Teachers
were of old, or our Braine-sicke and discontented Neotericks at the present,
whom Saint Paul discouers by a double Attribute, (...), and (...), vaniloqui,
and Seductores; unruly and vaine-talkers, and Deceivers, Titus 1.10. They talk
(it should seem) They do not Teach; and talk vainly too; I stius in cap. 1.
Tit. v. 10.11.
and not only so, but this vanity must be noised, unruliness goes with it,
Lectio Hieron. in 1. cap. Tit. v. 10.11.
and Those which in their Doctrines are vain and vntuly too, sometimes prove
Deceivers, Mentium Decepteres, (as Jerome reads it on the Text) Deceivers of
minds, 2. Tim. 3.6.
of weak and simple minds, Mechanics, and captived women, which have been
the disciples of all Schisms and all Heresies in all Ages. And such indeed are
the chiefest Proficients in their Schools now: for none are so pinned to the
strict observation of their Precepts, Vide 2. Tim. 4. ver 3.4.
as these Silly ones. There is nothing so furious as an ignorant zeal, so
violent as a factious Holiness; and therefore when their Doctrines or their
practices are touched unto the Quick, and made (once) the subject of a Pulpit
Reprchension; their Charity is presently on the Rack; the Brass sounds loud,
and the Cymball tinckles shrill, their Censures are full-charg'd, and come on
like a peale of Great shot, thick and terrible.

The Cymball (as Caietan observes) was an Instrument of old, Vide Estium in 1.
Cor. 13.1.
Magis sonorum, quam musicum, not so musical as loud and of more noise then
melody, and such as women only used, both in their times of Triumph and
Devotion. A pretty Invention for weakness and childhood to play withal, and
be it spoken without disparagement of some glories in that Sex, a fit type of
women and their frailties; who, for the most part are taken rather with the
sound of things, then the things themselves, and are seldom without this
Instrument of Noise about them. The Tongue is their proper Cymball, Psalm. 150.
not the well-tuned Cymball David speaks of; but the Loud Cymball, with which
they do not so much praise God, as sometimes disparage men; Their Morality,
and their zeal are near one, a shrilnesse as well in their Devotion, as their
Actrons, and their practice in both is a very Tinckling; Tinckling with their
Feet, lead the Dance to the next Conuenticle; Tinckling with the tongue too;
Great talkers, in Divinity, and if they could exchange a Parlour for a Church,
or a stool for a Pulpit, they would preach too, and ('it is thought) Edify as
much as their zealous Pastor. But Away with those Echoes in Religion, fitter
for Silence, then Reproof; and for pity, then confutation; and therefore
(once more) I Beseech you, and with the phrase of an Apostle too, Heb. vltims.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, Halt and limp not
between Innovation and an established Discipline. But (as Peter said to the
Cripple) In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk; Acts 3.6.
Return unto the Church, whence ye are straggling; not to your Stepdame, but
your mother, the Mother of whom you were borne and nursed; dry those tears she
sheads for you; peace those sighs, and groans, and complaints, which she
wailes for you; Fall upon those Arms which will embrace you, those Bowels
which yearne for you, those Paps which gave you suck. What went you to see? A
Reed shaken with the wind? Yes, a very Reed, shaken with every wind of
Doctrine; A Reed with a bruized stalk or broken Ear, no Corn in it; or if it
have, it is blasted with Sedition, fitter for the Dunghill, the^ the Granary.

Away then from Lebanon (my Beloved) from Lebanon; Look from the Den of Lions,
Cant. 4.8.
and Mountains of the Leopards (where the peace of Religion is blood-suck't
and devoured) and come hither to the mountains of Myrrh; and hills of
Frankincense; The Altars of the living God, where the Incense of his Church
flames cheerfully, with no less truth of devotion, then unanimity. Lo, her
golden vials, full of odours, Sacrifices both devout and peaceable, Such as the
heart of his people offer, and not the hands, only; Calves of our lips, and
groans of the Spirit, which touch both the cares and nostrils of the Almighty.
Let the voice of division, then, jarre no more amongst you, which if there were
nothing else to noise our frailties, were enough to speak bondage to the
flesh, and not yet, our freedom to the Spirit. For whence are strifes and
enuryings? are they not from your lusts? And whilst one says, I am of Paul, 1.
Cor. 3.4.
another, am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? Christ is not divided, his Church
is one; My Dove, Cant. 6.7.
my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother, the choice one of
her that bare Her, Can. 6.7.

The Church, (you hear) is Gods only one, his choice one; He has no more,
and we, tho many, are but one neither, 1. Cor. 10.17.
the Churches one, Her choicest one, one Body, nay, one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
Moreover, Christ's Spirit is but one; tho it be in many, it is there still one
Spirit, no division where that is, but all peace; Ephesians. 4.3.
and therefore it is called the unity of the Spirit; and this unity must be
still kept in the bond of peace. Mark, here is no wanering, or Temporary peace;
but this peace must be still kept, and not stightly kept, but there is a Tie on
the keeping of it, The Bond of peace: Ephesians. 4.3.
and it is this Bond that makes the unity, and this unity that keeps the peace,
and this peace that preserues the Spirit, so that it is still an unity of
Spirit, kept in the Bond of peace.

Come hither, then, my Faithful Brother in the Lord, and let us no more
censure, but expostulate. Have Thou the true Faith thou so much gloriest in?
where is thy zeal? have thou true zeal? where is thy Charity? have thou true
Charity? why art thou Tumultuous? John. 13.35.
By this shall you know (says Christ) that you are my Disciples, if you love
one another. Mutual agreement begets Love, and this Love makes the Disciple,
and this Disciple is known to be Christ's, by a Si diligeretis, only, if ye
love one another. And therefore in the first Dawne and rising of the Christian
Church, the chief thing remarked in it by the Gentiles, was the Christian
Love: Tertul. Apol. 36.
Vide vt inuicemse diligunt! vt pro alterutro mori sint parati! as Tertullian
stories it. Lo how they Love! the Heathens cry, How ready to Dye one for
another! But this Love of the Brother unto Death, I press not here; (for the
very Infidels had their Commorientes, as well as we) but Love unto Sincerity
and Constancy, of which he that is destitute, falls short both in Religion, and
Morality. And therefore that Text in Saint Peter runs Methodically, Fear God,
1. Pet. 2.17.
Honor the King, but first, Love the Brotherhood; as if there could be no true
fear of God, or honor of the King, except there be first Love to thy Brother;
to thy Brother? nay, the Brotherhood: (...), says the Greek, Achava, the
Hebrew; Beza Annot. in 1. Pet. 2 10.
Brotherhood, for the company and conjunction of Brethren in the Church; and in
this, not so much a Conjunction of persons, as of Minds, otherwise it is no
Church. And therefore the multitude of them that believed at the Apostles
Sermon, were said to be of one Soul, and one heart, Acts 4.32. And this one
Soul, and one heart; S. Paul calls one mind, and one Judgment: And this one
mind and one Judgment, must not be thinly mixed, 1. Cor. 1.10.12.
but perfectly joined together, and so joined together, that there be no
Division among us; and therefore he coniures his Corinthians by the Name of
Jesus Christ; Romans 15.5, 6.
not only to Do, but to Speak the same thing. I Beseech you Brethren, by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that there be
no Division amongst you, but that ye be perfectly joined together, in one
mind, and the same Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Maximum indicium malae mentis fluctuatio, Sen. Epist. 121.
Reeling between opinion and opinion; is a Mental drunkenness and there is
no such Index of a Depraved Disposition, as wauing and vnsettlednesse. And
therefore the Stoicke describing the unconstant man, Senec. Jbid.
Thus lashes him, Nunquam eundem nec similem quidem, sed in diuersum aberrat;
He so trauerses and wanders in himself, that he is neither the same, nor
like, but diverse. So that the Wise man is the Man only of Resolution, for He
is one, and the same still: Praeter Sapientem nemo vnus, Seneca tells his
Ducillius in his 126. Epistle. And doubtless, it is this one mind and one
Judgment, that makes both the discreet Moralist and the wise Christian:
Videmus qualis sit, quantus sit, and vnus sit: Epist. 26.
the same Seneca. Unanimity is the Soul of Brotherhood, whether in that of
Nature, or of Grace; And therefore, what Abraham, of old, said unto Lot, is
worthy both of your memory and observation, Genes. 13.8.
Let there be no strife between me and thee, nor between my Heardsmen, and
thy Heardsmen; why? We are Brethren as if the very word did inuolue union, and
where there was Brotherhood, there could be no strife; no not amongst their
very Heardsmen, that brawling Regiment, which, for the most part, are as unruly
as the Droues they keep; and in some things it is disputable, which is the
verier Beast; for they both go one way, non qua eundum est, sed qua itur, Sen.
Epist. 135.
As the multitude treads, so they follow, squadron'd into a Faction, as That
is, not only in the State, but the Church too; And so 'twas of old, Acts 14.4.
in the time of the Apostles, when at Iconmum there was a great uproar amongst
the Jews and Gentiles, about the preaching of Paul and Barnabas; in stead of
suppressing the fury of the Tumult, the Rabble of the City was Divided; and
part held with the Jews, and part with the Apostles, Act. 14.4.

Thus popular conuocations were ever the Nurses of Distraction; and These, now
occasion the Hubub and Outcries in Our Church, the strife is not so much
between Loo, and Abraham, as their Heardsmen, the People more side it in
Religion, then their Pastors do; and that is the best Doctrine which They
fancy; not what the Others teach. And to this purpose, They have gotten, lately
into most Corpor ations of the Kingdom, certain Lapwing-Dinines, and
featherlesse Professors of their own Cut; prescribe them Principles which they
may not tran sgresse; and not only their Posture, Habit, and Conversation, but
the very Method, Tone and Language cued them. Miserable Age, when Divinity
shall be thus slau'd to a Stipend and a Trencher! and the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, for a morsel of bread! or some Mechanicke, or Leane-cheek'd
Contribution, shall disparage the Power and Sacredness of their Keys! But fie
on this Factious Holiness, this Iezebel in Religion, that smells too much of
the Painter, and his Varnish: Let it no more with uncharitable contentions, or
nouelty of Doctrine, or unseasonableness of suggestion, disturb the peace of
our Spiritual Mother; but let her sleep and rest sweetly in that Divine
truth, which she has received from Primitive plantations, and sealed fince,
with the Blood of so many Martyns. I charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, by
the Roes and Hinds of the field, that ye stir not, or awake my Love, until
she please, Cant. 3.5.

'Twas long since the complaint of a disconsolate Church, and ours has in part
revived it: Ecce pace amaritudo mea amarissima, pax ab haereticis, pax a
paganis, bellum a filijs: O my bitter bitterness in the days of peace, peace
amongst pagans, peace amongst Heretics, but wars and struglings by the
twins of my own womb! My sons, my divided sons, are more unnatural then
all these. The Protestant, that has been so long the Star of the Reformed
Church, the Ensign and Standard Bearer of true Religion, must be now buffeted
and spit upon by the obloquy and scorn of up start Sectaries!

You then, that thus dig out the Bowels of your hallowed mother, and stick
your Daggers at her very heart; Sermon. 57. de Diuerfis in Append.
Hark, Saint Augustine, the devout Saint Augustine, All those gifts and
rewards of Beatitude, which God has treasured up for his Children and Elect,
in pacis conseruatione promisit, are appropriate only to the Sons of peace.
And hence is our Saviors Beatipacifici, Blessed are the peacemakers; why?
They shall be called the sons of God. Aug. Sermon. 463. de Temp.
Non peruenitur ad voc abulum Filij, nisi per nomen pacifici, says the Father.
They had never been called the Sons of God, had they not been first the
sons of peace; nor entitled to the Attribute of Blessed, had they not been
formerly the Sons of God. And therefore it is the Substance of Christ's
valediction to his Disciples; John 14.27. Aug. Sermon. 463. de Temp.
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: Proficiscens voluit dare,
quod desiderabat rediens in omnibus inuenire; the same Saint Augustine; He
gave to all, at his departure, what he desired to find in all, at his return;
his peace, his blessed peace: For where there is a Congregation of men, and not
of opinions, or of opinions, and not of love; Christ is not there with his Pax
vobis: so that where peace is not, there is no Christ; and where no Christ, no
Church. Thy Religion, thy Faith, thy Hope, are dead without it, thy Groans,
thy Sighs, thy Devotions, are false and empty, like vaults that sound merely
from their hollownesse; thy self like an Instrument that is cracked, or a
string that jarr's. And therefore to the peace-lesse Brother, that of
Tertullian to the Gentiles, shall be both my Advice, and my Conclusion; Fratres
vestrisumus, Tertul. Apol. 36.
iure nostrae Matris vnius; et si vos parum homines, qui mali fratres; at
quanto dignius, fratres and dicuntur, and habentur, qui vnu^ Patrem Deum
agnouerunt, qui vnum Spiritum biberunt sanctitatis, qui de vno vtero
ignorantiae eiusdem, ad vnam Lucem expauerint veritatis? Itaque, quia Anima,
animoque miscemur, nihil de rei communicatione dubitemus: Since we have one
God, our Father; one Christ, our Brother; one Church, our mother; one Spirit,
our Comforter; Ephesians. 4. vli.
let us all have one mind, one heart, one peace, our Director; that so the God
of peace, which is above All, may be through All, Cant. 4.15.
and in us All. And then Arise, O North and come, O South, and blow on my
Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Cant. 7.12.
Arise ye Sovereign winds of the Spirit of God, and breath on this garden of
the Spouse, where the Pomegranates bud forth, and the tender grapes appear,
that the fragrant odours of these her Plants may be both increased and
dispes'd, and at length carried into the Nostirls of her wellbeloued, who shall
bring her out of this Wilderness below, Cant. 3.6.
like pillars of smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Incense, which as sweet
savors, shall ascend on high, where the Day breaks, and shadows fly away,
where Darkness is banished everlastingly, and the Sun of Righteousness
shines for evermore. To whom, etc.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
Haec, atque huiusmodi verba obtrectantium, sieve non obtrectando, sed quaerendo
talia loquentium, operosius fortasse refellerem, nisi hae disceptationes
haberentur cum viris liber aliter institutis: Aug. de Apoll. and Apul. ad
Marcellinum. Epist. 5. Respon.
FINIS.

