The Summarie of English Chronicles. (Lately collected and published) now
abridged and continued till this present month of March, in the year of our
Lord GOD, 1566. By I. S.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Marshe.

The Contents of this Book, as follows*
1 FIrst a Calendar at large. 2 A rule for the beginning and ending of the
Termis. 3 The Description of England, Wales, and Cornwall. 4 The names of all
the kings of England from Brute, who was the first king to this present* with
the true account of years, wherein every king began their Reygne, how long
they reigned, and what notable things has been done, during their Reigns*
5 The names and years of all the Bailiffes, Custos, Majors, and Sheriffs of
the City of London since the Conquest. 6 The buyldyng of the most ancient
Cities, Towns, Castelles, with other Antiquities, and Monumentes within this
Realm, by whom and about what time they were builded* 7 How a man may
journey from any notable town in England, to the City of London: or from
London to any notable town in the same Realm* with many other notable
matters, as partly may appear noted in the margin of the same Book.
^L. January has.xxxi. days* ^ii ^ Circumcision of Christ. ^ b Octa. of Saint
Stephen 2 xi c Octa. of Saint John ^ d Octa. of Innocents 4 xix e Deposition
of saint Edward 5 viii f Epiphania Domini 6 g ^ran^^a. ^^^^he^m^ 7 xvi ^
Lucian priest ^ ^ ^ Jews confessor 9 c Paul the first Heremite 10 xiii d Sol
in Aquarius 11 ii e Richardus mar^^r 12 f S. Hilarious martyr 13 x g Felicis 14
xviii ^ Archadius martyr 15 vii b S. Mauricius 16 c Saint Anthony. 17 xv d
Prisce virgin 18 iiii e Wolstan bishop 19 f Fabian and Sebastian. 20 xii g
Agnes virgin 21 ^ Vincent martyr. 22 ^ b Emerense ^3 c Timothe bishop 24 ix d
Conversion of S. Paul's 25 e Policarpe. bishop 26 xvii f Julian confessor 27 vi
g Valerii bishop 28 ^ Theodore priest 29 xiiii b Basilius bishop 30 (...) c
Saturniue and Victor* 3^ KL* February has.xxviii. days d Brigide virgin.
Fast. 1 xi e Puri^^cation o^ Mary 2 xiv f Blase bishop 3 viii g Gilbert
confessor. 4 k Agathe virgin 5 xvi b Amandus bishop and conf. 6 v c Anguli
bishop 7 d Paul bish. Sol in (...) 8 xiiii e Appoline virgin 9 ^^ f
Scholast^^e virgin 10 g Desiderius bishop 11 x ^ Dorothe vir. (...) 12 b
Wolfrane bishop 13 xviii c Valentine martyr 14 vii d Faustine, Ioui^e 15 e
Julian virgin 16 xv f Polycron^us bishop 17 ^^iii g Simon bishop 18 ^ Sabyn and
Julian martyr. 19 xii b Milbred virgin 20 j c Lxxix. martyris. 21 d Cathedra
Petr^ 22 ^x e Fast. (...) 23 f (...) Apostle 24 xvi^ g Alexandee bishop 25 ^i ^
Eusebius priest 26 b Augustine 27 xiii^ c Oswalde bishop 28 KL. Marthe has*
xxxl. iii d David bishop ^ e Chadde consessor 2 xi f Maurice confessor 3 g
Adrian bishop 4 xix ^ Fo^e and Eusevi^ 5 viii v Vidor and Victorin 6 c Perpetue
and Felix 7 xvi d Deposit. of Felix 8 v e Quadraginta mar. 9 f Aggeus prophet
10 g Gorgonius mar. 11 xiii ^ Gregorius bishop 12 ^i b Theodore martyr 13 ^ c
Longius mar. Sol (...) 14 d Cyriaci martyr 15 xviii e Hilarious bishop 16 vii f
Patrick and Gertrudis 17 g Edward kyngand confessor 18 xv ^ Joseph the husband
of Mary 19 ^iii b Cuthbert bishop 20 c Benedict abotte 21 xii d Aphrobosius
bishop 22 j e Theodore virgin 23 f Fast. 24 ix g (...) 25 ^ Castor martyr 26
xvii b Eulalie virgin 27 vi c Victor martyr 28 d Augenii mar. 29 xiiii e
Quirin^ mar^. 30 iii f Ade^mus bishop. 31 KL. April has.xxx. days. g
Theodore virgin 1 xi ^ Mary Egiptiace 2 b Richard bishop 3 xix c Ambrosius 4
viii d Martianus mar. 5 xvi e Sixtus bishop. 6 v f Egesippus 7 g Euphemii
virgin 8 xiii ^ 9 ii b Perpetuus bishop 10 c Marcus martyr 11 x d Sol in (...)
12 e Oswalde archbishop 13 xviii f Guthlarie 14 vii g Olife 15 ^ Isidore 16 xv
b Aniceti 17 ^iii c Eleutherius bishop 18 d Alphege. (...) 19 xii e Tyburtius
20 j f Sother virgin 21 g Simon bishop. 22 ^x a S. George mar. 23 b Lucretia 24
xvii c Mark E^^n^el^^^^. 25 vi d Anastasii 26 e Ditalis martyr 27 xiii^ f
Petri Mediolanensis 28 ii^ g Clete bishop 29 ^ Depositio Erkenwald 30 KL. May
has xxxi. days xi b Philip and Jacob ^ c Athanasii bishop 2 xix d Inuen. of
the cross 3 viii e Floriani martyr 4 f Godard 5 xvi g John port latin 6 v ^
John of Beuerley 7 b Apparitio Mich 8 xiij c Genguifi martyr 9 ^j d Gordian and
Epimachy 10 e A^^ent^on day 11 x f Sol in Gemin^ 12 g Boniface martyr 13 xviii
^ Sophia vyrgin 14 vii b Seruacii confessor 15 c Translat. of S. Bernard 16 xv
d Dioscorides martyr 17 iiii e Dunston bishop 18 f Bernardyne 19 xii g Helene
Queen Fast 20 j ^ ^^^^so^day 21 b Vrbane martyr 22 ^x c Translation Francis. 23
d 24 xvii e Adelme bishop 25 vi f Augustine of England 26 g Be^e priest 27 xiiii
^ Trinity ^^^^day 28 iii b (...) 29 c Corona, mar^. 30 ^i d Marcell, martyr 3^
KL. June has.xxx. days e Corpus Christi 1 xix f Erasmus bishop 2 viii g
Basil 3 xvi ^ Petro^i confessor 4 v b Boniface bishop 5 ^ c Melon bishop 6
xiii d Translatio, Wolstane 7 ii e Wilhel^ni confessor 8 f Trans. Edmond 9 x g
Iue confessor 10 ^ ^arna^e ^ostle 11 xviii b Sol ^n Cance^ 12 vii c Anthony 13
d Basil bishop and confessor 14 xv e Vite and Wodeste 15 iiii f Trans. Richard
16 g Botulphe 17 xii ^ Marr^ and Marciliani 18 i b Geruasie 19 c Trans. Edward
20 ix d ^alburge Vyrgin 21 e Albane martyr 22 xvii f Fast. 23 vi g (...) 24 ^
Trans. Helene 25 xiiii b John and Paul. 26 iii c Achasius confessor 27 d Fast
28 xi e (...) 29 f Comme, of Paul. 30 KL. ^ul^ has.xxxi. (...) xix g Octa
John Baptist 1 viii a Visitation of our Lady 2 b Trans. of S. Thomas. 3 xvi c
Translation of S. Martyn. 4 b d Zoe Vyrgin and martyr 5 e Octa. Peter and Pause
6 xiii f Translation of S. Thomas 7 ii g Deposition of Grymbald 8 a Cyrilli
bishop 9 x b Seven brethren 10 c Trans. of. S Benet 11 xviii d Nabor and Felix
12 vii e Private Sol in (...) 13 f (...) 14 xv g Trans. of S. Swythyn 15 iiiii
a Trans. of S. Osmund 16 b Keneline king 17 xii c Arnulphe bishop 18 i d Rufine
and Iustine 19 e Margaret 20 ix f Praxede vyrgin 21 g Mary Magdalen 22 xvii a
Apollinaris 23 vi b Fast 24 c (...) 25 xiiii d Saint Anne 26 iii e vii. slepers
27 f 28 xi g Samson bishop 29 xix a Abdon and Sennes martyrs 30 b Germany
bishop 31 KL. August has.xxxl. days ^ii^ c Lammas day 1 ^vi d 2 v e Stephanus
bishop 3 f Iustini confessor 4 xiii g A^^a vyrgin 5 ii a Transuguration 6 b
The feast of Jesus 7 x c Siriarke 8 d Romayne 9 xviii e S. Laurence day 10 vii f
Tiburtius martyr 11 g Clare vyrgin 12 xv a Rochus 13 iiii b Eusebii priest 14 c
Assumption Mary 15 xii d Sol ^n ^ergo 16 i e Oct. of S. Laurence 17 f Agapethe
martyr 18 ix g Magnus martyr 19 a Jews confessor 20 xvii b Bernarde 21 vi c
Oct. assumptio. Mary 22 d Timothe Fast. 23 xiiii e (...) 24 ^ii f Ludouici king
25 g Seuerine bishop 26 xi a ^ufus martyr 27 xix b August bishop 28 c Decolat.
of S. John 29 ^iii d Felyx 30 e Cuthburge virgin 31 KL. September has.xxx.
days. xvi f Egidius abbott^ 1 b g Anthonini mar 2 a Gregory bishop 3 xiii b
Transla. of* Cuthbert 4 ii c Bartyn abbot 5 d Eugenius 6 ^ e Gorgon 7 f
Nati^itie of Mar^^ 8 xviii g Prothus 9 vii a Siluius bishop 10 b Iacobus priest
11 xv c Maurilius bishop 12 iiii d Amantii martyr 13 e Holy Roode day 14 xii f
15 i g Edith virgin 16 a Victorin bishop 17 ix b Ianuarii martyr 18 c Eustatius
19 xvii d Fast. 20 vi e S. Mathe^ Apos^i^* 21 f Tecle virgin 22 xiii^ g
Mauritius cont. 23 iii^ a Andochi martyr 24 b Firmine martyr 25 ^^ c Cyprian
and Iustin^ 26 xix d Seuerine bishop 27 e Cosine and Damian^ 28 viii f Michael
^^changel 29 g Hierome priest. 30 KL* (...) has* xxxi. days* ^v ^ Rem^g^us
bishop 1 ^ii^ b Leodegari^ 2 xi^ c Candidi martic 3 ^^ d Francis confessor 4 e
S. Faith vir. 5 ix ^ Marci and Marcellian^ 6 g Pelagi^ virg. 7 xvi^ ^ (...) 8
v^ b Nicasius con. 9 c Wylfriede virgin 10 xv d Trans. of S. Edward 11 iiii e
Calixtus bishop* 12 ^ Wolfrane bishop 13 xi^ g ^ol (...) 14 i ^ Galli confessor
15 b Maximini martyr 1^ ix c Etheldrede virgin 17 d (...) 18 xvi^ e Q^irin^
martyr 19 v^ f Ausirebert martyr 20 g Xi. M. virgins 21 xiiii ^ Mary Salome 22
iii b Romani archbysh. 23 c Chrispine 24 xi d Euaristus 25 xix e Vrsula vir. 26
f Maglorius bishop 27 vii^ g Fast* 28 ^ S. (...) 29 ^^i b Abacu^ prophet. 30 ^
c Quint^ni martyr 31 KL* (...) ^ ^ (...) ^ xiij e All souls day 2 ij f
We^efrede vyrgyn 3 g Amancius 4 ^ ^ Le^e 5 b Leonard 6 xviij c Villibrord
bishop 7 vij d Quatuor coronato. 8 e Theodore martyr 9 xv f Martin bishop 10
^iiij g Martyn 11 ^ Paternie (...) 12 xij b Bric^ 13 j c Trans. of Erkenwald.
14 d Macute 15 ix e Deposit. Edmond 16 f Hughe bishop 17 xvii g Octa* Martini
18 vj ^ Elizabeth 19 b Edmond king 20 xiii c Present* of our Lady 21 iij d
Cicil^e vyrgin 22 e Clement bishop 23 xj ^ Grisogoni martyr 24 xix g Katherine
vyrgin 25 ^ Peter bishop 26 viij ^ Vitalis and Agricol^ 27 c Ruffinus (...) 28
xvi d Fast* 29 ^ ^ (...) 30 KL: December has. xxx^. days xiij ^ Crisanti and
Darie marty^ ^ ii g Libiani ^ a Deposit. Osmond* 3 ^^ b Barbara vyrgin* 4 c
Saba abbot 5 xviij d Nicolas bishop 6 vii e Oct. Andrew 7 f Concep. Mary 8 xv g
Cyprian abbot 9 ^iij ^ Eulalie 10 b Antippa Sol in Ca^^^^ 11 xij c Paul
bishop* 12 ^ d Lucy vyrgin 13 e Nicasi^ 14 ^x ^ Valery 15 g Osapientia 16 xvij
a Lazatus bishop 17 vj b Gracian bishop 18 c Venesy vyrgin* 19 xiiij d Fast. 20
iij e S. Thomas (...) 21 f ^o* martyrs 22 xi g Victor vyrgin 23 xix ^ Fast. 24
^ Na^iuitas Christ^ 25 viij c S. Steven marty^ 26 d S. John Ea^geli^^ 27 xvi e
Innocents day 28 v f Thomas (...) 29 g Trans. of S. James 30 xiij ^ Siluest^r
bishop* ^^

A rule to know when the Term begins and ends
EIght days before any Term be, the Eschequer opens for certainty, except
Trinity term, which is but.iiij. days before.

Hillary term begins the.xxiii. day of January, if it be not Sunday: then
the next day after, and ends the.xii. day of February.

Easter term begins: xvii. days after Easter, and ends four days after
Ascension day.

Trinity term begins the next day after Corpus Christi day, and ends the
wednesday fortnight after.

Michelmas term begins the.ix. day of October, if it be not Sunday, and
ends the.xviii. of November.

In Easter term on the ascension day. On Trinity term, on the Nativity of
saint John Baptist. In Michelmas term on the feast of all saints. In
Hillary term on the feast of the Purificatio^ of our Lady the queen's Judges of
Westminster, do not use to sit in judgment, nor upon any Sondayes.

^ table for.xxx. years to come.
The years of our Lord God. (...) Leap years* Easter day March or April*
1564 a ^ A 1565 g 22 A 1566 ^ 14 A 1567 ^ ^0 M 1568 c ^ 18 A 1569 b 20 A 1570 a
26 M 1571 g 15 A 1572 e ^ 6 A 1573 d 22 M 1574 c 12 A 1575 b ^ A 1576 g ^ 22 A
1577 ^ 7 A 1578 ^ 18 M 1579 d 19 A 1580 b ^ 3 A 1581 a 16 M 1582 g 5 A 1583 ^
31 M 1584 d ^ 19 A 1585 c 11 A 1586 b 3 A 1587 a 16 A 1588 f g 7 A 1589 e 30 M
1590 d 19 A 1591 c 4 A 1592 a ^ 2 M 1593 g 15 A

A brief Description of England.
BEFORE I enter to abridge the factes and gestes of the Kings and other
persons, within this Realm from Brutus, the first King of the same: I purpose
briefly to make a Description of this noble Realm, gathered out of Polydore
Virgil, reported in his work of the English history, who says: That all
Britayn, which by two names is called England and Scotland is an Island in the
Ocean sea, situate right over against the Region of Gallia: one part of which
Isle Englishmen do inhabit: an other part Scotts, the third part
walshemen, and the fourth part Cornishmen. All they, o^ther in language,
conditions or laws, do differ among them selves. England (so called of
Englishemen, which did win the same) is the greatest part, which is
divided into xxxix. Counties, which we call Shires* whereof, ten (that is to say,
Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Southampton, Barkeshire, wilteshyre, Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, Devonshire and Cornwall) do contein the first part of that
Island* whithe part boundyng toward the Southe* stands between the Thames and
the Sea. From thence, to the river of Trent, which passes through the mids
of England, be xvi. shires: whereof the first vi. (standing eastward) are
Essex, Middlesex, Hertfordshire, Suffolk, Northfolk, and Cambridge^shire: the
other ten which stand more in the middle of the country, are these: Bedford,
Huntingdon, Buckyngham, Oxford, Northampton, Rutland, Leicester, Notingham,
warwike, and Lincoln. After these, there be vi. which border westward upon
wales, as Gloucester* Hereford, worcester, Salop, Stafforde, and Chester. About
the middle of the Region ^ye Darbyshire, yorkshire, Lancashire, and
Cumberland. On the left hand toward the west is westmerland. Against the
same, is the Bishoprike of Durham, and Northumberlande, which boundeth upon
the North, in* the marches of Scotland. Those shires be divided into.xvii.
Byshoprikes, which by a Greek word be called Dioceses. Of which Dioceses
Cantorbury and Rochester, be in Kente.

Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertforde* belongs to the Bishoprike of London.

The Bishop of Chichester has Sussex. ^ winchester has Hampshire, Surrey, and
the Isle of wight.

Salisbury, has Dorsetshire, Barkeshire, and wylteshire.

Excetour, has Devonshire and Cornwall.

Bathe, and wells, has Somersetshyreworcester, has Glocestershyre,
worcestershire, and part of warwikeshire.

Hereforde, has part of Shropshire, and Herefordshyre.

Couentrie and Lichefelde, Staffordshyre, and the other part of warwikeshyre.

Chester, has Chesshyre, Darbyshyre, and a piece of Lancashire, nere the river
of Repel

The Diocese of Lincoln, which is the greatest, has eight shires, lying
between the Thames and Humber, as Lincoln, Northampton, Leicester, Rutlande,
Huntingdon, Bedforde, Buckingham, Oxford, and the residu^ of Hertfordshire.

The Bishoprike of Ely has Cantabrigeshire, and the I Will of Ely.

Suffolk and Norffolke, be in the circuit of Norwiche Diocese. And this is
the Province of the Archebishoppe of Cantorburye: which is the Primate of all
England, with wales, which has.iii^. Diocesses, as hereafter shall be declared*

The bishop of york, has yorkshire, Notynghamshyre, and a piece of
Lancastshyre.

The Bishop of Durham, has the byshoprik so commonly called, and
Northumberla^d: Carlis^e co^teineth Cu^breland and westmerla^d And this is ye
other province of tharchbishop* of york, which is an other Primate of
England, and was of long time also primate of all Scotland. But these
Diocesses take their names of the Cities, where those seas be placed. The
chief whereof is London: wherein the beginning was the Archbishops sea, but
afterward transposed to Cantorbury, a city in Rent, placed in a soil
amiable and pleasant. London, stands in Middlesex, on the northsyde of the
Thamis. That most excellent and goodly River, begins a little above a
village called w^nchelcombe in Oxfordshire still increasyng* and passes first
by the university of Oxenford, and so with a marvelous quyete course by
London, and then breaks into the french Ocean by mayn tides, which twice
in.xxi^ii. hours space does ebb and flow more then.lx. miles, to the great
commodity of trauailers: by which all kinds of merchandise be easyly conveyed
to London, the principal store and staple for all commodities within this
realm. Upon ye same river is placed a Stonebridge, a work very rare and
marvelous, which bridge has xx. Arches, made of.^^i^. squared stone, of
height. (...) ^ote, and of breadth.xxx. foot, dista^t one from an other xx.
foot, co^pact and joined together with ^aul^es and sella^s* Upon both sides be
houses builded, that it seems rather a continual street, then a Bridge. The
Ocean sea does bound England, the first part of Britayne east and South:
wales, and Cornwall west. The river of Twede deuideth England and Scotland
north. The length of the Island begins at Portsmouth in the south part, and
ends at Twede in the North, conteinynge CCCxx. miles. This Realm above other
is most fruitful on this side Humbre: for beyond it is fuller of mountains.
And although to the beholders of that country a far of, it may seem plaen, yet
it is full of many hills, and those for the most part void of trees: the valleys
whereof be very delectable, in habited for the most part by noble men, who
according to ancient and old order, desire not to dwell in Cities, but nere
unto valleys and rivers in several villages: for aduoidyng of vehement wynds,
because ye Island naturally is stormy. Humbre has his beginning a littell on
this side york, and by and by runs southward and then holds his course
eastward, and so into the main sea, greatly increased by the ryuers of Dune and
Trent. Trent begins a little from Stafforde, running through Darbyshyre, and
Leicestershyre, passing by Lichfielde and Notyngham on the right hand, and
Dune on the left: so that both those rivers do make an Island, which is called
Auxolme, and then ioynyng together on this side King ston upon Hull, a goodly
merchant town, they fall into Humbre: by which river they may aryue out of
France, Germany, and Denmark. England is fruitful of beasts, and abounds
with cattle: whereby thinhabitauntes be rather for the most grasiers, then
ploughmen, because they give them selves more to fedyng, then to tyllage. So
that almost the third part of the country is employed to cattle, dear read
and fallow, goats (whereof there be store in the north parts, and conies) for
every where there is ioly maintenance of those kinds of beasts, because it is
full of great woddes, whereof there rises pastyme of huntyng greatly
exercised, specially by the nobility and gentlemen.

Of Scotland, an other part of Britayn, I purpose to say nothing, because I
have promised only and briefly to remember thaffa^res of mine own country, as
best travailed and acquainted with the knowledge of the same* wales, the third
part of Britayn lies upon the left hand: which like a Promontar^e or
forelande, or an Isle (as it were) on every side it is compassed with the main
sea: except it be on the east part with the river of Sabrine commonly called
Seuerne, which deuideth wales from England. Although some late writers
affirm Hereford to be a bound between wales and England, and say, that wales
beginueth at Chepstoll, where the river Deye augmented with an other river
called Lugge, passing by Hereford does run into the sea: which river rises
in the middle of wales out of that hill (but uncertain whether out of that
spring) that Sabrine does, which Corn. Tacitus calls Antona. For even to
that place there gothe a great arm of the sea, which passes through the land
westward: on the right hand leaves Cornwall, and on the left wales* which
Topographye or description, although it be new, yet I thought good to
solowe. Therefore Wales is extended from the town of Chepstoll, where it
begins almost by a straight line a lttle above Shrowesburye, even to
westchester, northwarde. Into that part, so many of the Britains as remained
alive after the slaughter and loss of their country, at the length, being
driven to their shyftes, did repair as ancient writings report: where
partly through refuge of the mountains, and partly of the woddes and marshes,
they remained in safety: which part^ they enjoy even to this day. That land
afterward the englyshmen did call wales: and the Britains the inhabitants of
the same walshmen: for among the Germains, walsman, signifies a stranger, an
alien, an outborn or strange man: that is, such a one, as has a contrary
language from theirs (for wall, in their tongue* is called a stranger borne, as
an Italian or Frencheman: which differ in speech from the German: Man,
signifies Homo, which is a man in english. Therefore Englishemen, a people of
Germanye, after they had won Britayne, called the Britains, which escaped
after the destruction of their countreye, after their country manner,
walshemen: because they had an other tongue or speech, besides theirs, and the
land which they inhabited, wales: which name afterward both to the people
and country did remain. By this means the Britains with their kingdom lost
their name. But they which affirm that name to be derived of their King or
queen, without doubt be deceived. The country soil toward the sea coast,
and in other places in the valleys and playnes is most fertile, which yeldeth
both to man and beast, great plenty of fruit and grass: but in other places
for the most part it is bareyn, and less fruitful: because it lacks
tillage: for which cause, husbandmen do live hardely, eating Oten cakes, and
drinkyng mylk myxt with water, and sour whay. There be many towns and strong
casteis, and.iiii. bishoprikes, (if the bishoprike of Hereforde be counted in
England, as the late writers declat^. The first bishoprike is Meneue, so called
of Meneua, which at this day they call Saint David's: a City very ancient,
situated upon the sea coast, and boundeth westward toward Irelande. An other
is Landaffe, the third Bangor, and the fourth Saint Asaph. All which be under
Tharchebishop of Cantorbury. The walshemen have a language from thenglishemen,
which as they say, that fetch their Petigree from the Troianes, doothe
partly sound of the Trojan antiquity, and partelye of the Greek. But how so
ever it is, the walshemen do not pronounce their speech so pleasauntly and
gentilly as thenglyshemen do, because they speak more in the throat: and
contrarywyse, thenglishemen rightly following the Latins, do express their
voice somewhat within the lyps, which to the hearers seems pleasant and sweet.
And thus much of wales, the third part of Britain

Now follows the fourth and last part of Britayne, named Cornwall. This part
begins on that side, which stands toward Spain westward: Toward the
East, it is of breadth.iiii. score and ten miles, extending a little beyond
saint Germains, which is a very famous village, situated on the right hand
upon the sea coaste, where the greatest breadth of that country is but.xx.
miles: for this parcel of land on the right hand is compassed with the coast
of the mayn sea: and on the left hand with that arm of the sea, which (as
before is declared) parts the land, and runs up to Chepstoll, where the
country is in form of a Horn: For at the first, it is narowe, and then
grows broader, a little beyond the said town of saint Germayne, Eastward it
bordreth upon England: west, south, and North, the mayn sea is round about it:
It is a very bareyn soil, yeldynge fruit more through travail of the tyllers
and husbandmen, then through the goodness of the ground: but there is great
plenty of lead and tynne: in the mynyng and diggyng whereof, does specially
consyst the living and sustentation of the inhabitants. In this only partt
of Britayn, even to this day continues the nation of the Britains, which in ye
beginning brought out of Gallia occupied and in habited that Island (if credit
may be given to them, which report the first inhabitants of Britayn to come
out of the Cities of Armerica.) The argument and proof whereof is, because the
Cornishemen do speak that language, which the Britains use now in France,
who^ the Britons do call Britonantes.

This thing to be more true, an old ancient Chronicle does declare, wherein I
found written, not Cornubia, but Cornugallia, compounded of Cornu, a horn, the
form whereof that country has, and of Gallia, out of which country
thinhabitants came first, the manner of which name is not to be mislyked. Their
tongue is far dissonant from english, but is much like to the walshe tongue,
because they have many words common to both tongues: yet this difference there
is between them, when a Walshman speaks, the Cornysheman rather
understands many words spoken by the Walshman, then the whole tale he
tells. Whereby it is manyfeste, that those three people do understand one an
other, in like manner as the Southern Scots do perceive and understand the
Northern. But it is a thing very rare and marvelous, that in one Island there
should be such variety of speches. Cornwall or Cornugall is in the Diocese
of Excetour, which was ones worthy to be counted the fourth part of the Ila^d,
as well for the contrariety of language, as for the first inhabitants thereof,
as is beforesaid. Afterward, the Normains which constituted a kingdom of all
those three parts reckened Cornwall; to be one of the counties or shires of
the country. Thus much of the particular description of Britayne, that the
whole body of the realm (by the members) may be the better known to some
peradventure that never heard the same before.

The form of the Island is triquetra, or three cornered, having three corners,
or three sides: Two whereof, that is to say: The corner toward theast, and
the other toward the weste^ (both extendyng northwards) ar the longest, The
third side which is the south side, is ^a^ shorter then the other: for the Island
is greatter of length then of breadth. And as in the other two parts is
contained the length, even so in the last, the breadth. In which place, the
breadth begins: and so continuynge from the south part to the North, it is
but narow, The first and right corner of which Island eastwarde, is in Rent, at
Dover and Sandwiche. From whence to Caleys or Boloigne in France, is the
distaunce of.xxx. miles, From this Angle which is against France, to the third
Angle, which is in the Nortte, in Scotland, the main whereof, boundeth upon
Germany, but no land seen: and there the Island is like unto a wedge, even at
the very angle of the land in Scotland. The length whereof is.vii. hundredth
miles. Again, the length from this Corner at Dover in Kente, to the vttermoste
part of Cornwall, being saint Michaels mount (which is the wes^e part or
weast angle) is supposed to be.CCC. miles. From this left Angle* being the west
part, and thuttermost part of Cornwall, which has a prospect toward Spayn,
in which part also stands Irelande, situated* between Britayne and Spain to
the north angle in the further part of Scotland: in which part the Island does
end, the length is.viii. hundred miles, in which part there be very good
havens, and saufe harboroughs for ships, and apt passage into Ireland, being
not past one day saylynge: but the shorter passage is from wales, to waterford,
a town in Irelande upon the sea coaste much like to that passage between
Dover and Calaice, or somewhat more: but the shortest passage of all, is out of
Scotland. From this last angle to Hampton: (which is a town upon the sea
coast, with a haven so called toward the south, and therefore called
Southhampton) between the Angles of Kent and Cornewal, they do mesure by a
straight line, the whole length of the Island, and do say, that it cont^ineth
viii. C. miles: as the breadth from Menena, or Saint David's to yarmouth, which
is in the uttermost part of the Island toward the east does conteyn.CC.
miles, for the breadth of the Island is in the south part, which part is the
front and beginning of the Land, and ends narowe, or as it were in a
straight. So the circuit or compass of the Island is.xviii C. miles, which
is.CC. less, then Caesar does reckon or account.

Thus much I have thought good to take ^ut of Polydore, touching the dyuisyon
of England, with the form and situation of the same. Much other good matter
that Author does allege, which here for brevity I do omit, referryng those
that desire to know farther hereof, to that Book: where he shall find the
style and story both pleasant and profitable.

THE RACE OF THE KINGS OF ENgland, since Brute the first of this Realm: and
in the margent are placed the years before Christ his birth, when every king
began their reigns, till ye come to Cimbilinus, in whose time Christ ye Savior
of the world was borne, and then follows ye years from Christ his birth.
AFTER THE commune and best allowed opinion of the ^moste ancient and best
approved Authors, Brute the son of Syluius Posthumous, arrived in this Ila^d*
at a place now called Totnes in Devonshire: the year of the world. 2855. the
year before Christ's Nativity 1108. wherein he first began to reign, and
named it Britayne^ which before was called Albion. And. London builded.
therein he builded the noble city of London, and na^ed it new Troy, buildyng
there a Temple to Appolin, wherein He established the Troyane Laws in this
kingdom.
he placed an Archf^amyn. He deuide^ the same Island, among his three sons:
unto Locrine he gave the middell part of Britayne, now called England, with
the superiority of all this I Will: Unto Camber he gave Wales, and to Albanacte
Scotland: After which partition he decessed, when he had reigned xxiiii.
years, and was buried at London, then called new Troy, as is aforesaid.

How the River of Humber took that name.
there drowned, the River is till this day named Humber. This king Locrine had
to wife Guendolyn, daughter of Corineus, duke of Cornwall, by whom he had a
son named Madan: he also kept as paramour, the bean tifull lady Estrild, by
whom he had a daughter named Sabrine. And afterthe death of Corineus, duke of
Cornwall: he put from him the said Guendolin, and wedded Estryld, but
Guendolyn repaired to Cornwall, where she gathered a great power, and fought
with king Locrine, and sieve him: he How the River of Se^er^e took* that name.
1063
was buried at Troinouant. She drowned the lady Estrylde with her daughter
Sabrine in a river, that after the young maide^s name, is called Seuern.

Gwendoline, the daughter of Corineus, and wife to Locrin (for so much as
Madan her son was to young to govern the land) was by common assent The
queen reigned during the minority of her son.
of all the Britains, made ruler of the whole Isle of Britayn, which she well
and discretely ruled, to the comfort of her subjects.xv. years, and than
left the same to her son Madan.

The King devoured by wol^es.
he used great tyranny among his Britons: And being at his disport of huntyng,
he was devoured by wild wolves, when he had reigned.xl* years. He left after
him.ii. sons, named Mempricius, and Manlius.

taking the wives and daughters of his subjects: and lastly, became so evil
that he forsook his wife and concubines, and fell to the sin of Sodomye with
beasts: whereby he becam odible to God and man. And goinge on hunting, The king
devoured of wolves
lost his company, and was destroyed of wild wolves: whereof the land was then
full, when he had reigned.xx. years.

Du^britain Ede^brugh Ba^burgh, and York builded*
castle of Alclude, which is Du^britain he made ye castle of Maidens, now
called Edenbrough: he made also ye castle of Bamburgh: he builded York city:
wherein he made a temple to Diane, and set there an Archeflame: and there was
buried, wha^ he had reigned.lx. years.



placing therein a Flamin, to rule y^ same, according to y^ laws of their gods
at that time: and there was buried, when he had ruled Britain.xxv. years.

Ca^torbury winchester and Shaftesbury builded.
Ca^torbury, Winchester, and Shaf^sbury, wherein he builded.iii. temples, and
placed in ye same.iii. Flamins, like as bishops now be* he reigned xxix. years
and left a son after him named Bladud.

Stamford builded. John Harding alleging Merlyn. Bath with ye hot baths
builded. The king ate^pting to fiye, brake his neck.
and made it an university: wherein he had great nu^bre of scolers, studying in all ye seven liberal sciences: which university dured to ye coming of S.
Augustine. At which time ye bish. of Rome in terdited it, for heresies yt fell
among the Saxons and brito^s together mixed. he builded Bathe, and made there a
temple to Apollo, and placed there a Flamyn: he made there the hot bathes, and
practiced his necroma^cy: he decked himself in feathers, and presumed to f^ie in
ye air, and falling on his temple of Apollo, brake his neck when he had
reigned.xx. years.

Leicester, and made there a temple o^ of Ianus: placyng a Flamyne there to
govern the same he had.iii. daughters Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordell* which
Cordelle for her wisdom and virtue toward her father, succeeded him in the
kingdom: when he had reigned xl. year, he decessed, and was buried at Leycester.

Galfride
slew her self, when she had reigned.v. years, and was buried at Leicester
in Ianus temple by her father.

How Glamorganshire took that name. S. John's town in Scotland builded.
with Morgan in wales, and there sieve him: which place is called Glamorgan till
this day: And then Conedagus was king of all Britayn: he builded a temple of
Mars at Perch, that now is S^. John's town in Scotland, and placed there a
Flamyne: he builded an oth^^ of Minerue in wales, which now Bangor (...) wales
builded.
is named Bangor The third he made of Mercury in Cornwall, where he was
borne: he reigned.xxiiii. years, and was buried at London. It rayned
blood.iii. days.








Iago or Lago cousin of Gurgustus, reigned.xxv. years: for his evil
government, he died of a litargie, and was buried at York.

Kynimacus succeeded Iago in this realm of Britayn, wherein he reigned liiii.
years, and was buried at York.



Porrex sieve his brother Forrex, and Porrex was afterward slain by his mother.
which Forrex was slain. And Porrex afterward by his mother was killed in
his bed. Thus cruelly was the blood and house of Brute destroyed, when yt this
realm by the space of *vi. C.xvi. years had been governed by yt lynage.

After the death of the two brethren, Forrex and Porrex, this Realm was Brutus
blud extinguished.
divided with civil wars, for lack of one sovereign governor, which
continued by the space of.li. years, until that noble Dunwallo reduced yt same
into one Monarchy.

ware a crown of gold: he constituted The first king of England that ware a
crown of gold, who builded Blackwel hall in London. The second laws were
Mulmutius laws. The town of Malmsbury built
good laws: which long after were called Mulmutius laws: he gave privileges
unto Temples, and ploughes, and began to make the four notable wais in
Britayne. In London, called then Troy Nouant, he builded a great temple: which
some suppose to be Saint Paul's, some Blackwell hall, which was called
Te^plu^ pacis. Finally when he had brought this Realm to welthe and quietness,
reignyng herein xl. years: He died honorably, leaving after him two valiant
and noble sons, Belinus and Brennus, as Fabia^ writes. He builded the town
of Malmesbury and of Vies. He was buried at London in the temple of Peace
before named.

the means of their mother, they were accorded: and Brennus being given
wholly to the study of wars, left his country to the governance of his
brother, and went into France amongst the Galls: where in the province of
Lio^s, for his excellent qualites, he was greatly esteemed of Siguinus king of
the country, whose daughter he married: And of the Galls was made souerain
captain when they made their voyage to Rome. Beline in the mean time John
Harding. Three archflames in England. Four notable wais made in England. John
Leylande.
both in civil Justice and also religion such as at that time was used, greatly
increased his realm. He made three Archflames, whose seas were at London,
York, and* Carlion. He finished the four great ways begone by his father: He
subdued and made tributarie unto him, Denmark. In London he made the haven,
which at this day, retains the name* of him, called Belins gate: and as John
Leylande writes, builded y^ tower of London. He married his daughter Cambria
unto a prince o^ The tower of London first builded.
Almayn called Antenor, of who^ these people were called Cymbri, and Syca^bri
Finally, after he had reigned with his brother and alone *xxvi. years, he died:
and after the pagan manner, with great ^ompe was burned: and his ashes in a
Carlyon builded. The old temple nere to temple bar built.
vessel of brass, set on a high Pinnacle over Belyns gate: he builded Carlion
and also the temple of Concord: which after the opinion of many ^s now the
parish church of the Temple.



The third laws we^ Marcian laws.
devised certain laws, which long time among the Britains were greatly
esteemed, and named Marcian laws. Finally, when this virtuous prince had
reigned.xxvi. years: he dyed, and was buried at London.

The picts first inhabited the marches of scotland and England
in the first year of his reign, a people of Almaine called Picts, arrived
here in Britayn, and possessed those parties which now be the marches of
both ^ealmes, England and Scotland. Cecilius was buried at Carlyon.





The king devoured by a monster.
monster: which destroyed much^ people* whereof the king hearing wol^ of his
valiant courage, needs fyg^h^^with it: by whom he was clean devoured, when he
had reigned.viii. years.

Ca^bridge and Grauntha^ builte.
reigned.xi. years. A prince just ^ religious: he renewed the temples of his
gods, and governed his people in peac^ and wealth. Our english Chronicle
faith, he builded the towns of Cambridge, and of Grantham.

for which cause by ye estates of the ^ealme, he was deprived of his royal
The king deprived.
^igni^ie, when he had reigned v. years.







vii. years. Vigenius tha^ died* and Per^durus The town of Pickering bu^ ded.
reigned after alone.ii. years. He ^uilded the town of Pickeryng after the
opinion of diverse writers.





Morgan was crowned king of britayn, who guyded the realm peacibly xiiii.
years.









Catillus reigned peacibly in britain x. years* he houng up all oppressors of
the poor people: to give ensample unto other.

Coilus succeeded Catellus in the realm of Britayn, who quietly reigned xx.
years.























iii. yearrs.











In this time diverse prodigies we^ Prodigious signs in y^ air.
seen, as globes of fire, burstyng out of the air with great noise.















How the Isle of Ely took first yt name.
Of this prince the Isle of Ely took this name, for that he there builded a
goodly palace wherein was his most delight to live: and also was there buried.

King Lud builded London from London stone to Ludgate, and named it Ludstone.
in Britayne. As soon as he was made king, he reformed the state of his common
weal: for he amended his laws, and took away all vsages that were naught:
Moreover, he repaired the City of London then called Troynouant* with fair
buyldings and walls: and builded on the west part thereof, a strong gate: which
unto this time retains the name of him, and is called Ludgate. Finally he
dyed, leaving after him two sons Androgeus and Theomantius: who being not of
age to govern their uncle Cassiuelane obtained the Crown. Our Chroniclers
write, that London took the name of this Lud, and was called Ludston. He was
buried nere to the same Ludgate, in a Temple which he there bulded.



In y^.viii. year of his reign, Julius Caesar: who warred long in France, made
the first voyage of any stranger in^^ Julius Caesar made his first voyage into
England
this Realm, and afterward subdu^^it. When C. Julius Caesar had warred seven
years in France and Germany, coming unto that part where Cala^^^^ and Boloigne
now stand, he determined to make war into Britain, which until that
time remained unfrequented and unknown of the Romans. His quarrel was,
because that in the wars of France, he perceived the Frenchmen to have much
succor and aid from thens: Wherefore having prepared.lxxx. ships, he sailed
into Britain: where at the first being weried with an hard and sharp
battle, And after with sudden tempest, his navy almost destroyed: he
returned again into France, there to winter his men. The next spring (which
was the The second voyage of Julius Caesar into England.
year before Christ.li. His navy being new regged and increased, he passed
the seas again with a greater army. But whiles he went toward his enemies on
land, his ships lying at anchor, were again by tempest almost lost: for either
they were driven on the ^andes, where they stack fast: or else through beatyng
one an other; with force of the tempest, they were destroyde. So that ^l. were
lost* the other with much labor were saved. Upon land also his horsemen at
the first encountre were vanquished, and Labienus the Tribune slain. At the
second conflict, not without great danger of his men, he put the Britains to
flight, and pursued them to the river of Thamis: on the further side whereof,
Cassiuelan, with a great multitude of people, was kepinge the banks, but they
not able to resist ye violence and force of the Romans, hyd them selves in
woddes, and with sodayn eruptions London submitted to Julius Caesar.
oftentimes invaded them: but in the mean time their strongest city,
Troynouant submitted it self to Caesar, deliuerynge unto him hostages: which
exaumple also the other cities followed: Whereby Cassiuelane after England
first tributarie to the Romans.
many losses was constreigned to give pledges, and to agree that Britayne
should become Tributarie to the Romans. Then Caesar like a Conqueroure with a
great number of prisoners sailed into France, and so to Rome, where shortly
after he was slain with bodkyns. John Lydgate in his Book named the Serpente
of diuisyon, writes, that Julius Caesar builded in this Land diverse Castelles
and cities for a perpetual m^morie, The castles of Dover, Cantorb. Rochest.
and the Tower of London built. Saliso. Chich. and Excetor builded.
to put his name in remembrance: That is to say, The castle of Dover, of
Canterbury, Rochester, and the Tower of London, the Castle and town of Cesars
burye: taking his name after Caesar, the which is now called Salisbury. He
also edifyed Cesars Chester, that now is called Chichester, and the castelle
of Excester. etc.





When Caesar Augustus the second emperor by the will of God had stablyshed
most sure peace thorough the world, our Redemer Jesus Christ, The birth of
Christ.
very God and man, upon whom peace waited, was borne in the.xiij. year of the
reign of Augustus.

From this place following, the years sens Christ's birthe are placed in the
margent, at the beginning of every Kings Reygne.

Southa^pton, how it took that name.
Cymbaline, and brother of Guiderius, was ordained king of Britayn: he
reigned.xxvii. years. He slew Hamon nere to a haven of the sea, and threw him
gobbet meal therein: wherefore it is now called Southampton.

Claudius the Emperor (after diverse happes of battle took king Aruiragus to
his grace. And for so much as he perceived him to be a valiant prince in token
of frendeshyp, gave to him his daughter in marriage, nam^d Genissa. Gloucester
builded named Tarlio^ S. Peter crucified, and S. Paul beheaded.
This Claudius builded* Gloucester: and was there buried.

S. Peter by the tyranny of Nero, was crucified at Rome* alter ye birthe of
our Savior Jesus Ch^iste.lxviii. years: and S. Paul was there beheaded wi^h
the sword.



This Marius builded the town of Chester ^own buil^ed.
Chester, and is buried at Carlyon.

Colchester builded.
builded the town of Colchester, he reigned.liij. years, and was buried at York.

England first received the christian faith
in the.viii. year of his reign, that was about the year of our Lord. 187.
sent loving letters to Eleutherius bishop of Rome, desyryng him to send some
devout and learned me^, by whose instruction both he and his people might be
taught the faith and religion of Christ: whereof Eleutherius being very glad
sent into Britayn.ii. famous clerks. Faganus and Dunianus. By whose diligence
Lucie and his people of Britayne were instructed and baptized in the faith of
Christ. 1294. years, after the arrival of Brute: The year of Christ. 189.
Lucius king of Britayn, when he had reigned.xii. years deceased, and was buried
at Gloucester: after whose death, for so much as of him remained no heir,
the Britaynes between them selves fell at great discord and war, which
continued to the great disturbance of the realm about.xv. years. By mean of
this foresaid discord among the Britons, Seuerus was moved to make haste into
this Country, as well to quiet the realm, as to keep back the Pictes and
Scots, which vexed them with war he caused a wall of turns and great
Adrians wall repaired by Seuerus, which is yet called the scottish bank.
stakes to be made of the length of. 112. miles (or after some) repaired the
wall of Adrian: It began at Tyne, and reached to the Scottishe sea. This
Seuerus governed Britayn.v. years, and was buried at York.



IN Britayne was yet no king: but the Emperor was accounted as king, wherefore
Carassus, a Britayn of low birth) but valiant and hardy in marciall deeds)
purchased of the Emperor, the keeping of the coasts of br^tayn. By means
where of he drue to him many knights of his countreye, and addressed deadly
war against the Romans, having the better hope, for that he heard of the
death of Bassianus the emperor, who about this time was slain by one of his
own servants.

Alectus, a Duke of Rome was sent to subdue Carassus, which vnlefully usurped
the Crown of Britayn: which Alectus vanquished Carassus: and lastely slew
him, when he had reigned viij. years.

Alectus slain by Asclepiodatus.
and nere to that city gave him bataile: in which Alectus was slain, when he
had governed Britayn.vj. years.

thus slain, belaied the city of London with a strong siege, wherein was Linius
Gallus the Romayn capitayn, and ere it were long, by knightly force and
violence, entered the city, and slew the fornamed Gallus, nere unto a broke
there at that day runnyng, into which broke he threw him: by reason whereof, it
was Walbroke in London how it took that name.
called Gallus or Wallus brook: and this day, the street where sometime the
broke ran, is called Walbroke. After which victory Asclepiodatus governed
Britayn.xxv. years.

Asclepiodatus was slain.
kingdom of Britayn, and governed the realm the space of.xxvii. years.

when he had recovered the tribute, returned with his wife Helena to Rome as
chief ruler in Britayn, who governed* the same.xxi. years: he was buried at
York.

In this Constantius time, was S. Albon prothomartir of England, martyred at
Verolan.

Wherefore y^ Kings of England wear close crowns.
parts of the Empire. Of this man the kings of Britayne had first the
privilege to wear close crowns or Diademes: he reigned.xviii. years.

^Ctauius came into Britayn, who is called in the English Chronicles Octauian)
reigned in this land at the lest 54. years. In which time he was troubled with
oftee^ wars by y^ Romans.

Maximus conquered little Britayne.
reigned.viii. years. He made war upon the Galls, and sailed into
Armerica, now called little Britayn: and subduyng the country, gave it to
Conon Meridoke, to hold for ever of the kings of great Britayn.

Saint Vrsula, with the. 11000. virgins, which were sent into little Britayne
S. Vrsula of England
to be married to the foresaid Conon and his knights: were slain of y^
barbarous people being on the sea.

and exercised all tyranny and exaction upon the people: for which cause he
was abhorred of all the Britayns: and by them was slain: when he had reigned
four years. Then was the realm a good space without head or gouernoure: In
the which time they were now and then very much vexed with the foresaid
Barbarous people, and other foreyn enemies.

Nere about the year of Christ. 427. The scots and Pictes invade England.
the Britaynes were invaded again by the Picts and Scots: which not
withstandyng the foresaid wall that was made by the Romans, spoiled the
country very sore, so that they were driven to seek new help of the
Romans: who sent to them a company of soldiers: which again chased the
Picts, and A wall of stone between England and Scotland.
made a wall of stone of the thickenes of viii. foot, and in height 12* foot.
Which thing when they had done comforting the Britons, and admonishyng them
hereafter to trust to their own ma^hod and strength, they returned again to Rome

The Scotts and Pictes yet once again entered the land of Britayne, spoylynge
the countreye, and cha^yng the commons so cruelly, that they were altogether
comfortiesse, and brought to such myserie, that each robbed and spoiled
other, and over this, ye ground was untilled: whereof ensued great scarcity
and hunger, and after hunger death. In this necessity they sent for The scots
and Picts in uaded this Realm so sore, that ye Romans refused to defend the
same: but rather to lose their tribut.
aid to Aetius, the Romayne capitayn being then occupied in wars in a part
of France: but they had no comfort at his hand. And therefore were forced to
send ambassade to Aldroenus king of little britayne, to desire aid and
comfort: which they obtained, in condition, that if they achieved the
victory, Constantine his brother should be made king of britayn: for to that day
they had no governor. Which thing of the ambassadoures being granted, the
said Constantine gathered a company of soldiers, and went forth with them. And
when he had manfully vanquished their enemies, obtained the victory: according
to the promise made, he was ordained their king, and guyded this land.x. years.

Here ends finally the dominion and tribute of the Romans over this la^d,
which had continued by the space of 483. years, from the time that Brute began
to rule this land. 1541. After the city of Rome was builded. 1585. years

THen it followed, that when Constantine brother of Aldroenus, had chastd and
overcome the Picts and Scotts (as is beforesaide) he was crowned king of
great Britayne, and guyded the land the space of.x. years in quietness.

The king slain in his chamber by a Picte.
to his presence: who watchynge his time, by secret means traiterouslye slew
the king in his chamber.

A Monk made king of England*
of Cornewal, was taken out of ye c^oister, and made king: under whose name
the fors^^d Vortiger ruled all the land and used great tirannie.

Constantius, king of britain, was slain of certain Pictes or Scotts, The
King traitorously slain by certain Pictes.
who^ Vortiger had ordained for a guard to the kings body. Whereof when
Vortiger had knowledge, he wept and made semblaunt of great sorrow and
heaviness: and caused the said Scotts or Pictes to be put to death, though he
in deed were the chief causer of their treason and murder. So this Constantius
reigned but.v. years: And Aurelius and Other, the kings younger brethren, fied
into Britayne.



In Britayn was so great plentye of Great plenty of corn and grain.
corn and fruit, that the like had not ben seen many years before. Whicde
plenty was cause of idelnes, gluttony lechery, and other vices: so y^ through
their incontinent and riotous living, ensued so great pestilence and mortality
that the living scantly suffised to bury A great pestilence.
the dead.

The Pictes and Scots also, having knowledge of the death of their knights,
which were slain by Vortiger, for murderyng of the king: invaded, The scots
and Pictes spoiled this land.
and in most cruel wise spoiled the land of Britayne.

Vortiger being sore abashed, for so much as he knew the minds of his
people to be alienated from him: sent for the Saxons, named Angli, which had no
place to dwell in: and gave to the^ inhabitance in Kent. By their help The
first Saxons entryng this realm.
and manhood in many batails he vanquished and drove back the Pius and other
enemies: and therefore had them ever after in great love and favor.

Hengist, one of the captains of the Saxons, found means that Vortiger king
of Britayne married his daughter King Vortiger deuorced from his lauful wife and
married Rowan ye daughter of Hengist ye Saxon.
Rowan, a maiden of wonderful beauty and pleasantness, but a myscreant and
Pagane. For her sake, the king was deuorced from his laufull wife: by whom he
had.iii. sons. For which deed well nere all the Britons forsook him: and the
Saxons daily increased both in favor, multitude and authority: and from this
time sought always occasion to extingny she utterly the power of the Britains,
and subdue the land to them self.

The Saxons couenanted with the Britons, that they should attend to their
worldly busynes: and the Saxons (as their soldiers) would defend ye land from
the incursions of all enemies: for which service the Britains should give to
them competent meat and wages. And under this pretense caused more Saxons to
be sent for, entendynge at convenient time, by force to have the land in their
subjection.

Saint Germain came into britayne Pelagius heresye in England.
to reduce them from the heresy of Pelagius* to the faith of Christ.

The Britaynes considering ye daily repair of the Saxons into this realm
showed their king, the ieopardye that might thereof ensue* and advertised him to
avoid the danger, and expel them out of the realm: but all was in vayn. For
Vortiger, by reason of his wife, bore such favor toward the Saxons that he
would in no wise hear the cou^celle of his subjects. Wherefore they Vortiger
deprived of his kingdom.
with one will and mind deprived him of his royal dignity, and ordained to
their King, his eldest son Vortimerus.

The king poisoned by his stepmother.
made king, in all hasthe pursued the Saxons: And by his marciall knyghthode,
vanquished them in.iiij. great battles, besides conflyctes and skyrmyshes.
Until at length he was poisoned by mean of Rowen his stepmother, after he had
reigned vij. years.

VOrtiger obtained again the kingdom of great Britayn, and reigned after this
time.ix. years.

The Saxons in Britayne, by privy guyle and treason, got the king Vortiger into
their hands, and kept him as prisoner: and by that means constreyned the
King to grant unto them three countries in the land of britayne: (that is to
say) Kent, Sussex, Suffolk and Norfolk. Then Hengist began his dominion over
Kent: and sendyng for ^o Saxons, to inhabit the other provinces: shortly after
made war upon the Britayns and so chased them, that he kept his kingdom of
Kent in peace and war.xxiiij. years.

Vortiger fled into Wales, and there builded a Castle. Of which buildyng and
long let of the same, and of his prophet Merline the common voice of the
people speaks many things.

Aurelie surnamed Ambrose, and Other, the brethren of Constantius king of
britayne: which was slain by the treason of Vortiger, landed with a Nauye
King Vortiger burned.
of ships Totnes: and by the healpe of britaynes, which gathered to the in all
have, made war upon Vortiger and burned him in his castle in Wales.

hasted him with an army toward York, against Octa son of Hengist, who with
his saxons kept the Citie^ where he discomfited, and took prisoner the said
Octa.

A Saxon named Hella; with his.ii^ The second kingdom* of the saxons.
sons, and a company of Saxons landed in the south part of Britayne, slew the
britons, and chased many of the^ into deserts and wods, and subdued the
countries of Southery, Somerset, Deuonshyre and Cornwall, which after was
called the kingdom of south Saxons.

A Saxon named Porthe, la^ded with How portsmouth^* came by that name. The
third kingdom of the Saxons.
his.ii. sons, at an haven in southsex: After whom, the Haven is named
Portsmouthe.

The kingdom of the East Saxons began in Britayn under a duke named Vffa: The
kingdom whereof contained Norffolk and Suffolk: the kings of that lordship
were called Vffines: great murder and vexation of the britains was at the
entryng of those Saxons.

In the end of Aurelie his reign, Pascentius, the youngest son of Vortiger:
who for fear of Aurelius fied in to Irelande, invaded this land with a great
army. Aurelius died being poisoned when he had reigned.xix. years.

Other, surnamed Pendragon, was crowned king of Britayne, and* reigned.xvi.
years. He was enamored upon the dukes wife of Cornwall: and to obtain his
unlawful lust, made war upon her husband Garelus, and slew him in
battle: he was buried at Stonehinge.

Gildas made a book de gestis Arthuri. Windesor* castle buil*ded.
a stripling of.xv. years of age, began his reign over Britayne, and governed
the land.xxvi. years, having continual war and mortal battle with the
saxons.

John Frosarde* affirms, that king* Arthure builded the castle of Wyndesour:
and there founded the order of the round Table.

The fourth kingdom of the weste Saxons began in Britayne, under a The
fourth kingdom of the Saxons*
Saxon called Cerdicus. They landed first at an have in Norffolk called
Yarmouth. With this Saxon Cerdicus, and his people, Arthur had much trouble and
war. This lordship contained the west part of England, as Wilshyre*
Somersetshyre, Barkeshyre, Dorsetshyre* and other*

Arthure, when after many and dy*uers battayls, he had set his land^ in some
quietness: he betoke the rule thereof to his nephewe Mordred, and with a chosen
army sailed into France where he did marvelous things, and vanquished Lucius
Hibertus, the Roman Captain, which thing seems not to agree with other
histories.

Mordred, which had the governance Mordred y^ traitor usurps the crown.
of Britayne in the absence of Arthure, by treason was crowned king through the
healpe of Cerdicus king of west Saxons. Of which treason when relation came to
Arthur being then in France: with all haste he made back to Britayne: where
he was met of Mordred, which gave to him three strong battayls. In ye which
many noble and valiant knights perished. And lastly, in a battle Mordred
slain and Arthur wounded to to death.
foughten besides Glastenbury, Mordred was slain, and Arthure wounded unto the
death. He was buried in the valley of Aualon, and afterward at Glastenbury.

of their father: so that between them was foughten sundry battayls: In the
which lastely the two brethren were vanquished and slayue.

Holy Gildas our countreiman flourished Gildas the wise.
in this time, he was called Gildas the wise.

Aurelius Conanus a britayne raised mortal war against Constantine the king:
and after sore fight, s^ew him in the field, when he had reigned.iij. years,
and was buried at Stonehing.



The kingdom of Northumberland The.v. and vi. kingedom of the Saxons.
began first in britain under a Saxon, named Ida* This province was first
divided into two kingdoms: The one was called Deyra, which contained the land
from Humber to Tine: the other Brenitia, which included the country from Tyne
to the Scottishe sea. After this day ye britayns decreased daily in lordship
and rule, and drew them toward Wales, so that the country about Chester, was
the chief of their lordeship.





Ethelbect, king of the Saxons in The first war between the Saxons in this
realm
Kent, gave bataile to Ceaulmus king of the west Saxons: in which fight were
slain.ii. dukes of Ethelberts, and himself with his people chased. This was
the first war between the Saxons, after they had land and dwelling within this
realm.

CAreticus began to rule the britons: this man (as witnesses al writers) loved
civil war, and was odible both to god and to his subjects, they moved the
Saxons to war upon him: who took from him a great part of his land.

The Saxons hearing of the discention Gurmundus builded Gurmund chester.
between Careticus and his britons, being accompanied with Gurmundus king of
Ireland, made war upon Careticus, in such wise that he was feign to take the
town of Cicester, where they assaulted him so sore that he with his men fled
from thence into Wales: by which means he left a great part of his dominion:
and shortly after ended his life, when he had reigned.iij. years.



In Britayne Ethelfridus governed the Northsaxons, who made such continual
war upon the Britons, and chased them so sore, that it is thought he slew mo
of them, then all the other Saxons kings. By this cruelty, the faith of
Christ was almost utterly extinguished among the Britains, which had continued
sense the time of Lucius about. 400. years, and many of the Britaynes were
chased out of the Island, the rest remained in Wales: who there kept the
Christen Faith, which they had received.

The britains being chased out of their The Saxons had the whole possession of
this realm
country into Wales, the Saxons obtained the whole dominion of this Ila^d:
Saving a part of Scotland which was subject to y^ Pictes and Scots: and the
Britons kept the^ selves in Wales.

In Anno d^i. 596. S. Gregory sent S. Augus. came into England. S. Auste^s of
Ca^torb. S. Paul's church in London and s. Andrews in Roches. s Peter's at west.
buylt 613.
Augustine Melitus Iustus, and John, with other learned men to preach the
christen faith to the Angles: which were first received of Ethelbert king of
Kente, whom they converted to the faith, with diverse of his people. This
Ethelberte (as some write) first began to build S. Austins in Cantorbury. S.
Poules church in London and s. Andrews in Rechester: he also excited a citise^
of London to buyld the abbey of Westmynster.

CAdwan duke of Northwales, was made sovereign of the Britaynes, who conunynge
out of Wales, gave strong battle to Ethelfride king of Northumberlande their
most deadly enemy: and in diverse encountres so discomfited the said
Ethelfride, that he was forced to entreat for peace: After which concord made
between those ii. princes, they continued all their life time, as two special
and loving friends, he reigned.xxij. years.

Also about this time began ye kingdom The.vii. kingdom.
of Mercia or middle England under the strong painim and Saxon called Penda:
which lordshyp contained Hu^tingtonshire, Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and
other, and was greatest of all other kingdoms. At that time reigned in diverse
parts of this land Paulinus builded the great church at Lincoln. Iron cups
fastened by wells and fountains to drink in 635.
vii. kings

Edwyn king of Northumberlande was baptized of ye holy bishop Paulinus: and
after him, many of his people: he for the refreshyng of wayfaring men,
ordained cups and dyshes of iron to be fastened by such clear wells and
fountains as did run by the ways side.

CAdwallyn the son of Cadwane began his reign over the Britayns. He was
valyaunte and myghtie, and warred strongly upon the Saxones: and made Penda
king of Mercia tributarie to him: he reigned.xlviij. years and was buried at
London in S. Martins church by Ludgate.

Segebert, king of East Angles or Norffolke, ordained good learning to be
taught, and erected Schools in The first Schole in Cambridge builded.
diverse parts of his dominion, as he sometime had seen in France. By him
was the first common Schole founded at Cambridge.

Penda king of Mercia warred upon Oswalde the good and holy king of
Northumberland: and sieve him in battle with many of his knights.

Oswye. the brother of Oswald obtained the kingdom of Northumberlande: who
sieve Oswyne his brothers son: and made Odilwaldus partaker of his kingdom.

Kenwalcus king of West Saxons was restored to his kingdom by the ^he bishops
se of Winchester builded.
help of Anna, king of east angles. He builded the bishops see of Winchester,
and made Agelbert the first bishop of that see. And after him was one named
Wine, of whom the city took the name of Wynchester.

Benet the monk, and master of the Glasynge brought first into England. The
abbes of Abingt^ Chertsty, and Barking builded.
^euere^d Beda, was famous in britayn This Benet brought first the craft of
glasyng into this land.

Cissa begun to build the abbey of Abingdon, and Erkenwalde bishop of London
builded the abbeys of Chertsey, and of Bar^ing in Essex. Chertsey in Southery
was afterward destroyed by the Danes.

The king became a monk.
Rome, and there became a religious man, and was buried at saint Peter's church
at Rome. He was the last king of Britayne. And this land after this The Island
called universally England.
time was called Anglia, and ye inhabitants thereof Angles or Englishmen, and
the Britayns were called Walshemen. This happened. 1791 years, or as says
Fabian. 18^2. after that Brute first arrived in this land: After the conquest
of Caesar. 735. years: From the entryng of the Saxons under their leaders
Hengist and Horsus, in the time of Vortiger. 236. or nere therabout.

Thus ends the reign of the Britons: and now follows the reign of the
Saxons. And although the Saxons h^d divided this realm into seven several
kingdoms: yet I will now speak chiefly of the west Saxons in order, because
that (in process of time) they subdued the other kings, and brought it again
into one monarchy.

The colleg of Wels, and the abbei of Glaste^buri newly builded. The queen of
west saxons was abbess of Barkyng. the king her husband becam a religious man
the Kentyshe Saxons, that he constrained them to seek and entreat means of
peace, geuyng to him for the same great gifts. This man builded first the
college of Wells, and the abbey of Glastenbury: he paid ye Peter pens first to
Rome, when he had governed the west Saxons by the space of.xxxvii. years, by
the earnest labor of his wif Etheldreda, which was an holy woman and abbess
of Barking in Essex, gave up his royal power, and becam a poor man, and went to
Rome on pilgramage, he is of Beda called Hunne or Jew.

reverend Beda was famous, and wrote S. Beda in this time wrote in England.
his book called Anglica historia, to Of frick king of Northumberland.
Ethelarde reigned.v. years.

two come^^or blasyng stars. Crowland abbey builded. Beda deceased
In his time appeared two blasyng sterres, castyng as it were burning brandes
toward the north. He reigned.xvi. years. Ethelwald before named builded the
abbay of Crowland.

The holy man Beda, which for his learning and godly life, was renoumed in all
ye world, ended his last day about the year of Christ. 734. he in his life
compiled.lxxviij. books.

The king deprived, and slain by a swineherd.
person desolate and forlorn, wandering alone in a wood, was slain by a
swineherde, whose lord and master, (when he had reigned as king) he was wrong
fully put to death, when he had reigned.iij. years.



Kenuife king of Mercia builded the Winchomb abbey builded. The abbey S. Albons
builded.
abbey of Wynchcombe.

Offa, king of Mercia builded the abbey of saint Albons, he chased the britons
or Welshemen into Wales, and made a famous dike between Wales and the
vtterboundes of Mercia, which is now called Offa dike.

Kenulphus as he haunted to a woman, which he kept at Merton, was The king
Kenulphus slain.
slain by treason of one Clio, the kinsman of Sigebert, late king. He was
buried at Winchester.

It rayned blood.
heaven, which falling on men's clothes, appeared like crosses.

The Danes first entered this land of The danes first entered this land.
Britayne, but by the strength and puissance of Brithricus, and other kings of
the saxons they were driven back, and compelled to void the land. Brichricus
was poisoned by his wife Ethelburga. The king poisoned by his wife
For which deed the nobles ordained, that from thencefoorth the kings wives
should not be called Queen's, nor suffered to sit with them in places of estate.



The Danes with a great host, entered The danes second entering this land.
this land the second time, and spoiled the Is^e of Shepey in Kente, against
whom Egbert the king addressed him with his power: who the Danes forste to flee
the field. After which time, some of the Danes continually abode in one place or
other of this land.

An hospital for english me^ builded at Rome. Oxenforde builded.
began his reign over the more part of England. He went to Rome, where he
repaired the english schole, which was first founded by Offa king of Mercia.
This schole was after turned to an hospital for englyshemen, which came to
Rome. he first founded the university of Oxenford, which some writers attribute
to Offa, king of Mercia He reigned.xxiij. years, and was buried at Winchester.



The Danes third entering this land.
was made king over the more part of England. In the beginning of his reign,
the Danes entered the west part of the realm, and spoiled the country before
them, till they came to Winchester, and by strength took it. But by the king
and his dukes, they were forced to leave Wynchester, and in retirynge toward
their shyps, they lost a great number of their men. He reigned vij. years,
and was buried at Sherborn.

This king divided the day and night in. 3. parts 8* hours to serve god 8
hours to here suites of his people and. 8. hours to take his sleep and rest*
took on him ye gouerna^ce of Westesaxons, and other provinces of England. He
was a man framed of nature as well to peace as war. Among his subjects, he was
myld, gentil, loving and pleasant: against his adversaries, severe, fierce,
valiant, and hardye. He lived in continual war with the Danes: which all the
time of his reign, vexed this land with most deadly wars: he divided the day
in three parts.viij. hours to serve god.viij. to here suites of his people,
and.viij. to take his sleep and rest.

A company of Danes landed in Northumberlande: The danes landed in
Northumberland.
and after many sayrmyshes and battayles to them given by strength they
possessed and held that country, the space of.lx. years, and got also the
City of York.

A company of the Danes entered the King Ed^mund slain by ye danes.
country of Norffolk, where they sieve the holy king Edmond, which governed the
province of Norffolke: because he would not forsake ye faith of Christ.

At Colingham abbey saint Ebb abbess Women to keep their
cut of her nose and ouerlip, and persuaded al her sisters to do the like that
they being odible to y^ Danes, might the better keep their virginity: in
despite whereof, the Danes burned the abbey, and the Nuns therein.

Also those Danes landed again in Southerey, and went forward til they came to
Readyng, and took that town and castle: at which time, while Etheldred was
busied against them, he had word of the landyng of Offrike king of Denmark
with an other company, The king slain by Danes. The priory at Excetor builded.
to whom the king gave many strong battayles. But in the end he was put to
the worse, and received a wound, whereof he died, when he had reigned.ix.
years. He builded the priory of Chanons at Excetor, and was buried at
Winbourne.

Shaftsbury and Etheling^ei builded. First schole (...) Oxe^ford
excellently well. He builded the house of Nuns at Shaftisbury, and an other
at Ethelyngsey.

By the counsel of Nottus, Alured ordained the first Grammar schole in
Oxenford, and franchised the town with many great liberties. He builded the
new mynster in Wynchester, Newabbel in winch.


King Edward the senior. Herford castle built. The monastery of S. Peter in
Gloucester builded.
and there lies buried.

King cronned at Kingston.
EDward, the elder son of Alured, began his reign over the most part of
England, and governed this land well and nobly.xxiiij. years. He builded
Hereford castle, and adjoined to his lordshyp all this Island, saving only
Northumberlande, which was possessed of the Danes. He lies buried at
Wynchester by his father, in the new mynster. he builded the monastery of S.
Peter in Gloucester.

ADelstane, after the death of Edward senior his father, began his reygne in
England. He was a prince of worthy memory, valyant and wise in all his acts:
and brought this land to one Monarchye: for he expelled utterly the Danes,
subdued the Scotts, and quieted the Welshmen. He reigned.xv. years, and lies
at Malmsbury.

noblenes and justice: he reigned vi. years and was buried at Glastenbury.

King crowned at king hull.
for his sons Edwine and Edgar, were thought to young to take on them so
great a charge. This Eldred had the earnest favor of the commons, because
he was a great maynteyner of honestye, and also most abhorred naughty and
unruly persons for his expertnes in feats of arms, he was much commended.
Whereby he quieted and kept in due obeisance, the Northumbers and Scotts, and
exiled the Danes. He reigned.ix. years, and was buried in the cathedral
church of Wynchester.

EDwine succeeded his uncle Eldred Crouned at Kingstone. A vicious king.
in the kingdom: of whom is left no honest memory, for one heinous act by
him committed in the beginning of his reign. In the self day of his
Coronation, he sodaynlye withdrewe him self from his Lords, and in the sight
of certain persons, ravished his own kynswoman, the wife of a noble man of his
Realm: and afterward slew her husband, that he might have the unlawful use
of her beautye: which act, and for banishinge Dunstane, he becam odible to
his subjects and of the Northumbers, and people of middle England, that rose
against The king deprived.
him was deprived, when he had reigned.iiij. years, he was buried in the
cathedral church of Winchester.

Crouned at Bath: some say at Kingston.
his reign in England. He was a prince of worthy memory, for his manifold
virtues greatly renoumed: so excellent in justice, and sharp in correction of
vices, as well in his maiestrates, as other subjects: that never before his dais
was used less felonye by robbes, or extortion or bribery by falls officers. He
chastised also the great negligence, covetousness, and vicious living of the
clergy, he reformed, and brought them to a better order: of stature he was but
little, but of mind valiant and hardy, and very expert in martial policy, he
prepared a great nauye of ships, which he disposed in.iij. parts of his This
king builded and repaired ^ilto^, Peterborowe, Thorney, Ramsei, and^
realm, and had soldiers always pressed and ready against the incursions of
foreign and strange enemies, he reigned xvi. years. He builded Peter's Bury,
Thorney, Ramsey, and many other, and was buried at Glastenbury.

EDward the son of Edgar by his first wife, began his reign over this
realm, contrary to the mind and pleasure of Elfride his stepmother, and other
of her alliance. In all kinds of honest virtue, this man might well be compared
to his father: and began his Reygne with such modesty and myldenesse, that he
was worthylye favored of all men: Except only Elfride, which ever bare a
grudge against him: for so much as she desired to have the governance of the
Realm, for her own soonne Egelrede.

Edward, while he was hunting in a forest (by chance) lost his company,
and rode alone to refreshe him The king murdered by his stepmother.
at the castle of Corffe: where by the counsel of his stepmother Elphrede,
he was traiteroussye murdered, as he satte on his horse: When he had
reigned.iij. years. He was buried at Shaftesburye. It is of some authors
written, that the foresaid Elphred did afterward take great penance, and that
she builded Almesbury and Warwel: ^lmes^ury ^ Warwel ^^ylded.
In which Warwell she after lived a solitarye life till she dyed*

The King crowned at Kingston.
king Edgar and Elphrede, was ordained king of England, and crowned at
Kyngston. In his time ye Danes arrived in sundry places of Englad: as in the
Isle of Thenet, in Cornewalle, and Sussex. In conclusion, for aduoidyng of
further danger, he was compelled to appeace them with great sums of money:
but when the money was spent, they fell to new robbyng, and cessed not to
spoil the land, and London b^sieged by y^ Danes.
lastly besieged London. And to augment the kings sorrow, Elphricus that then
was admiral of England, traitorously fled to the Danes. And after, being
reconciled, fled to them the second time.

The bloody flixe, the burning fever with diverse other maladies vexed the
people throughout all England.

Swain king of Denmark repented of ye former couenantes, made with the
Englishmen, with a strong army entered Northumberlande, and so went forth
till he came to London, which he besieged, and destroyed the country of Kent.
Egelrede despairyng of all recovery, ^^ed to Richard duke of Normandy: and
then possessed Swayn ye hole kingdom of this realm: who spoiled the lands of
S. Edmunds. But after his death succeeded Canutus his son who enclosed ye same
with a deep dich, and granted to thinhabitants thereof, S. Edmu^des bury
builded.
great freedom. And after builded a church over the place of his sepulture,
and ordained there an house of monks enduyng them with fair possessions.

The Englyshmen sent again for Etheldred out of Normandy, who by y^ help of
the Normans, and present assistance of his commons expelled Canutus* but
shortly Canutus returned again into England, where he spared nothing that
might be destroyde with sword and fire. In which time king Etheldred ended his
life, when he had reigned.xxxviij. years, and was buried in the north Isle of
Paul's church in London, above the altar. In the second* year of this Kings
reign a great part of the city of London was A great fire in London.
wasted with fire: But ye shall understand, that the city of London had most
housyng and buyldyng from Ludgate toward Westmynster: and littel or none where
ye chief or heart of ye City is now, except in diverse places was housyng* but
they stood without order. So that many towns and cities, as Cantorbury, York,
and diverse other in England, passed London in buyldyng. But after the
conqueste it increased, and shortly after passed and excelled all the other.

Edmu^de with the Ironsyde.
courage in martial adventures both hardy and wise, and one that could very
well endure all payns: Wherefore he was surnamed Ironsyde: but the more part
favored Canutus ye Dane. By means whereof, between those two princes were
foughte^ many great battails: in the which either party sped diversely to the
great slaughter of them that took their parts. But lastly it was agreed, that
the two captains should try their quarrel between them selves only. In which
fight, although Edmund seemed to have the upper hand: yet he condesce^ded to
divide the realm, and make Canutus fellow with him in ye kingdom.

An English Earl called Edricus, which by his falshode wrought much hurt to
his natural countreie, and lastly was aucthor of the death of the noble
Edmund. And thereof him self brought first knowledge to Canutus the Dane,
saying in this wise: Thus have I done Canutus for love of thee. To whom he
answered: saying: For my love thou have murdered thyn own sovereign Lord,
whom I loved most entierly: I shall in reward thereof, exalte thy head above
all the Lords of A just reward given
England. And forthwith commanded him to be beheaded, and his head to be set
upon a spear on the highest gate of London. These princes reigned together ii.
years. This Edmund was buried at Glastenbury.



Canutus subdued the Scots, whereby he was king of.iiij. kyngdoms, that is to
say, of England, Scotland, Denmark, and Norwaye. And after his death was
buried at S. Swithins at Winchester.



tables were spread.iiij. times in the day, and the people served with great
excess: when he had reigned.iij. years, he died sodeinly at Lambeth, not
without suspection of poysonyng, and was buried at Winchester.

Hardikenitus being dead, the Danes were beaten, slain. and driven out of this
land, into their own country xxxiij. years after that Swayn began first to
reign.



William bastard duke of Normandy, William bastard Duke of Normandy.
about this time came with a goodly company into England: and was honorably
received; to whom the king made great chere* And at his return enriched him
with great gifts and pleasures: and (as some write) made promise to him, that
if he died without issue, the same William should succeed him in the kingdom
of England.

Harold the son of the Earl Goodwin, went to Normandy: where he made faithful
promise to duke William, that after the death of Edward, he would keep the
kingdom to his behalf: on which condition, he brought with him at his return
his brother* Tosto.

King Edward finished his last day when he had reigned four and twenty
years.vii. months and odd dais. He purged the old and corrupt laws The
laws of S. Edward the confessor.
and picked out of them a certain, which were most profitable for the
commons. And therefore were they called the common Laws. For restitution
whereof, happened diverse commotions and insurrections in this Land. He was
buried at Westminster.

HArolde, the eldest son of Earl Goodwyne, being of great power in
England, and therwyth valiant and hardye, took on him the governance of this
land, nothing regarding the promise that he made to Wyllyam, Duke of
Normandye. Wherefore whenne Wyllyam sent to him Ambassades, admonyshyng him of
the couenauntes that were agreed between them. Harolde would in no wise
surrendre to him the kingdom, which Wyllyam claymed, not only for the promise
that was made to him: but also because he was the next of king Edwards blood.

Whenne Wyllyam Duke of Normandye perceived, that he could not William Duke of
Normandy conquered this land.
by any means bring Harolde to fulfylle his promise, nor by trea^^e to yield
unto him the kyngedome: By force he entered the land, to whom Harolde gave
strong and sharp battle. In the end whereof, William chased the
Englyshemen, slew Harolde, and obtained the governance of this land, when
Harolde had reigned but.ix. months. He was buried at Waltham abbey.
Waltham abbey, which he him self had builded, and was the last that
reigned of the bloudde of the Saxons in this Realm.

King William Conqueror.
Anno Regni.i.
so he changed the whole state of this common weal, and ordained new laws at
his pleasure, profitable to himself: but grievous and hurtful to the people
This William was wise and politic rich and covetous, and loved well to be
magnified. He was a fair speaker and a great dissembler. A man of comely
stature, but somdeale gross bealied: stern of countenance, and strong in
arms, and had great pleasure in hunting, and making of sumptuous feasts.

Anno. 2.
Two castles builded at York one other at Notingham, an other at Lincoln.
umbers rebelled, which were both subdued, and grievously punyshed.



Anno. 3.
CAnutus king of Denmark being encouraged thereto by certain English
outlawes, invaded the North parts of England, and passed thorough to York:
from whe^s he was driven back by William, and forced to flee into his own
country.

Anno. 4.


Anno. 6.
The new forest in Southampton.
for ye atchiuing of which enterprise he was forced to cast down diverse towns
and churches.xxx. miles of length, and replenished the same with wild beasts,
and made sharp laws for the maintenance and increase of the same.

Anno. 10.
Execution at Winchester.
was beheaded at Linchester, and buried at Crowland.

Anno. 13.
The king gave the Erledome of Northumberlande to Walter bishop of Durham,
who was after slain by the men of Northumberland.

Anno. 15.


Anno. 16.
shrewes, and We^lok abbeis built.
About this.xvi. year, earl Waryng earl of Shrewsbury, made two abbeis whereof
the one was in ye suburbs of Shrewsbury, and the other at Wenloke.

Anno. 19.
The number of men and cattle, and how many hids of la^d was noted in england
of tribute to be levied throughout this Realm, for every hyde of land (that
is twenty acres.vi. s. And not long after, commanded a valuation to be taken
of all lands, fees, and possessions, and diligent search also to be made, what
number of men and cattle were within this land. And according A grievous
exaction
to the quantity and number thereof, gathered an other payment.

Anno. 20.
Great plag^ in england
honger among people, great bareynnesse upon the earth, and much hurt was
done in many places, by the misfortune of fire: and specially in London. For a
part of Paul's was brent ye.vii. A part of Paul's church bre^t
of July. King William builded two abbeis in England, one at Battle in Sussex:
ye other nere to London called Barmondsay. He builded the third at Cane Battle
abbey and Barmondsey abbey builded.
in Normandy. He ended his life the.ix day of September, and was buried at Cane
in Normandy, he had.v. children, Robert, to whom he gave Normandy, Richard, who
died in his youth. William Rufus, and Henry, which were kings after him. And
one daughter, named Adela, who he gave in marriage to Steven Earl of Bloys, who
got on her Steven that after was king of England.

William Rufus, or William the red king.
Anno regni. 1.


Robert Curthoise his elder brother came with an army into England, against
William, whereof when the said William had knowledge* he entreated peace.

Anno. 2.
Diverse Lords of this realm conspired against William Rufus, and assaulted
diverse tounes within England they stirred in like manner against him Robert
Curthoyse duke of Normandy, the second time. But Willian vanquished the
traitors, chased them out of this realm, and made peace with his brother
Robert. This second year was A great erthquake.
a great earthquake, the.xi. day of harvest, that ouerturned many houses and
churches in England.

Anno. 3.


Anno. 4.
A great tempest fell on saint Lukes The rose of Bowchu^h^ and s^^e hundred
houses in London blown down.
day in sundry places of England, and specially in Winchecombe: where a great
part of the steple was ouerthro: wen with thundering and lightning: and in
London the wynd ouertourned.vi. hundred houses, and the roof of Bowchurche in
Cheap.

wars had impaired: and builded other Newcastel upon Tine builded. ^als.
church brent with lightening.
there besides, as the new castle on Tyne. etc. This.v. year the roof of
Salisoury Church was clean consumed with lightnyng.

Anno. 6.
Great frost.
the great cakes of ice brake down many great bridges.

Robert Curthois duke of Normandy Normandy morgaged to the king of england.
laid his dukdome to pawn to his brother William of England for ten
thousand pounds.

This.vi. year Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester sent to Normandy for Ancelme, to
build an abbey at Chester: Chester abbey built
which he after builded, and then was made archbishop of Cantorbury: and after
was exiled by William Rufus.

Anno. 7.
The king of Scotts slain in England.
of England: and in Northumberland was slain with his eldest son Edward, by
Robert Mo^bray, which was Earl of that province.

This year was so great a pestilence, Great pestilence.
that many men lay unburied.

Anno. 8.
Great morrein of me^*
with exactio^s, and murreyn of men so sharply, that tillage of the earth was
laid aside for.x. year, whereby ensued great hunger and scarsity the years
following. And many strange and uncouth fightes were seen, as hosts of Sightes
in the air.
men fightyng in the say, fiery flames, and such other.

Anno. 10.


Anno. 11.


Anno. 12.
great flou^
rose so hye that it drowned many towns in England.

In England at a town called Finchauster A well (...) and flames fire seen the
(...)
in Barkeshyre, a well cast out blood as before it had done water, and after by
the space of.xv. days great flames of fire were seen in the element.

Anno. 13.


King Henry the first, called Beauclerke
Anno Reg. 1.


Anno. 2.
Tribute to he duke of Normandy.
should pay three thousand marks yearly to duke Robert.

Anno. 3.
The priory and hospital of S. Bartholomewe in Smithfield begone to be builded.
the church and hospital of saint Bartholomew in Smithfield, was begone to be
founded by a minstrel of the kings, named Rayer: And after finished by good
and well disposed citizens of the city of London, and especially by Richard
Whittingto^. This place of smithfielde was at that day a laystowe of al ordure
of fylth: and the place where felons and other transgressors of the Smith^^^^ld
a laystowe.
kings laws were put to execution.

Anno. 4.


Anno. 5.
Teukesbury* abbey builded.


Sir Robert le Fitzha^ builded Teukesbury, and there was buried.

Anno. 6.
Rebellion in Shropshyre and Cornwall.
William of Cornwall, rebelled against king Henry, and were taken and
condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

Anno. 7.
A blasynge sterre.
the sterre, and shortly after were seen two moons, the one in the East, and
the other in the west.

Anno. 9.


Anno. 10.
The strong castle of bristow built Euisha^ abbey builded
of saint James in the northesyde of the same city, where his body was buried.
And his son Earl William began the abbey of Euishan.

Anno. 13.
A greh erthquake.
a great earthquake, and the river of Trent was so dried, that the space of one
day men went over dryshod. And this year the king builded the abbey of Hide
abbey builded.
Hyde without the walls of Winchester that of old time was within the walls.

A blasyng sterre appeared sone after, and there upon followed a hard winter, A
blasynge sterre.
death of men, scarsitie of victuals, and morayne of beasts

Anno. 15.


Anno. 18.


Anno. 20.
The kings children drouned in the sea.
Richard the sons of king Henry of England, and Mary his daughter, Richard
earl of Chester, with his wife, the kings nece, and other to the number of*
160. persons passing from Normandy into England, by oversight of the ship
master were drowned, saving one butcher, which escaped the danger.

Anno. 24.
Readinge, abbey, Cisseter Windsor and Woodstock builded.
was begun to be builded by king Henry the first: he also builded Cisseter
Wyndesore, and Woodstoke with the park.

Anno. 17.
The graye frierst first came into England.
England, and had their first house at Cantorbury.

Maude the daughter of king Henry after the death of her* husband the
Emperor, came into England to her father.

Anno. 28.


Anno. 32.
Fountains abbey builded.


Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of Angew married Maude ye empress, daughter of king
Henry: of which.ii. descended Henry the second which reigned after Stephen.

About this time was builded the The priory of Norton and the abbey of Combr^
more built
prioyre of Norton in the province of Chester, by one William, the son of
Nichole. Also the abbey of Combremore in the same province was* builded about
the same time.

Robert Curthois dyed in prison, and was buried at Gloucester.

Anno. 33.


Anno. 36.
Henry the first took his death by a fall of his horse.
Normandy, with a fall of his horse took his death, and was buried at Readyng:
when he had reigned. 35. years.iiij. months, and one day.

King Stephen.
Anno Regni.i.
STephen Earl of Boloyn, ye son of the earl of Bloys and Adela, William
Conquerors daughter, and nephewe to king Henry ye first took on him the
governance of this realm of England the second day of December, in the year of
our lord. 1135, and left ye same y^ x^v. day of October, in ye year of our
lord. 1154 so that he reigned xviij. years.x. months, and xxiiij. days.
Although he had continual war, yet did he never burden his commons with
exactions. He seemed in this blam worthy, that contrary to his oath made to
Maude the daughter of Henry, he was thought unjustly to take on him the Croun.
For which cause he was vexed with wars all the time of his reign.

At this time was great trouble and slaugher in England: for somuche as diverse
of ye nobles mainteyned Maud the empress against Stephen, which was in
possession of the croune.

King Stephen made wars against David of Scotland, because he refused to do
him his homage, for Northumberland, and huntingdon, which he held by his wife.
In this war the Earl of Gloucester was taken. But at the length Stephen
made peace, and agreed with David king of Scots, and received of him homage,
after that he had won from him certain tounes and castelles, and gave to
Henry the son of David, the erledome of Huntingdon.

Anno. 2.


Anno. 4*


Anno. 6.
King Stephen taken prisoner.
Robert earl of Gloucester, and Ranulphe of Chester, made strong war upon king
Stephen. In the^d whereof the kings party had the worse, and him self taken
prisoner, and sent to Bristow. But the Kentishe men and Londoners, fauouryng
the king, warred upon the rebels, and in open field took Robert earl of
Glouceter. But shortly after, both the king and the duke were delivered out of
prison by exchange. And Stephen without delay asse^blyng a strong army, in
such wise pursued his e^^emies, that he forced Maude to forsake the Realm.
This war continued a long time, to the great damage of the Realm.

About this time was founded the abbey of Stratford Langthorn within Stratford
abbey builded.
iiij. miles of London, by a knight called sir William de mount Fichet.

Anno. 10.


Anno. 11.
Henry succeeded in the dukedom.

Anno* 12.


Anno. 15.
A great frost.
so stronglye frosen, that horse and cart passed over upon the ye.

Anno. 16.


Anno. 17.


Anno. 18.
condition that Stephen during his life should hold the kingdom of England and
Henry to be heir apparent.

Anno. 19.
The abbeis of Cogshal Fourneys, and Feu^^sham builded.
Coggeshal, in Essex an other at Furneis in Lancashire, and the third at
Feue^sham in Kente, where now his body rests, and deceassed the *xxv. day of
October: in the year of our Lord. 1154. when he had reigned.xviii. years.x*
months and.xxiiij. days.

King Henry the second.
Anno regni. 1.


Anno. 2.


Anno. 3.


King Henry went into Wales, and Castle of Rutland and abbey of Basingwerk
built
quieted that country, and after builded the strong castle of Rutlande, and
founded the abbey of Basyngwerke.

Anno. 4.


Anno. 6.



Anno. 7.
KIng Henry went into Scotland, and made war upon king William so that he took
him, and made him yield the castle of Carlisle; the castle of Camburgh, with
diverse other, and received of him fealty and homage.

Anno. 8.
Great fire at Cantorbury.
was fiered by negligence, and a great part thereof brent.

Anno. 10.


Anno. 14.
R. Henris so crouned his father being alive
son to be crouned king as he thought to the great quietness as well of himself as
of the realm: but as it proved, to the utter disturbance of them both.

Anno. 17.


Anno. 18
other things it was enjoined him in his penance, that it should be lawful to
his subjects as often as the^ listed to appeal to the sea of Rome, and that
no man should be accounted as king until such time as he were confirmed by
the Romayne bishop.

Anno. 19.


Anno. 21
The kings son the second time crowned.
England was crouned the second time with his* wife Margaret, ye french kings
daughter.

Anno. 22.
Henrye the son of king Henry rebelled against his father.
on of the king of France, Elanour his mother, and certain other nobles, took
arms, and r^i^ed dedly war against his natural father. Diverse strong battles
were foughten as well in England by the deputies and friends of both parties,
as also in Normandy, Poytow Guyen, and Britayn: where they were corporally
present: but y^ victory fell always to the father. There took party against king
Henry the father, Lewis king of France, William king of Scotland, Henry,
Geffrey, and John his own sons: Robert Earl of Leicester, Hughe of Chester,
and other. But in the end the sons with their alies were constrained to
yield to their father, and desire peace, which he gentilly granted and forgave
their trespace.

Anno. 24.


Anno. 26.


Anno. 28.


Anno. 29.
S. Iustes at bristowe builded.
to who^ king Henry gave the Garonye of Ge^klaye, butlded the abbey of S*
Austen at Bristow.

Anno. 31.


Anno. 32.


Anno. 34.


King Richard the first called Cueur delion.
Anno regni. ^.
The first batliffes in London.
name, for his valiantness surnamed Cueurdelion, being the second son of Henry
the second, was crowned King of England. He began his reign the.vi. day of
July, in the year of our Lord.1189. and he deceased, the year of our Lord 1199.
the vi. day of April: so that he reigned.ix. years and.ix. months.

THe first year of his reign, the citisens of London obtained two officers to
guide their City, which were called Bayliffes, whose names shall follow here
under.

Anno regni. ^.
Baylyffes.
Richard Reine^y


IN this year ye Jews were very brag here in this realm, for that their number
Jew ^slain in england.
was so great. But the common people, especially about London, fell upon them,
and despoyled them without pity or mercy, they so hated the^ for their usury,
and other evil conditions.

THis year the king set at liberty Elianor Elianor released out of prison.
his mother, which long before at the commandment of his father her husband,
had been kept close prisoner. But after her enlargement, the realm was much
governed by her.

KIng Richard gave over the Castelles of Bar wike and Rokesburge to the
Scottishe King, for the sum of x. ^.li. He also sold to the bishop of
Durham his own province, for a great piece of money, and created him earl of
the same. Wherefore the king said after in game: I am a wondrous craftsman, I
have made a new earl of an old bishop.

He gave his brother John many dignities, as the provinces of Notingha^,
De^o^shyre and Cornwall, and created him earl of Lancaster.

Anno reg. 2*
Batliffes
Roger Duke.


IN this year king Richard betook the guiding of this land to the bishop of
Ely then being Chancelour of England, and sailed into Normandy: and when he had
appointed good gouernoures over that country, he went to mete the french
king: and having made sure league one with an other, went either of them
onward of their journey toward Jerusalem.

This time the Jews in diverse Jews in England robbed. and many slew them
selves.
places of this Realm, as at Lincoln Stamforde, and Lynne, were robbed and
spoiled. And at York to the number of four hundred* and more, had the^r
master veins cut, and so bled to death.

Anno reg. 3.
Baylyffes.
John Bukmotte


KIng Richard in his journey to waedes Jerusalem, subdued the Earl of King
Richard went to Ierusale and his brother rebelled.
Cipres, and then joining his puisance with the French kings in Asia,
conquered Acon, where there grew between king Richard and Philip the French king
a grievous displeasure. John the brother of king Richard took on him the
kingdom of England in his brothers absence.

King Richard restored to the Christians the city of Ioppa, and in many
battles put the Turk to great sorrow.

Anno. 4.
Bailiffes
Nicolas Duke Peter Newlay




An. reg. 5.
Bailiffes.
Roger Duke

King Richard having knowledge that Philip of France invaded Normandy, and
that John his brother had made himself king of England, made peace with the
Turks for.iii.* years, and with a small company returnyng King Richard taken
prisoner.
home ward by Thrace, was taken prisoner by the Duke of Ostriches men, and
brought to Henry the Emperor, and there kept in streite prison, a year and.v.
months. Where it is said that he slew a Lion, and took out his heart.

Anno reg. 6.

William Fitz Isabell William Fitz Arnold


John the kings brother by the setting on of the French king made great war
within the land, and took by strength the castelles of Windsore, of Notingha^,
and others. And the French king made strong war in Normandy.


Bailiffes.
Robert Beysaui Io^e le Iosue


Hubert bishop of Salisbury was by king Richard sent into England to have the
guiding thereof, and also to treat with the lords and commons for the kings
deliverance. The said Hubert was by the monks of Christ's church in Cantorbury
chosen archbishop.

Anno. reg. 8*

Gerrad de Anteloche Robert Durant


THis year king Richard was delivered Great ransume paid for the king.
out of prison for the sum of one. C. M. pounds of sterlinge money, for
payment of which ransom al yt wol of white monks and chanons was sold and
rings and crosses of prelates, with vessels and chalices of al churches through
the land, and.xvii. shrines were ap^d and spoiled of the gold and silver. etc.

King Richard being thus delivered shortly after landed at Sandwich, and so
came to London: where when he had arested him: with a certain number of
knights: he rode to Notingham, and wan the castle: and after that the castle
of Tikhill, he deposed his brother John, Richard again cronned at Winchester.
and crouned him self again king of England in the city of Winchester, and
then he called a parliament, where he called again into his hands all such
things as he had either given or sold by patentes, or otherwise: wy which
means he gathered a sum of money and sailed into France, where shortly a
peace was concluded between the two kings for one year. Then John which had
taken part against his brother, made means to Elianor his mother, by whose
mediation he was reconsiled.

In this time one William with the William with the long beard
long bearde, moved the common people to se^e liberty and fredome, and not to
be subject to the rich and mighty. By which means he drew to him many great
companies, and with all his power defended their cause against the rich. The
king being warned of this tumult, commanded him to cease from those attemptes.
But the people s^il followed him as they before had done: and he made to them
certain orations openly, taking for his Theme this sentence Haurietis aquas in
gaudio de fontibus Saluatoris, Which is to say: Ye shall draw in joy, waters
forth of the wells of your Savior. And to this he added: I am (said he) the
savior of pore men: ye be pore, and have assaied long the hard hands of the
rich men. Now draw ye therefore wholesome water forth of my wells, and that with
joy. For the time of your visitation is com^n. This William was taken in Bow
church in Cheap, but not without shedding of blood for he was forced by fire
and smoke to forsake the church. And he with.ix. of his adhere^ts were hanged.


Bailiffes.
Roger Blunt Nicholas Ducket


This year the war was renewed between King Richard of England, and Philip of
France, in which either of them ^ped diversely.

An. reg. 10
bailiffes.
Robert le Beau.


King Richard of England be^^eged the castle of Galiarde, and was wounded
King Richard wounded to death.
with a quarrel that was shot from the wall, and thereof died the.vi. day of
Apryll, in the year of our Lord. 1199. when he had reigned.ix. years, and.ix.
months. His body was buried at Founteuerard, his bowels at Carlisle, his heart
at Roan.

King John.
Anno Regni. ^.


An. reg 1.
bailifies.
Arnold bitz Arnold


Philip king of France (in the quarrel of Arthur duke of Britain, whom certain
of the Lords had named king of England) made war upon king John, invaded
Normandy, and took from him diverse castles and tounes. iii. s. of every
ploughe land.


King John hearing thereof, assembled a counsel, wherein was granted to him
iii. s. of every plough land through England, beside the subsedy of the
spiritual lands: he sailed into Normandy, where he spent the time to his
loss and dishonor. But about Michelmas a truce was concluded between the two
kings of England and of France. king John deuorsed


This year was a deuorce between king John and his wife, the earl of Glocesters
daughter, because of nerenesse of blood: and after he was married to Isabel,
the daughter of the Earl of Engolcsym in France: by whom he had. i^ sons,
Henry and Richard, and.iii. daughters, Isabel, Elianor, and Jane.


bailifs
Roger. Dorset James bactilmew aldorm^


In this second year Raynulphe Earl of Chester, by thexample before showed by
king John, lefre his own wife named Constance, which he before had married, and
wedded one Clemens. One Chronicle sath he did so to have issue: but he there
with displesed God so much* yt he would suffer him to have none issue, but dyed
without.

An. reg. 3
Bailiffs.
Walter. Fitz Ales


THis year in Yorkshyre were seen. v Moons, one in the east, an other in ^^ue
mones in the firmament.
the Weste, the third in the north, the fourth in the southe, and the fifthe
in the mids of the other: and went compassing the other.vi. t^nes, as it were
the space of an hour, and vanished away sone after.

In this yore were chosen.xxv. of the most substantial and wysest men of the
xxv. governors of the city.
City of Lond^, to maintayn and keep the Assizes of the same City, of the
which yearly the bailiffs were chosen: and after the Mayor and Sheriffs were
taken of the same number.

An. reg. 4.
Bailiffes. Gyot tempest.

Normand Blundell John de Ely.


THis year fell excedyng lightnyng, thunders, and other storms of wynd and
rayn with hayl of ye bigness of hens eggs: which perished fruit and corn
houses, and young cattle. Also spirits were seen in the air, in likeness of
fowls bearyng fire in their bylles, which set fire on diverse houses.

Philyp of France continually made war upon the Duchy of Normandy, till at the
last he subdued the same with the provinces of Guyen, Poytiers, and Britayne,
which before pertayned to the crown of England.

King John sailyng into Normandy warred on the borders of France, but of his
victories is little written.

Anno. 5.
Bailiffes.
Walter Brown William Cha^berlain Dearth of wheat.



This year by means of evil weather, in the year passed, wheat was sold
for.xv. s. a quarter, which was thought an extreme price.

King John married his bastard daughter to Lewlyn prince of Wales, and gave
with her the castle and lord ship of Elyngsmore, being in the marches of
Southwales.

The bishop of Rome wrate to king John, gentilly requirynge him to admytte
Stephen Langton into the byshoprike of Cantorbury, and the monks by him
expelled from their own^ abbeye, to restore them again to the same: but the
more his lords advised him so to do, the more was he bente to the contrary. In
so much yt they returned without obteinyng their request*

Anno Reg. 6.
Baylyffes.
Thomas Hauerill


The bishop of Rome deno^^^^ed king John with his whole realm* accursed,
England interdicted
because he would not admit Stephen Langton to the bishoprike of Cantorbury:
but he little regarded his threatnyngs, and would not obey him.

At this time in Suffolk a fish was taken like to a man, and was kept living A
(...) fysh was taken
vi. months upon the land with raw flesh and fyshe: and after when they saw
they could have no speech thereof, they cast it again into the sea.

Anno re. 7.
Bayliffes.
John Walgra^e


King Philip of France subdued the Norma^dye ^ost.
country of Normandy* which sens the time of Charles the simple (that is to
say) the space of. 300. years) was ^ot in the possession of the kings of
France.

Anno re. 8
Bailiffs.
John Holylande


About this time the Irishemen and Wales and Ireland re^elled.
shortly after the Welshemen rebelled, for that he levied on them such
grievous taskes to war against France^ so that the King was feign to raise a
great tax throughout this Realm of England to wythstande their force. He
required of the white monks six thousand mark: but they refused the
payement of so great a sum, so that the king took great displeasure against
them: by reason whereof after his return out of Ireland, he exacted of them
more then before he had desired: where by he caused some abbottes to forsake
their houses.

Anno Reg. 9.
Bailiffes.
Edmond Hardell


King John sailed into Normandy: where after certain s^^rmishes, he made peace
with king Philyp of France for.ii. years.

This year was granted to the Citisons of London by the Kings Lette^s
patentes, that they should yearly First ma^^^^ of London
chose to them selves, a Mayre and.ii. Sheri^^es, on S. Mathewes or Mychelmas
day, whose names were as follows.

Anno Reg* 10.
Maire
Henry ^^tz Alwyn
S
Tho* Nele


This year London bridge was b^gon to be builded of stone: The original
whereof, was as follows. First being no bridge but a Ferry, the Feryman and
his wife deceasynge, left the same to their daughter, a maiden named Mary
Audery: who with the goods left to her by her parents, builded an house of
systers, which is the uppermost end of S. Mary Auderis church, unto the
which house she gave the ouersyght and profit of the same ferry but afterward
the same house of sisters was converted unto a college of pristes: who builded
the bridge of timber, and from time to time kept the same in reparations: but
consydering the great charges in repairing y^ same, in the year of our Lord.
1209. by the great aid of the citisens of London and other, they begone to
build the same of stone, and then the abouesaid college of priests was
converted unto a priorie of chanons, bearyng still the name of the maiden,
which kept the ferry: and so called S. Mary Auderie.

Anno. 11.
M
Henry fitz Alwyne
S
Peter le Iosue William Blou^d


The Englyshemen which were sent by king John to aid the earl of Flanders
chased the Frenchemen: and in the haven of Sluice compassed and took their
whole navy of ships, which was in number. 1020. sail.

M
Henry fitz Alwyne
S
Stephen le grase
This year Pandolph a legate came from A legate from Rome
the bishop of Rome monishing ye king in sharp manner, yt he should restore
master Stephen Langton to his see of Cantorbury, and the monks unto their
abbey. The king calling to mind the dangers he was wrapped in, both in his
own realm, and also in Normandy, The King sworn to be obedient to Rome.
made promise by oath, to be obedient to the court of Rome. At that time were
granted the Peter pence.

Anno reg. 13.
M
Henry fitz Alwyn
S
John Garlonde


THis year Stephen Langton archbishop of Cantorbury with the other exiles
landed in England: the king receyuyng them ^oyo^sly, and was there assoyled of
the said bishop: and after that* the king making restitution to the bishop and
other, according to the third article of his oath, the land was released of
the interdiction: the the king making restitution to the bishop and other,
according to the third The land released of the Interdiction.
article of his oath, the land was released of the interdiction: the King being
bounden, that as well he as his heirs should ever after be fenders to the sea
of Rome, paying yearly tribute a thousand marks, and to hold the Title of the
Crown by the bishop of Rome.

Anno. 14.
M

S
Ra^dolph Eila^d Consta^tin Iosue


This year fell great discention between Discention between ye King and his
Lords
the king and his lords, partly for that he would not maynteyne the laws of
king Edward, partly for the displeasure he bare unto them: for that they aided
him not against the bishop of Rome, so that a greatnumbre of people were raised
on both parties: The Earl of Chester with the other lords took the City of
London, and held them there. Other say, that a great part of this variance
between King John and his barons, was forbecause the King would have exiled
the Earl of Chester, who oftentimes had advised the king to leave his
cruelnes, and his accustomed aduoutrye, which he exercised with his brothers
wife, and others. But by means of the Archebyshep af Cantorbury, and other
prelatez, a peace was taken for a while.

This year on the.xi. day of July, a Great fire in Southwarke and London.
great part* of Southwarke was brent: and in the month of August next
following, was much harm done in London by fire.

The king and his lords met with A Charter to the Barons.
great strength on either party upon Baramdowne: where a charter or writing
was made and sealed by the king: so that the Barony was with it contented, and
departed in peace every man into his country.

Anno. 15.
M
Roger fitz Alwyne
S
Martin fitz alis


The peace which in the last year was agreed between king John and his
barons was this year by the King biolated and broken. Wherefore the lords
assembled to them great powers, and made cruel war upon the king: in so
much that he was constrained to send into Normandy for aid. The^ camme into
England, a Normane knight, named Foukis de Brent, which brought with him a
company of Normans, Flemmyngs and Picards. He and his company were so cruel,
that they destrosed as well religious houses ^s other, and did much harm to
the land, puttyng the lords to the worse, the king made Foukes and other of
his company, wardens of castles and strong holds in England. The lords
seeing the king, persevere in his wrong, and that he would in no wise be
induced to hold his own grantes, but to do all things after pleasure and
nothing after law or justice, cast in their minds how they might bring the
realm in a better rule, and by one consent wrote to Philip king of France that
he would send some noble man into England, and they would yield the land unto
him.

This year king John caused to he drawn and hanged at Warham, one Piers of
Pomfret and his son executed.
Piers of Pomfret, and his son, for speaking of diverse things against the
King.

Anno reg. 16.
M

S
Salomo^ basing Hugh basyng


King John laying siege to the castle of Rochester, wanne the same, and K.
John be sieged ye castle of Rochester.
took therein certain gentylme^, and sent them to diverse prysons, placyng
strangers in the same Castle. The barons held them together at London, abiding
the coming of Jews son to the French king, which landed in England with
a great army, and so came to Rochester, and wanne it with small pain: he
caused all the strangers therein to be hanged: and after came to London, where
certain alliances and couenantes were establyshed and concluded between the
lords and him, and received of them homage. Then he with the Lords departed
from London, and gat the castle of Rigate, of Gilforde, and of Fernham, and
from thens to Wynchester, where the City was yielded, with all other holds in
those parties: and then he with the lords came again to London. At whose
coming, the tower of London was delivered to them, they slew all strangers
that had been placed by the King in any place.

King John being thus ouerset with his lords sent messangers to ye bishop of
Rome, showing to him the rebellion of his lords, and how they labored his
destruction. Wherefore the bishop of A Legate from Rome.
Rome with all haste sent a Legate into England, called Swalo: The which after
his coming, commanded Jews to return into France, and labored boured to
the uttermost of his power* to appease the King and his haronye: but all his
labor was in* vain.

Anno reg. 17.

William Hardel
S
John Crauers Andrew Newla^d


This year king* John dyed* of the the Flixe (as is recorded in Policronicon)
at the town of Newarke: he was bowelled in the abbey of Croghton, and buried
at Worcester.

It is written that he builded the abbey The abbey of black monks in
Winchester
of Bewley, in the new forest, in re compence of the parysh Churches, which he
there ouerturned, to enlarge the forest, and an abbey of Black monks in the
city of Winchester. He deceasse^ in the year of our Lord. 1216. the.xix. of
October, when he had reigned. 17. years.vi. months, and. 13. days.

Henry the third.
Anno Regni.i.
our Lord. 1216. and deceased in the year. 1272. thy.vi. day of November. So
he reigued.lvi. years, and.xxviij. days. The noble mou with their retinue kept
sharp war with Jews the french kings son, who by the conenants made
before with the English men, claymed the crown. But after certain s^icmishes
and battles, Lewys Henry crouned at Gloucester.
began to desire peace, which was concluded, and Henry was crowned at
Gloucester.

Anuo. 1.
W
Jacob Alderma^
S
Benet Coue^trie


Swale y^ Legate accursed Lewis ye french kings son. He accursed Lewlyn
prince of Wales, and interdicted his la^d.

At the last, Lewis took a. W. marks (or as some authors affirin.xv. W. marks)
of money, and departed this realm.

Anno. 2.
W
Serle merrer
S
Tho. Bokerell


When the la^d was delivered from strangers, inquisitions were made to know
what persons assisted Lewas against the king: of which y^ king pardoned many of
the lay men: But the spiritual men were put to such synes, that they were
compelled to lay^ all that they had to pledge. And also to sue to Rome to be
assoyled.

Raynolffe Earl of Chester, took his journey to the holy land.

Anno. 3.

Serle Mercer
S
John Wayle Iosenus Spicer


A parliamente was holden at London, ii. ^. of every plough land.
by virtue whereof was granted to the king.ii. s. of every ploughe land through
England.

This year king Henry began to build the new work of the ^^^^rche
Westminster abbey.
of westmynster.

Anno. 4.

Serle mercer
S
Rich. Wimbeldey John Wayle


Alexander King of Scotts married the lady Jane sister of King Henry.

This year was great harm done Spirits and fiery drago^s
in England by violence of whirle winds and fiery dragons and spirits we seen
flying in the air.

This year was a proclamation made that all strangers should avoid the
realm, except such as came with merchandise, and to make sale of them under
the kings saufe condude, which was done to avoid Foukes de Bre^t, and his
accomplices, who kept the. castle of Bedford against the King.

This year was king Henry secondly Henry crouned the second time. The castles
of Chartley Beston, and the abbey^ of Delacresse built
crowned at Westminster.



Anno. 5.
W
Serle mercer
S
Richard Renger Iosence le Iosue


THis year was a counsel holden at Oxenford of the bishops of England wherein
one was condemned, which taught that he was Jesus Christ, and to confirm the
same. he showed the tokens of wounds in his hands body and fete: He was
therefore crucified on a Cross at Alburbury, till he dyed.

Anno. 6.
W
Setle mercer
S
Richard Renger


A conspiracy was made against king Henry by one Constantine in the city of
London: for the which he was drawn hanged and quartered, the morrow Execution
after our Lady day assumption. Which conspiracy so moved the King, that he
was in mind to have cast down* the walls of the city.

Anno. 7.
W

S
Richard Renger Thomas La^bert


This year John king of Jerusalem came into England, and required aid of king
Henry to win again Jerusalem* but he returned again with small comfort.

This year the King began the foundation Salisbury builded.
of Salisbury mynster.

Anno. 8.
M

S
William Ioyner Tho. La^bert


This year the Lords and gentilmen The first grant of wards to the king.
of England first granted to king Henry and his heirs, the ward and marriage
of their heirs, which was then by learned men, called the beginning of euyls.

Anno. 9.
M

S
John Trauers Andrew Bokerel


Richard the brother of king Henry overcame the Frenchemen, recovered Poytiers,
and kept the Gascoynes in due* obedience.

Anno. 10.
M

S
Roger Duke Martin fitz William


This year the pleas of the crown were pleaded in the Tower of London.

Lewis king of France wan certain castles in the country of Poytiers: and
shortly after spoiled the city of An^owe.

Anno. 11.
M
Richard Renger
S
Henry Cobham


In this year was granted by king Henry of the Sheriffs of the City of
Shiriffewike of London and Middlesex. Free* warreyn.
London, the sheriffewike af London and Middlesex for the sum of, CCC. pound by
the year.

It was also granted to the city free warren, that is to say, free liberty
to hunt a certain circuit about the city.

It was also granted, that the ce^isens of London should pass tole free through
Toll free*
out all England^and also granted by the king, that all weeres in ye Thames
should be plucked up, and destroyed for ever.

Anno. 12.
M
Roger Duke
S
Stephen Buckerel


The liberties of the City were this year confirmed, and to each of the
sheriffs The cities liberties ratified.
was granted to have.ii. clerks and two officers, without any more.

Anno. 13.
M

S
Walter Winchester Robert fitz John


King Henry sailed with an army in to Britayne against Jews king of France:
where after spoiling the country, a peace was concluded between the.ii. young
princes.

Anno. 14.
M

S
Richar. Fitz William John Wobborne


This year was ordained by ye Ma^or and rulers of the City of London, that No
sheriff in London past one year.
^o sheriff of that city should continue longer / in office then one year,
because that they should not by long continuance of office become covetous
bribers

Anno. 15.
M

S
Michael of Saint Cleue Walter Guff^ide


This year was much harm done Great fire in London
in London by fire, which began in the house of a wydowe named dame Jane
Lambert.

Anno. 16.
M
Anbrewe Bokerel
S
Henry Edmonton Gerrarde Bate


Variance grew between King Henry and his lords, because he put from War
between the king and his lords.
his service Englishemen, and trusted strangers as well in his counsel as
other officers nere about him.

Anno. 17.
M
Andrew Bockerel.
S
Roger Blunt.


IN this year the king began the foundation of the hospital of saint John, S.
John's without Oxenford begone.
without the east gate of Oxenforde. In which year also fell* wonderful sore
wether, with such thunder and lightning that the like had not ben seen. And
there followed an earthquake, to the great fear Great tempests.
of the inhabitauntes of Huntingdon, and nere therabout.

Anno. 18.
M
Andrew Bokerell.
S.
John Norman.


THis year the king put from him the strangers, and restored the English men to
their offices.

The Jews dwelling in Nor wiche were accused for stealyng of a child, whom
they purposed to have crucified.

Fredrike the Emperor married Isabel sister of the king of England.

Anno. 19.
M

S
Gerrard Batte Robert Ardell


King Henry married Elinor ye daughter of the earl of Prouance.

There appeared as it were hosts of men fyghting in the element.

The statute of Merton was first enacted The statute of Merton
at the parliament of Merton.

Anno. 20.
M

S
Henry Cobham Jorden Coue^try


Queen Elinor founded the hospital of Saint Katherins besides the tower S.
Katherines by the ^ouer un^lt
of London for the relief of poor women.


M
Andrew Bokerel
S
John Thesalan Garard cord waver


Octobo^ea, a^legate came into England and ordened good ordinances for ye
church But not all to the pleasure of the young clergy of England. Wherefore as
he one day passed through Oxenford, the scholars sought occasion against his
servants, and fought with them, and ^^ue one of the same, and put the legate
in such fear, that he for his safeguard took the belfray of O^ney, and there
held him till the kings officers coming from Abingdo^, delivered him, and
conueid him to Wallingford.

Sir Simon Mountford married the kings sister, named Elianor, countess of
Pembroke.

Anno. 22.
M
Richard Renger
S
John Go^dresse


A clerk of Oxenford (or more verily King Henry like to have been slain.
a souldior) faining him self mad: enterprised to have slain King Henry in his
chamber at Wodstocke: but he was taken and put to death at Couentry.

This year was borne Edward the kings son called Longshankes.

Anno. 23.
M
William Joyner
S
Rafe Ashewy


This year on Candelmas day the king created sir Simo^ de Mountford Earl of
Leycester.

Anno. 24.
M
Gerrard Batte
S
Michel Tony


The King subdued the Welshemen which oftentimes rebelled.

An. 25.
M
Reymond Byngley.
S
Tho. Duresyne


This year were aldermen first chosen The first aldermen in London
in London, which the^ had the rule of the wards of the city, but were every
year changed, as ye sherifs are now.

Anno. 26.
M

S
John Fitz John Rafe Ashewy


KIng Henry sailed into Normandy with a fair company, purposing to recover
Poyteirs, Guian, and other countries: but after many bickerings, some what to
the loss of Englishmen, Henry treated a peace.

Anno. 27.
M

S
Hugh Blunt Adam Basing


THis year the pleas of the crown, were pleaded in the tower of London And in
this year Griffeth which Griffeth of wales brake his neck
was son of Lewlyn, lately prince of Wales, entendyng to have broken prison
fell over the inner ward of the Tower of London, and brake his neck.

Anno. 28.
M

S
Rafe Spicer Nicolas Batte


THis year Michell Tony Mayor, and Nicolas Batte Shiriffe were both convict of
per^ury, by the oath of all the Aldermen. Because Nicholas Batte had been
Shriue over one year, and for the same they were both deposed, and other were
in their places.

Anno. 29.
M
John Gysors
S
Robert Cornhill


RObert Grosthed bishop of Lincoln with other prelates complained to ye King,
of the wast of the goods and patrimony of ye church, which daily was wasted by
the aliant bishops, and clerks of this land, who shortly were avoided.

Anno. 30.
M
John Gysors
S
Simon fitz mary Laure^ce Frowike The labbey of Hayles builded.



This Richard the Kings brother builded the abbey of Hayles.

Anno. 31.
M
Piers Alleyn
S
John Doile


IN this year was a mighty erthquake in England, that the like to it, was An
earthequake.
not seen many years before.

This year the king seized the fraunchise The king seized the fraunchises of
the city ^ of London. Coin changed*
of the city of London for a judgment* that was given by the Mayor and
aldermen against a wydowe, named Margaret Diel: but shortly the* Mayor and
sheriffs were again restored to their offices: and this year was a new coin,
and the old called in.

Anno. 32.
M
Michel Tony
S
Nicolas Joy


This year the wharfe of Queen's hiue in London was taken to ferme by the
Communaltie of London, to pay yearly fifty pound for the same.

Anno. 33.
M

S
Rafe Hardell John Tosalan


This year dyed Robert Grossehed a famous clerk and bishop of Lincoln, who
compiled many famous books, which remain to this day in the latin and the
french tongue: the names whereof are partly declared by master Bale in his
story of English writers.

Anno. 34.
M

S
Humfrey Basse William fitz Ric*


This year was a great wind upon A great wind
the day of Simo^ and Jude, which did much harm in many places of England.

Anno. 35.
M

S
Laure^ce frowike Nicolas Batte


The friar Augustins began to build or inhabit in wales, at Woodhous.

King Henry married his daughter Mary to Alexander king of Scots, and received
of him homage for the realm of Scotland.

Anno. 36.
M
John Toleson
S The mayor of London sworn in thex chequer.

William Durham Tho. Wimborn


This year was granted by the king, that where before this time the citizens of
London, did present their Mayor before the king whersoeuer he were, and, so to
be admitted, now he should come only before the Barons of the exchequer, and
they should admit him, and give him his oath.

Anno, 37.
M
Nicolas Batte
S Many vilages in England drowned.

John Northa^pto^ Richard Picard


This year in the month of January the sea rose in such height that it drowned
many vilages and houses nere unto it in diverse places of England.

This year also the Thames sprang so high, that it drowned many houses about
ye water side. And this year was granted of the king that no citizen of London
should pay scauage or toll for any beasts by them brought as the^ before
time had used.

Anno. 38.
M
Ri. Hardel Dra.
S The liberties of London seized.

To. Belington Rafe Ashewy


This year also ye liberties of London were again seized by the mean of Rychard
Earl of Cornwalle, because the Mayor was charged, that he looked not to the
bakers for their syses of bread: so that the city was forced to please the
Earl with. 600. marks or they were restored again.

Alphonce king of Castle gave Elinor his daughter in marriage to prince Edward
the son of king Henry, to who^ his father gave the princedome of Wales, The
kings eldest son prince of Wales.
and governance of Guian and Ireland, whereof began that the kings of England
ordained their eldest sons princes of Wales.

Anno. 39
M

S
Stephen Oistergate Hen. Walmode


THe king again seized the liberties The liberties of Lon^on seized.
of the city for certain money which the queen claymed for her right of the
citizens, so that they gave unto his grace 400. mark, and then were restored
to their liberties again.

The. 22. day of Noue^ber, were brought to Westminster. 102. Jews from
Lincoln, which were accused for crucifying Execution ^f the Ie^es.
of a child at Lincoln, they were sent to the tower of London: of these. 8.
were hanged, and the other remained long in prison.

Anno. 40.
M
Rich. Hardell draper

Mat. Bokerel John Mynor


THis year a peace was made between the citizens of London and the abbot of
Waltham, who had been long in controversy for tol, that he demanded of the
citizens that came to Waltha^ fair: but at the last the citizens were set free
and bound to no toll.

Anno. 41
M
Richard Hardell Draper

Rich. Ewyll William Ashewy.


GReat variance was between ye king and the Londoners, in so much yt the The
mayor of London diverse Aldermen, and the sherifs deprived.
Mayor and diverse aldermen and sheriffs, were deprived of their offices, and
the governance of the city committed to certain persons of the kings
appointing.

The king for so much as he had oftentimes promised the restitution of certain
ancient laws, but never performed the same, the lords murmuring against him,
to appeace their malice, he held a parliament at Oxenford, which The mad
parliament
was called the mad parliament, because many things were there enacted, which
proved after to the confusion of the Realm, and death of many noble men. In
confirmation of these acts were chosen.xii. piers, who altered and Twelve piers.
changed many things, greetlye to the discontenting of the kings mind.

Anno. 42.
M

S
Th. fitz Rich. To. Cathelion


This year Hugh Bigot Justice, and Roger Turkeley, kept their courts in Bakers
on the tumbrel
the Guildhal of London, and punished the Bakers upon the tombrell, where in
times passed they were punished on the pillorye, and they did many other
things against the laws of the city.

Richard the kings brother returned out of Almayn into England.

Anno. 43.
M

S
John Adrian To. Cornhil


King Henry fearing some rebellion of his nobles, went into France, and there
concluded a peace: After which peace finished, the king returned into
England,

A Jew at Tewkesbury fell into a A Jew ^rouned in a privy.
privy upon the saturday, and would not for reuere^te of his Saboth day be
plucked out. Richard of Clare ^ri^ of Gloucester, hearing that the Jew did so
great reverence to his Saboth day, thought he would do as much to his holy day,
which is sunday, and so kept him there till mondaye, at which season he was
found dead.

Anno. 44.
M
Willi^ fitz Richard

Adam brown Ri. Couentry


In this year the king commanded a a ^olk mo^e at Poules cross.
general assembly or meting at Poules cross* whor the king in proper person
commanded the Mayor that the next day after he should cause to be sworna Oath
to the king.
before his Aldermen every striplynge of.xii. years of age and up ward, to be
true unto the king and his heirs kings of England: and that the gates of the
city should be kept with har^issed men.

Anno. 45.
M
Will. Fitz Richard

Io. Northa^pto^ Rich. Pickard


King Henry published at Poules cro^ the bishops of Rome absolutio^ for him and
al his, that were sworn to maintein the articles made in the parliament at
Oxforde: for which cause the barons of England begone to utter their malice
which they had long before conceived against the king, and caused an
insurrection that continued three years. Richard earl of Gloucester decesed, and
Gilbart de Clare was earl after him.

Anno. 46.
M

S
Phi. walbroke Rich. Tailor


THis year was so great a frost yt men A great frost The barons against the king.
rode on horse back over the thames: The barons of England armed them against
their king, and all this year ho uered about London and other places they
robbed and spoiled aliens and certain other persons, whom they knew to be
against their purpose: specially they slew the Jews in all places.

Anno. 47.
M

S
To. Mountpiler Os^ern Bu^kessell.


500 Jews were slain by the ciiza^s Jews slain.
of London, because one Jew would have forced a christen man to have paid more
the^.ii. d. for y^ usury of.xx. ^. for a weke

Hugh le Spencer with the citizens of London, spoiled and brent the manors of
Richard the kings brother, which hither to had b^n a great stay of the war
between the king and his nobles.

Nere to Lewis in Sussex, king Henry A ba^tell at Lewis.
and his barons fought a cruel battei, in which the king him self with Richard
his brother: sir Ed. his son. and other noble men to the number of. 25. were
taken: and of the commons were slayue about 20000.

Anno. 48.
M
Tho. Fitz Thomas

Tho. Lamford Edward blune


Debate and variance fell between Simon Mountford earl of Leicester, and Gilbert
de clare earl of Gloucester, chif capitains of y^ barons: which turned to their
great evil. For prince Ed. being now set at liberty, allied him with the earl
of Gloucester, and gathering to him a The battle of Euisha^
great power, warred so freshly upon Simon of Leicester, that at the end he and
Hugh spencer with many others of the nobles, were slain in the battle at
Euisham in Worcestershyre.

The same year was holden a parliament A Parliament at winchester
at Wynchester, where all the statutes made before Oxforde, were disanulled and
abrogate. And all writings made for the confirmation of the same, cancelled.

The city of London was in great London like to have been spoiled.
danger to have been destroyed by the king for great ire and displeasure that
he had conceived against it, because of the fornamed commotion: he gave unto
prince Edward, the Mayor of London and* iiii. of the best Aldermen, with all
their goods and lands, and put diverse other of the most welthye into diverse
prisons.

Anno. 49.
M

S
Peter Armiger Greg. Rockesie


The king came to Westminster, and shortly after he gauevnto diverse of his The
king gave diverse citizens of London with all their lands and goods to his
household servants.
honshold servants, upon. 60. housholdes and houses within the city, with all
such lands and tenementes, goods and cattels as the said citizens had in any
other places of England, and then he made one Custos or Gacdein of the city,
sir Othon Constable of the tower. And after this, the king took pledges of the
best men's sons of the city, that his peace should be surely kept in the same,
the which were put in the tower of London, and there kept at the cost of
their parents. And shortly after, by great labor and suite made, all the
foresaid persons which should be in the keeping of the bailife of the castle
of Windsor, eight only except, and all the other londoners. 31. in nu^bver,
were delivered and came to London. Dailye suit was made unto the king, to have
his grace and know his pleasure what fine he would have of the city for their
transgressions by the done, for the which the king asked.xl. M. pou^des, and
stuck at.l. M. marks, but the citizens alleged for them selves the
vnhabilitie of the city, as that many oftheyr citizens were fled: the rest at
home were spoiled and robbed of their goods. For which considerations and many
other, the citizens besought the kings most gracious favor to take of the^
as they might bear. Such continual labor was made to ye king, that lastly
it was agreed for.xx. M. marks, to be paid by the city, for all transgressions
and offenses by them done: certain persons excepted, which the king had geu^
his son, being in the tower of Windsor. Then for the leuying of this fine, were
taxed as well servants, couenaunte men, as householders. And many refused the
liberties of ye city for tobe quite of the charge: of which number many never
returned again.

King Henry besieged the castle of Kenelworth castle besieged.
Kenelworth, which Henry Hastinges defended against him the space of half a
year, and then gave it up into his hands.

Anno. 50.
M
William fitz Richard
S
Gre. Rokesly


THe old franchises and liberties of London with a new grant for the shyre of
Middelsex, were consirmed by A Parliament at Northampton.
a parliament at Northampton. Where also many noble men y^ had taken part with
the Barons, were disheryted of their lands, and therefore fled to Ely, and
strengthened it in such wise that they held it long after.

Anno. 51.
M

S
John Adrian Lucas Bite^cote


About the.li. year, was made the statutes of weightes and measure, that is to
The statute for weightes and mesures.
say, that. 32. graynes of Whete dry and round and tak^ in the mids of the
ear, should way a sterli^g penny, and.xx. of those pens should make an onnce,
and.xii. ounces should make a pound troy, and. 8. pound troy should wey a gallon
of wine, and. 8 gallo^s of wine, should make a bushel of London, which is the.
8. part of a quarter. Also that three barley corns dry and round, should make
an inche, and.xii. inches to a foot, and three foot to a yard, and five
yardes and a half to a perch or pole, and.xl. pole in length, and.iiii. in
breadth to make an acre of lad, and these standards of weight and mesures, were
confirmed in the.xv. year of Edward the third. And also in the time of Henry
the sixte, and Edward the fourth, and lastly confirmed in the.xi. year of
Henry the seventh. How be it in the time of king Henry the sixth, it was or
deined that the same ounce should be divided The alteration of the coins, from
iiii. pe^ce to xii. pence.
into.xxx. parts called.xxx. pe^ce: and in king Edward the fourth his time
into.xl. parts, called xl. pence. And in king Henry the eight his days
into.xliiii. parts, called.iii. ^.viii. d. but the weight of the ounce troy,
and the measure of the foot* was ordained ever to be at one stint.

Anno. 52.
M
Alleyn Souch
S
Thomas Basing


Glybert de Clare Eerle of Gloucester for unknown displesure, allyeng him self
with the exiled gentilmen and other nobles of England, rose against the king,
and held the city of London, buil The King besieged London.
dyng therein bulwarks, and cast ditches and trenches in diverse places of the
city and Southwarke, and fortified it wonderously. The king lying at the abbey
of Stratford, also assaulted the same city, more then a month: but by
diligent labor upon his party, and by the Legate and the king of of Romans
on y^ other party. Agreement was made between the king and him: In this mean
time many robberies Four persons cast in ye Thames
were done wherefore four yt bare cognizance of the Earl of Darby, were put in
sackes, and cast in the Thames.

Anno. 53.
M

S
William de Durha^ Walter Haruy


Varia^ce fell between the felowships of goldesmythes and taylers of London, A
great riot in London.
which caused great rufflynge in y^ city, and many men to be slain. For
which ryo^.xiii. of the chief capitains were arreigned, cast and hanged. Alein
Execution
Souch was discharged of his ma^oraltie by the king, and Stephen Edworth made
constable of the tower, and Custos of the City.

The disherited gentilmen were this year reconciled to the Kings favor. And
the five citisens which had remained The mayor and.iiii. alder me^ ^elcased out
of Win^or castle.
prisoners in the tower of Wyndsor, the which the king had given to his son
Edward, when they had made their end with great sums of money were delivered.

Anno. 54.
M

S
Will. Hadstock Anketil de Aluerne


The river of Thamis was so hard A great frost.
frosen from the feast of S. Andrewe to Candelmas, that me^ and beasts passed
over on foot from Lambeth to Westminster. The marchandises was carried from
Sandwiche, and other havens City of London given to prince Ed.
unto London by land.

The city of London with ye revenues thereof was given to prince Edward.

Anno. 55.
M
John Adria^ bintener
S
John Tailour


This year the liberties of London The steple of Bow Church blown down.
were newly confirmed. And this year the steple of Bow church in Cheap fell
down, and slew many people both men and women.

And. 56.
M
Io. Adrian vintener
S
Henry waleis


This year deceased Richard king of Almayn and earl of Cornwall, brother to the
king, and was buried at Hailes

In June began a great riot in ye city A ryotte in* Norwiche.
of Norwich, where through the monastery of ye Trinity, was burned. And for
that fact the king rode down, and Execution
made enquiry for the chief doers thereof: whereof xxx. young men were condemned,
drawn, hanged and brent.

This year were diverse prodigies and strange tokens seen in diverse places of
England.

Anno. 57.
M

S
Richard Paris John Bedill


In the beginning of this year king Henry sickned: and he called before him sir
Gilbert Clare earl of Gloucester, and caused him to be newly sworn to keep the
peace of the land, to the behofe of Edward his son, and then dyed the xvi.
day of November, in the year of our Lord. 1272. when he had reigned lvi. years
and.xviii. days. He was buried at Westminster upon the southe tide of saint
Edward. He builded a great part of the same Church.

King Edward the first* surnamed Longshank
Anno Regni.i.
and deceased the.vii. day of Iulye, in the year. 1307. so he
reigned.xxxiiii. years.vii. months, and.xx. days.

Anno. 1.
M
Sir Walter Haruy knight
S
John Horn


IN the end of this year, the king returned Strife for chosyng the Mayor of
London.
into England. There was yet busynes about chosyng of the Mayor: for diverse
would have made such a Mayor as they had lyked. But for that time they were
disappoynted: which in the year following upon the same day took further
effect.

Anno. 2.
M
Henry ^alleys
S
Henry Couentrie


THe king of Scotts did homage to king Edward for the kyngedome of Scotland.

The king ordained certain new laws for the wealth of the realm, among the
which was one: that bakers making bread lackyng weight, assigned after the
price of Corn, should first be punished by loss of their bread, and the
second by enprisonment: and thirdlye by the correction of the pillorye.
Myllers for stealing of corn to be chastised by the tumberyll, and night
walkers to be punished in the Tonne in Cornhyll. And this to be put in
execution, he gave authority to all majors, bailiffs and other officers
through England, and specially to ye mayor of London.

Anno. 3.
M

S
Lucas Bate^court Henrye Frowyke


King Edward builded the castle of The castle of Flynte builded.
Flynte, and strengthened the castle of Rutla^d, and other against the
welshme^.

Anno. 4.
M

S
John Horn Rafe Blunt


The statute of Mortmayn was enacted by king Edward. Alienynge in Mortmayn.


Michell Tony was hanged, drawn, and quartered for treason.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Rob. de Bracy Rafe Fenour


King Edward gave unto David brother to Lewlyn prince of Wales, the lordshyp
of Froddesham.

Anno. 6.
M

S
John Adrian Walter La^gley


Michelmas term was this year kept Term kept Shrewsb.
at Shrewesbury.

Anno. 7.
M
Gregory Rockesse

Robert Basing Will. Merser


Reformation was made for clipping of the kings coin: for which offense
Execution of Jews.
297. Jews were put to execution.

In this year began the foundation of the Church of the friar preachers or
Black friars in London buylt.
black Friars by Ludgate, and also Castle Baynard.

The town of Boston was greatly empaired* with fire.

Anno. 8.
M
Gregorye Rockessey

Thomas Box Rafe Moore


This year was first coined halfepens Halfepen^ and farthing^
and farthynges of silver: where before, other coins of other metal ran
among the people to their great loss and n^yance.

Anno. 9.
M
Gregory Rockessey

Will. Faringdo^ Nicolas Wynchester


David the brother of Lewlyn prince Rebellion in Wales.
of Wales, unkindly* and traitorously moved his brother against king Edward.

Anno. 10.
M

S
William Mazerer Nicholas* Wynchester


King Edward sent a company of soldiers into Wales, under guyding of the
Earls of Northumberlande and Surrey: Of which company many were slain, and
sir Roger Clifford taken prisoner. The Welshemen subdued certain* castelles and
holds, and of some towns thr^e down the walls.

Anno. 11.
M

S
Rafe Blunt Haukyn Betuel


Lewlyn prince of Wales was slain Execution
by sir Roger Mortymer: and his head set upon the Tower of London.

William Marton Chancellor of England Marto^ college built
about this time builded Marto^ college in ye university of Oxenford.

Anno. 12.
M

S
Jorden goodchepe Martin Box


David the brother of Lewlyn prince A parliamente at Shrewesbury.
of Wales was taken and beheaded.

Prince Edward was borne in Wales, at the castle of Carnaruan, and a
parliament was held at Shrewsbury.

Laurence Ducket a citisen of London was found dead, and hanged with Laurence
Ducket hanged.
in saint Mary Bow church of Chepe: for the which were condemned.viij. men,
which were drawn and hanged, and one woman brent.

This year the great conduite standing The great cundite in Chepe builded.
again saint Thomas of Acres in Chepe was first begone to be made.

Anno. 13.
M
Gregory Rockessey

Stephen Cornhil Robert Rockessey


This year the liberties of the City Liberties of London seysed.
of London was again seysed into the kings hands, and Stephen Sand wiche
admytted for Custos, and the Mayor discharged, for taking bribes of the Bakers.

The new work of the church of The new work of westminst church.
Westminster unto the end of the quier begone in the third year of Henry the
iij. and continued in building.lxvi. years before it was fynished.

Anno. 14.
M
Rafe Sa^dwich

Walter Bl^nt John Wade


This year were enacted by ye King Parliament at Glocest.
the Statutes called Additame^ta Gloucestria.

Anno. 15.
W

S
Thomas Cross William Hautein


King Edward sailed to Bnrdeaux and from thens rode into France, where he was
honorably received o^ Philyp le beau king of France.

This year the summer was so exceeding A hot summer and great cheap of corn.
hot, that many men died through^ the extremity thereof. And yet wheat was so
plentuous, that it was sold at London for.iii. ^.iiii. d. a quarter.

Anno. 16.
M

S
William Herford Tho. Stains


Great hail fell in England, and after ensued so continual rain, that the
year following, wheat was sold for. rvi. d. ^ bushel: and so increased yearly ye
reign of this king and his sone, till it was lastly sold for. x^. ^. a quarter.

Anno 17.
M

S
William Betain John of Can^ee bury


Rice ap Mer^ooke, a welsheman, rebelling against Pain Tip^o^t, warden
Execution.
of the countreye, was by the Earl of Cornwall in the kings absence, taken,
drawn, hanged, and quartered at York.

Anno. 18.
M
Rafe Sand wiche
S
Salomo^ Langford


This year king Edward returned into England. and was honorably ^eceyued of
the citisens of London.

Anno. 19.
M
Rafe san^ which
S
Tho. Roman Wo^staple at sa^dwich. Jews banished.
William de Lyre


This year the staple of woll was ordained to be kept at Sandwiche.

And this year the Jews were banyshed the land: for the which cause the
commons gave to the king a fyftene.

Anno. 20.
M
Rafe sandwich
S
Hamo^d Box


This year died queen Elianor y^ kin^es w^^^^, and was buried at westminster in
the chapel of saint Edward, at the sete of Henry the third. This year also
dyed Elianour wife unto Henry the Queen Elianor dec^sed.
third, and mother to this Edward, whose heart was buried at the graye friars
in London, and her body at Ambresbury, in the house of Nuns.

An^o. 21.
M
Rafe Sa^dwich
S
Eli^ Russell


This year.iii. men had their right hands smitten of in West chepe for
rescuyng a prisoner, arested by an officer of the City of London.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Roberte Rocke^leye Martin Aubreye


The.xviii. day of May fell a wondrous snow, and therewith an exceeding wind. By
violence whereof, great harm was done in sundry places of England, as
ouerthrowynge houses Great tempest.
and trees. etc.

Anno. 23.
M

S
Henry Box Richard Gloucester


MAdocke with the Welshemen rebelled against the king, wherefore he* in all*
haste made against them, and overcame them:

This year the frenchemen arrived ^ouer spo^^d by frenhemen.
at Dover, and spoiled the town, and brent a part of it, in which skirmishe
was slain one Thomas of Dover.

Anno. 24.
M

S
John Dunstable Adam Harlyngbury


John Baylel was by king Edward admitted to be king of Scotts, and he for the
same did his homage, and swear unto him ^^altie.

This year was taken Madocke or Rebellion in Wakes.
Meridoke captain of the rebels in Wales: he was drawn and hanged at
London.

Anno. 25.
M
Sir John Bryton
S
Ada^ de Fullam


John Baylell king of Scots co^tr^^y to his allegiance, by the setting on of
the Frenchmen, rebelled again king Barwik^ won.
Edward. Wherefore king Edward hasted him thither. He wan from him the castles
of Garwicke and Dunbarre. He slew of the Scotts.xxv. M. and took prisoner sir
William Douglas and other noble men. He conquered also Edenbrough, where he
found the reg^^ensignes of Scotland: that is to wit, the Crown, the Scepter
and clothe of estate.

Anno. 26.
M
Sir John Britton
S
William de Stort forde


Certain persons brake up y^ Tonne in Cornehyll, and took out certain
pr^soners, that thither were committed by sir John Britton: for the which.ix.
of them were grievously punished by long ^mprisonement, and great fines. The
tun above named is now the cundit in Cornhill.

The king coming again into England, Liberties of, London granted.
and so to Winchester, the citizens of London made such labor unto his grace,
that they obtained grant of their liberties that had in some part be kept from
them by the term of.xii. years or more.

Anno. 27.
M

S
Richard Resha^ Thomas Sely


This year the king made cruel war upon the Scots, and had of them a great
victory, and then yielded th^im selves again to his grace and mercy.

This year also the king called in certain coins of money called pollards,
C^ocardes, and rosaries:

Anno. 28.
M

S
John Armencer Henry Fringrith


King Edward hearing of the untruth and rebellion of the Scots, made his third
voyage against them, wherein he subdued a great part of the land, and took the
castle of Estriuelyn with other, and made the lords swear to him ^^^^ltie and
homage.

Anno. 29.
M
Elis Russell
S
Rich. Champeis


This year the king gave unto Edward his son, the princedom of Wales and
joined thereunto the dukedom of Cornwall, and the erledom of Chester.

Anno. 30.
M
John Blunt
S
Robert Caller


This year the King held a great Parliament at Ca^torb.
parliament at Cantorbury.

Anno. 31.
M
John Blunt
S
Hugh Pourte


This year king Edward made great wars in Scotland, where he had many great
victories.

Anno. 32.
M
John Blunt
S
Ioh. de Burford


This year the king caused great in quirie to be made of ye behauior of his
Justices throughout his realm, which was called Troyly Baston.

Anno. 33.
M
John Blunt
S
Roger Paris


Wylliam Wales which had done s^ many displeasures to king Edward Execution at
London.
in Scotland, was taken, drawn, hanged anb quartred at London on Saint
Bartholomews eve, and his head set on London bridge.

The nobles in Scotland in a parliamente at Westmynster voluntarily were sworn
to be true to the king of England, and keep the land of Scotland to his use
against all persons.

Anno. 34.
M

S
Raynold Doderil William Causon


Roberte le Bruise (contrary to his oath to king Edward before made) assembled
the lords of Scotland, and caused him self to be crowned. When king Edward
heard of this treason, he went with haste into Scotland, where he chased sir
Roberte le Bruise, and all the power of Scotland, and took many of the noble
me^ prisoners.

Anno. 35.
M

S
Simon Belet Godfrey de la conduite


The wars continuynge in Scotland, King Edward deceased.
the noble king Edward ended his life, the seventh day of July, in the year,
1307, when he had reigned. 34. years. 7. months, and. 21. days. He lies
buried at Westminster in the chapel of saint Edward upon the south side in a
plain tomb of marble at the head of his father.

King Edward the second.
Anno R^gni. 1*
council: and beside that he was given to these vices of nature: He was made
much worse by the counsel and familiarity of certain evil disposed persons: ^s
Piers of Gaueston, Hugh Spencer, and others, whose wanton counsel he following
gave him self wholly to the appetite and pleasure of the body, not regarding
to govern his common weal, by sadness, discretion, and justice.

Anno. 1.
M

S
Nicolas Pigo^ Michell Drury


King Edward took to wife Isabell the daughter of Phillip the fair king of
France.

He gave Piers of Gaueston, the ^arledome of Cornwall, and the lordeshyp of
wallingford, and was ruled a^ by his counsel.

Anno. 2.
M

S
William Basyng John Butler


The king calling to mind the displesure done unto him and his familiar, Piers
Gauesto^, by ye bishop of Chester commanded him to the tower of London, where
he was strayghtlye kept many days after. But the lords per^eauing the king
given all to wantonness, and that he was much provoked thereunto by y^ means
of Piers Gaueston, caused the king to banish him the realm, and so he went
over into Ireland, where the king notwithstanding comforted him with many rich
gifts and made him chief ruler of that country.

Anno. 3.
M
Thomas Romayn
S
Roger Palmer


The king and his lords were at great strife for the banishment of Piers of
Gaueston, in so much that the king would not be pleased until he were again
restored. the Rhod^ won by christen men. Crouched friars.


This year was the Is^e of Rhodes recovered from the Turk, by the knights of
the order of saint John Baptist.

This year the crouched friars came first into England.

Anno. 4.
M
Rychard Rofham
S
Pet. Blacknay


Pie^s of Gaueston more and more increased: in so much that he had the custody
of all the kings jewels and tresure of the which he took a table and a A
table with (...)
pair of tresse^s of gold, and conueighed them with other jewels out of the
land. He also brought the king to manyfolde vices: as adultery and such other.
Wherefore the lords again banished him out of England into Flaunders, to the
kings great displeasure.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Simon Merwood Rich. Wilforde


Piers of Gaueston, was again by the king called out of Flaunders, wherefore
the lords being confederate, besieged him in the castle of Scarborough, where
they took him, and brought him to Gauersyde beside Warwick, and Execution in
Gauersyde.
smote of his head, to the great discontenting of the kings mind. This year
the kings first son, named Edward, was borne at Windsore.

Anno. 6.
M

S
John Lambyn Adam Lutekyn


This year was many good laws made in the parliamente at London, whereunto the
king and his lords were sworn.

Anno. 7.
M

S
Adam Burden Hugh Bayto^


The English men encountered with Robert le Bruise and his Scots, at
Estriualen, where was fought a strong The (...).
battle. In the end whereof, the Englyshemen were discomfited and so egerly
pursued by the Scotts, that many of the noble men were slain: as Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, sir Robert Clyford, sir Edmond of Manle, with other
lords and barons, to the number of.xlii. knights, and.lxvii. barons, be
side.xxii. men of name, which were taken prisoners, and.x. M. common soldiers
slain. After this time Robert le Bruise reigned as king of Scotland.

Anno. 8.
M
John Gysors Grocer
S
Hamo^d Chikwel


A villayn called John Poydras, a tanners son of Excester, in diverse places A
barkers son made claym to the croune
of England, named himself the son of Edward the first, and said that by a
false nourse he was stolen out of his cradel, and Edward that was now king put
in his place, which was but a carters son but shortly after, he was convict of
his untruth, and confessed, that he did it by the motion of a familiar sprite,
which he had in his house in likeness of a cat, whom he had served.iii. year,
and he for his service was drawn and hanged at Northamptou.

Anno. 9.
M

S
Hamo^dgoodchep Will. Reading


The castle of Barwike was yielded up to the Scotts by the treason of Peter
Spaldyng.

Two cardinals being sent from Rome to conclude a peace between the king of
England and the Scots: as they went through Yorkshyre, were robbed by two
Knights called Gilbert Midle^o^, and Walter Selby, with. 600. men, which.ii.
knights had don many robberies in those parts, or they were taken, but they
were afterward condemned, drawn and hanged at London. And the King recompensed
the Cardinals double so much as they lost.

Shortly after sir Goss^en Deinuile and his brother Robert, with two hundred in
habit of Friars, going about Notable ^heues in Friars apparel.
as exiled persons or outlawes, did many great and notable roberies and
despites, they robbed and spoiled the bishop of Durhams palaces, leaving
nothing in them but bare, walls, and such like robberyes, for the which they
were after hanged at York.

Anno. 10.
M
John Wengraue
S
Rafe Palmer


The Scotts entered the borders of Northumberland and most cruelly robbed and
spoiled the country, sparyng neither man, woman nor child.

To this mischief was joined so exceeding Great famine
dearth and scarsitie that wheat was sold for.iiii. mark the quarter: the
common people did eat horse flesh, and other vile beasts, and many died for
hunger.

Anno. 11.
M
John Wengraue
S
Will. Furnex


King Edward laid siege to Barwike. The white battle
But in the mean time the scots by an other way invaded the borders of
England, and wasted the country even to York, and slew a great number,
specially of religious people: Wherefore it was called the white battle. King
Edward was constrained to break up his siege, and return again into England.

Sir Hugh the Spencers, the father and the son, were of great power in
England, and by the favor of the king practiced such cruelty, and bare them
self so hautie, that no lord in this land durst contrary them in any thing
that they thought good: whereby they were greatly hated of the nobles.

Anno. 12.
M

S
John Pou^tney John Dalling


The Lords and nobles of England detestynge the outrageous pride of the
Spencers, in such wise conspired against them, that they caused the king
half against his mind, to banish them the Realm.

Anno. 13.
M

S
Simon Abingnon* John Preston


This year king Edward contrary to the mind of his lords revoked the Spe^cers
from banishment, and set them in like authority as they before had been, to
the great disturbance of the realm. and not long after pursued the barons and
chased them from place to place: as first at Ledes castle in Kent: after in
the marches of Wales, where he took the Mortimers, and sent them to the Tower
of London.

Anno. 14.
M

S
Reynolde at cundit Will. Prodham


This year king Edward ouercam the barons of this realm in many battles Great
execution.
and took many of them, whom he put to death in diverse parts of this realm, to
the number of.xxii. noble men. Master John Baldocke, a man of evil fame was
made Chancellor of England, who extremely pilled y^ commons of this realm: for
the which he was well rewarded after.

Anno. 15.
M
Hamond Chikwel Grocer
S.
Rich. Hakeney


This year the sun appeared to men's The sun appeared as blood
sight as red as blood, and so continued the space of.vi. hours. The last day
of October the Irishmen by the aid they had out of England, drove the scotts
out of their land. At which time many noble men of Scotland were slain. Among
which was Edward le Bruze the kings brother.

Anno. 16.
M
Hamond Chikwel Grocer
S
Rich. of Ely


King Edward with a great army entered Scotland: but with sickness and other
misfortunes that chanced among the soldiors, he within short space was forced
to return into England: whereof sir James Douglas, and the Scots having
knowledge, pursued him in such wise, that they slew many english men and had
welnere taken the king at an abbey called Beighland, from the which he was
forced to flee, and leave his tresure behind him.

Anno. 17.
M

S
Adam Salisbury Io* of Oxeford


Charles of* France warred upon the lands of king Edward in Gascoyne and Guien,
and took there many to wnes and castles. Wherefore king Edward sent his wife
Isabell to entreat with her brother Charles for peace, or (as Fro^sard says)
the Queen her self fleyng che tyranny and mischief of the Spe^^ers, fled with
her young son Edward into France, and was gently received of her brother, which
made great promise to aid her against the tyranny and injury of the Spencers.

Anno. 18.
M

S
Be^et of Fulham John Ca^sion


Queen Isabel by the aid and help of lyr John of Haynold with a ^^nal company
of Henoways returned into England: to whom the Nobles and the King Edward
taken prisoner.
commons gatheringe in great number pursued the king, the Spencers, and other
enemies so egerly, that ^hortlye after they took them, and kept the king in
prison at Kenil worth*

And after at Barkley they took master Robert bal docke, the chancellor, the
Spenrers taken prisoners.
Robert Baldock, the Cha^cellor both ye Spencers, the father, and the son,
the earl of Arundel, with diverse other, and brought them to* the town of
Hereford.

Anno. 19.
M
Richard Betain Goldsmith
S
John Cotton


The morrow after Simon and Jude, sir Hugh Spencer y^ father was put to Great
execution.
death at Bristowe, and after buried at Winchester: and on saint* Hughes day
following was sir Hugh his son drawn hanged and quartered at Hereford, and his
head sent to London, and set among other upon the bridge. After Robert
Baldock the Chancellor was sent to London to Newgate, where he died miserably.
The earl of Arundell was put to death at Hereford: and king Edward was by
parliament deposed from King Edward deposed.
his kingdom, when he h^d reigned.x^^yere. six months and.xviii. dais, and
not long after was murdered by sir Roger Mortimer, and was buried a^
Gloucester.

Edward the third
Anno Regni. 1.
^^pared to him. At the beginning of his reign he was chiefly ordered by sir
Roger Mortymer and his mother Isabel.

In this first year of his reign he confirmed The liberties of London
confy^med.
the liberties of the city of London, and ordained, that the mayor of the city
of London should sit in all places of iudgem^t within the liberties of the same
for chief Justice, the kings person only excepted, and that every alder man*
that had been maidr should be justice of peace in all London and Middlesex: and
every Alderman that had not been mayor should be justice of peace within his
own ward. Diverse other priu^leges he granted to the city.

The king went toward Scotland having understanding that the scotts were
entered into England, as far as Stanhop park. He beset them round about,
hoping to have brought them bnder his subjection. But when he thought to be
most sure of them by treason of some of his host, the scotts escaped clean,
and returned back into scotland. About the.xxi. day of September King Edward
the second murdered.
Edward y^ second was murdered in the castle of Barkley by sir Roger Mortimer,
and was buried at Gloucester.

Anno. 1.
M

S
R^c. Roting Roger Chacellor


The King married the lady Philip the earls daughter of Henawde in the city of
York.

The king held his parliament at A Parliament at Northampton.
Northampton, where through the counsel of sy^ Roger Mortimer, and the old
Queen his mother, he made with the scots an unprofitable and dishonorable
peace: For why he restored to them all their writings, charters, and patentes
whereby the kings of Scotland had bound them selves to be tributarye ^o to
the crown of England, with other like unprofitable conditions.

Anno. 2.
M

S
Henry Darcy John Hawden


David the young prince of Scotland married Jane, the sister of King Edward,
whom the Scotts in derision called Jane makepeace. The scotts made many ^ymes
against thenglishmen, for the fond disgui^ed apparel by them at that time
worn, amongst the which this was one.

Long beardes hartlesse, Scottish ^ tauntes.

Painted hoodes witless,
Gay Cotes graceless,
Makes England thriftlesse.
Anno. 3.
M
John Grantham Grocer

Simo^ Fra^c^s Henry Combmarten


Edward earl of Kent, uncle to king Edward of England, being falselye
Execution.
accused of treason, was by sir Roger Mortimer put to death at Winchester.

Prince Edward was borne at Wodstock. The.xvii. of October, sir Roger Mortemer
was taken in Notingham castle, and sent to the Tower of London.

Anno. 4.
M
Symonde Swalond

Richard Laza^ Henry G^sors


Sir Roger Mortimer was accused for diverse points of treason, as yt he murdered
king Edward the second, and that through him the scots escaped at Sta^^hope
park, for receiuynge sums of money of the Scotts: for which accusations he
was shortly after drawn Execution*
and hanged at London.

Edward Baylel, the son o^ John Baylel late king of scotts by lysence
purchased of king Edward, entered into to Scotland, clayming the crown by the
right of his father, where he vanquished the Scotts, and was crouned at Stone,

Anno. 5.
M

S
Robert Ely Thomas whorwod


The king with a great army went into Scotland, and at Halid^ hill gave the
Scotts battle, wherein he obtained a triumphant victory, and slew o^
them.viii. earls. 900. knights and of barons, Barwike won
and esquires. 400. and. 33000. common soldiers: he wan Edenbor^we, Barwike,
and many other castles, and gane the governance of Scotland to Edward Baylel.

Anno. 6.
M

S
John Mocking Andrew Aubery


The king of France sent.x. shyps toward Scotland, which were ^o wether driven
into Flanders, that they were little worth after that time.

Anno. 7.
M

S
Nicolas Pikr John Husband.


King Edward went again into Scotland, and laid siege to the castle of
^ylbridge: He wan it by strength, set the country in quietness, and came back
to the castle of Tyne where shortly after Edward Ba^lel king of Scotts, came
and did him homage, and swear unto him fealty.

Anno. 8.
M
John Pountney draper

John Hamond William Hansarde


Ambassadors were sent from Philip de Valoys king of France, for to conclude
upon certain articles of varia^ce between their lord and the king of England,
but it took none effect.

Anno. 9.
M
Reignold at Cundyte

John Hyngston Walter Turk


This year king Edward sent ambassadors into France, to conclude a peace which
likewise took none effect.

Anno. 10.
M
John Pon^tney draper

Walter Wordo^ Richard V^ton


This year king Edward made claim to the crown of France, and therefore
proclaimed open war between England and France.

Anno. 11.
M

S
William Brickelsworth John Northhal


This year the king considering the charge he had with wars in Scotland and
also that he intended to have against the Frenchmen, gathered together treasure
by diverse and sundry ways, where of the manner is not expressed: but such great
plenty came to his hands, that money was very scant throughout the whole
Realm: by reason of which scarsnes, vitaile and other merchandise were
excedyng good cheap: for at London Cheap of vitailes.
a quarter of wheat was sold for ij. s^. A fat ox for.vi. s^.viii. d. A fat
sheep for vi. d. and viii. d. six pigeo^s for one penny, a fat goose for ii. d.
a pyg for a penny: and so al other victuals after ye rate

This year appeared a blasing sterre.

Anno. 12.
M

S
Walter Neale Nicolas Crane


King Edward sent Ambassadors beyond the sea, to allie with him the earl of
Heynault, and other lords, which obeyde not the french king: of who by the
means of Jacques Dartuell, he had great comfort both of the Flemmings and
diverse lords and princes of those parts

This year the king granted, that the officers of the Mayor and Sheriffs of
London should bear maces of silver.

Anno. 13.
M
Henry Darcy

William of Pomfret Hugh Marbre


King Edward for establishement of amity between him and the Hollanders,
Selanders, and Grabanders, sailed to And warpe, where he concluded the matter
with his aliances, and by y^ consent of ye emperor Lewys was proclaimed vicar
general of the empire.

In this mean time certain frenchmen Southa^pton robbed
had entered the haue^ of Southhampton and robbed the town, and brent a great
part thereof, and upon the sea they took ii. great ships, called the Edward, and
the Christopher.

Anno. 14.
M
Andrew Aubery grocer

William Thorney Roger Frosham


King Henry held a parliament at Great subsedye.
Westminster: he demanded the fyfthe part of every man's goods. The customs of
the wolles to be paid.ij. years before hand: and the nynth sheafe of every
man's corn. Which was granted him. But before it were all paid, the love of
the people did turn into hatred, and their prayer into cursyng. etc.

The king changed his coin, and made Coin changed.
the noble, and half noble: The noble at vi. s.viij. d. which is how.x. s^.

King Edward entered the borders of France, and made claim to the whole realm
of France, as his rightful inheritance: Arms of England and France
entermedled.
and for more authority named him self king of France, and entermedled the
arms of France, as it remains to this day.

Anno. 15.
M

S.
Adam Lucas Bartholomew marys


The queen of England wife to king John of Gaunt.
Edward being at Gaunt, was delivered of a son, which afterward was called
John of Gaunt, which was first earl of Richemount, and after Duke of
Gloucester.

King Edward sailyng into Flaunders nigh to the town of Sluice met Sattayl
ou^e sea.
with the French kings navy, where was foughten a cruel battle. Whereof the
king of England had the victury, and the French flete that was in number. 400.
sail was welnere destroyed and the soldiers taken, slain and drouned, so that
of. 33000 four escaped alive

After this victory, king Edward besieged Turney, and the town of saint Omers.
At the end of.xi. wekes after the siege, a peace was concluded for. xii
months, and the king returned.

Anno. 16.
M
John Oxenford vintener

Rich. barkyng John Rockesleye


This year came into England.ii. cardinals to treat a peace between the
kings of England and of France, who concluded it for.iij. years, but it
lasted not so long.

This year the queen was delivered of a man child at Langley, and was named
Edmund of Langley, and was king Edwards third son.

Anno. 17.
M
Simon Francis mercer

John Lufkin Rich. Kyslingbury


This year died John duke of britain by reason of whose death, war and strife
grew, and parts taking by ye French king and king Edward.

Anno 18.
M

S
John Sewarde John Aysesham


This year ye king called a parliament at Westminster: In time whereof, Edward
his eldeste son was created prince of Wales.

This year ye king made a coin of fine gold, and named it the Florentine; y^ is
A new coin.
to say, the penny of ye valu of.vi. ^.viii d the halfpeny of y^ valu of.iii.
^.iiii. d. and the farthing of the valu of.xx. d. which coin was ordained for
his wars in France, for the gold thereof was not so fine as was the noble
before named.

Anno. 19.
M

S
Geff. Wichingham Thomas Legget


This year ye king held a solemn feast The order of knights of the garter.
at his castle of Windsor: where he de^sed the Order of the garter, and
stablished it as it is at this day. And then he sailed into Sluice, and so into
little Britain with a strong army. He sent ye earl of Derby with a strong army
into Guye^ for to aid the earl of Northampton.

Anno. 20.
M

S
Edmonde Heuenall John Gloucester


King Edward made a great preparation for the wars of France: and Philip de
Valoys king of France made as great preparation to defend his land against
him.

Anno. 21.
M
Geffrey Wichingha^
S
Will. Clopton


King Edward sailed into Normandy with. 1100. sail, with his son Prince
Edward, they over rode spoiled and destroyed ye country before them unto
Paris: and gathered wonderful riches of prai which he sent into England.
Shortly after, he encou^tred ye french king nigh the forest of Cresse, when he
had not in his host the eight man in comparison of y^ French army, and
obtained of them a traumphant victory* Where was slain the king of Goheme with
ten other great princes.80. baners.1200. knights, and.3000. common
soldiers. After this victory king Edward went toward Caleys, and besieged
it. In the mean while David of Scotland made war upon the borders of
England: but the bishop of York with other lords, gathered a great company,
as well spiritual as temporal, and nere unto Durham did bid the king of
Scotts battle, where was fought a cruel and fierce battle. But in the end
the victory fell unto the queen's side, and there was taken the king of Scotts,
with many of his greatest lords, and there R. of scots taken.
was slain one and other above.15000. soldiers.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Adam Bramson Richar. Basingstoke


This year, after king Edward had Caleys yielded.
lien before Calais a year and more, it was yielded up to him, as ye may read
in John Frosarde.

Anno. 23.
M

S
Henrye Pycarde Symo^ Dolell


In the end of this year about August Great plage
the pestilence begone in diverse places of England, and specially at London, and
so continued till that time twelve month.

Anno. 24.

S
Adam Burye Rafe Lynne


The King caused to be voyned grotes and half grotes, the which lacked
^teration coin.
of the weight of his former coin.ii. ^ vi. d. of a pound troy. And about y^
end of August ceased the death in London, which was so vehement and sharp, that
over the bodies buried in churches and churchyardes, monasteries, and other
accustomed burying places, was buried in the Charter house yard of Great
pestilence.
London. I. M. persons. And also many persons of good credit yet living in
the city of London affirm that they have read the like, written on a plate
of laton, fastened on a cross of stone in the same Charter house churcheyarde:
and also to have seen recorded in one old Book of the said Charter house,
that at that time the said mortalitis was so great, that there remained not
the tenth person alive throughout the realm.

Anno. 25.
M
Richard Kyllyngburye
S
Wylliam Wocester


This year king Edward had a goodly victory upon the sea against the
Constable of France, where he took xxii. of their shyps.

Anno. 26.
M
Andrew Aubery grocer
S
John Wroth


This year the castle of Guynes was yelden unto ye englyshmen, dwellinge in
Calice, by treason of a French man.

Also the englismen being in Britain had a goodly victory over the Fre^chme^
where they took many noble men prisoners.

Anno. 27.
W

S
John Peache John Stodeney


This summer was so long dry, that it was called after, the dry summer: for
from March till the later end of July Dry Summer.
fell little rain or none: by which reason corn that year following was scant.

Anno. 28.
mayor

S
John Welde John Little


The duke of Grunswike made an appeal against Henry duke of Lancaster: for
which was waged battle in the french Kings court, and being both ready
within the lystes to fight, the french king stayed the matter, and took; the
quarrel into his hands, so that either of them departed the freld without any
stroke stricken.

Anno. 29.
W

S
William Totingham Richar. Smelt


For so much as the towns in Fla^ders Woll staples keptat Westmin. Chichester
Lincoln, Bristow and Ca^torbury
brake their promise before time made by Jacques Dartuel, and now favored the
French party, king Edward removed the market and staple of wol out of Flanders
into England: as to Westminster, Chichester, Lincoln, Bristow and Cantorbury.

Also this years was the house of the Friars Augustins in London finished:
Friar Augustines church in London builded.
which was reedified by sir Humfreye Bohune Earl of Hertforde and Essex, whose
body lies buried in the quier of the said house before the high altar.

Anno. 30.
W
Simond Francis Mercer

Tho. Forster Thomas Brandon


Edward prince of Wales, nie to the city of poitiers joined battle with king
John of France: of who^ ye prince by his marcial policy wan a noble victory not
withstanding yt he had in his army but 800. soldiers: and on the french part
were 6000. fighting me^. In this conflict king John was taken with his young son
Phi^^p, and many of his nobles, and brought into England.

Anno. 31.
W
Henry Picard

R^ch. Notingha^ Thoma ^osell^


Great and royal iustes were holde^ in Iustes in smithfiel^
smithfield before the king of England (the French king being prisoner) y^ king
of Scots, and diverse other nobles.

Anno. 32.
W

S
Stephen Ca^dish Barthol. Frostlyng


This year David le Bruze king of Scots was set at liberty, when he had put
king Edward surety of. 10000. mark for his ransom.

Anno. 33.
W

S
Ioh. Barnes John Burys


The Englyshemen in Britain took the town of Ancore, and diverse other, and put
them to great ransom.

Anno. 34.
W

S
Simon Bedington John Chichester


A fynall peace was concluded between the kings of England and of France, on
this condition, that king Edward should have to his possession, the countries
o^ Gascoyn and Guyen, Poytiers, Lymosyn, Galeuile, Xantes Calice, Guines, and
diverse other lordshyps, castles, towns* and all the lands to them belonging,
without knowledge of any sovereignty or subjection for the same: and the king
of France should pay for his ransom. 300000. crowns: and so king John
returned into France.

Anno. 35.
W
John Wroth fishmonger

John Denis Walter Burney


King Edward returned from Caleys into England; and brought with him many noble
me^ of France for hostages.

This year men and beasts perished in England in diverse places, with thunder
and lightenynge: and stendes were seen in man's likeness, and spoke unto men as
they travailed by the way

Anno. 36.
W
John Peche fishmonger

William Holbeche James Tame


This year was great death and pestilence The second pestilence.
in England, which was called the second mortality: in which dyed Henry duke
of Lancaster: and then was John of Gaunt the kings third son, which had
married the dukes daughter, made duke of Lancaster.

Also there were seen this year in the air Castelles, and hoostes of men
fyghtyng.

Anno. 37.
M

S
Io. of S. Albo^s James Andrew


This year was a great wind in England, Great wind.
wherewith many steples and towers were overthrown.

King John of France came into England, and shortly after died at ye Sauoy in
London. Also this year was a great frost in England, which lasted from the
myddest of September, to the month of April.

Anno. 38.
M

S
Richard Croydon John Hiltofte


Prince Edward sailed into Bordeaux, and received the possession of Guyen that
king Edward* had newly given unto him.

Anno. 39.
M

S
Simon Mordant Io. of Motford


This year the king began the foundation S. stephe^s chapel.
of saint Stephens Chapel at Westmynster, which was fynished by Richard the
second, and son of prince Edward.

Anno. 40.
M
Adam of Burye Skinner

John Bukilsworthe John Drelande


Adam of Bury was mayor one part of the year, and John Luf^yn ye residue.

This year the king commanded that Peter pence should no more be gathered nor
paid to Rome.

Anno. 41.
M
John Louekyn fishmo^ger
S
William Dickman


This year was borne the second son of prince Edward, named Richard.

Anno. 42.
M
James Andrew Draper

Rich. Torgold William Dickman


This year appeared Stella cometa, that is a blasing star. And the Earls
Blasyng sterre.
of Armenak, of Brett, and of Perygort, with other nobles of the Duchye of
Guyan, appealed the Prince of Wales in the French kings court, that he had
broken the peace, and wronged them, as in exacting of them over great sums of
money. etc. But the French king deferted it for certain causes to long here
to recite.

Anno. 43.
M

S
Ada^ Wimbingham Rob. Girdler


This year the French King proceeded in judgment upon the appellation before
made by the earl of Arminak, the lord of Bret, and earl of Perygort against
prince Edward. Whereupon, discord and variance began to take place between the
two kings: and those lords which before were sworn to king Edward, did now
yield diverse towns of the country of Poytiers unto the French king.

Anno. 44.
M

S
John Pyell Hughe Holbitche


This year dyed Queen Philyppe Queen's college in Oxforde.
wife to Edward the third, she builded the college in Oxenford, called queen's
college.

In this year was the third mortality or pestilence, whereof died much people

Anno. 45.
M

S
William Walworth Roberte Gayton


John Barnes mayor of London, gave a cheste with three locks, and a. 1000.
marks, to be lent to young men upon sufficient gage, so that it passed not one
100. marks: and for the occupying thee of, if he were learned, to say at his
pleasure De profundis for the soul of John Barnes: if he were not learned, to
say. Pater noster. But how soever the money was lent, at this day the chest
stands in the chamber of London, without either money or pledges for the same.

Anno. 46.
M
John Barnes mercer

Roberte Hatfielde Adam Staple


The earl of Pembroke, as he passed the sea to reskue the castle of Rochell,
was encou^tred with a flete of Spaniardes, which king Henry of Castle had
sent to aid the French king. Of these Spanyardes after cruel fight, the Earl
was taken, and sir Guystarde de Angle, and other, to the number of. 160*
persons, and the more part of his men slain and drowned.

Anno. 47.
M
John Pyell merchant

John Philpot Nicolas Brember


John Duke of Lancaster, entered by Calays into France, and passed through out
the realm, by Vermendoys and Cha^payn, nigh to Bordeaux in Aquitayn without
battle.

Anno. 48.
M

S
John Aubery John Fysshyed


Diverse entreaties of peace were made between the king of England and France,
by mean of the by shop of Rome, but none was concluded.

Anno. 49.
M

S
Richard Lio^s William Wodhouse


The entreatie of peace continued, but not concluded but for four months at
the most: in which time of entreatie the French king wan many holds, and
towns of the Englishmen, as well in Guyen as in Britayn, and in other places.

Anno. 50.
M

S
John Hadleye Willyam Neweporte


Many wonderful sycknesses fell among the people, ^swel in Italy as in
England, whereof there died an exceadyng great number.

Anno. 51.
M
Adam Staple Mercer
S
Robert Launde


Prince Edward departed out of this life, who was in his time the flower of
chivalry. He was buried at Cantorbury, and then king Edward created Richard
son of prince Edward prince of Wales: and because the king waxed feeble and
sickly, he betoke the rule of the land to sir John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster,
who so continued during his fathers life.

This year king Edward the third ended his life at Richemond, the.xxi. day of
June, in the year of our Lord 1377. When he had reigned. 50. years five
months lacking four days, and was buried at Westmynster. He left behind
him four sons: Lionel duke of Clarence, John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster,
Edmonde of Langleye duke of York, and Thomas of Wod stock, Earl of Cambridge.

Richard the second.
Anno Regni.i.
RIchard the second, son of Prince Edward of Wales, was ordained king of
England, being as yet but eleven years of age. He began his reign the.xi.
day of June, in the year of our Lord 1377* and left the same the.xxix. day
of September in the year. 1399. so he reigned.xxii. years.iii. months and
eight days. In bounty and liberality he far passed all his progenitoures:
but he was ouermuche given to rest and quietness, and loved little deeds of
arms, and marciall prowess, and for that he was young, he was most ruled by
young counsel, and regarded nothing the aduertisementes of the sage and wise
men of his Realm: for the chief about him were of no wisdom nor el^^mation.
Which thing turned this land to great trouble, and himself in fine to extreme
myserie. Of him John Gower writes these v^^ses following.

When this king first began to reign, ^o^ clama^ (...).
the laws neglected were:
Wherefore good fortune him forsook and thearthe did quake for fear.
The people also whom he poulde, against him did rebel,
The time does yet bewail the woes, that Chronicles do of tell:
The foolish council of the lewd and young, he did receive:
And grave advice of aged heads: he did reject and leave.
And then for gredy thirst of coin, some subjects he accusde:
To gain their goods into his hands thus he the Realm abusde.
Anno regni. 1.
M
Nicolas Brember grocer.

Andrew pickma^ Nicolas Tuyforde


By the enticement of the Frenchmen, the Scots began to rebel, and a squire of
theyrs, called Alexander Ramsey, Barwyk^ taken.
with.xl. persons, in a night took the castle of Barwike, which was r^scued
and recovered by therle of Northumberlande.

Anno. 2.
M
John Philpot grocer

John Boseham Thomas Cornewalis


This John Philpot mayor of London Charita^ deeds o^ John P^^^^pot.
above named, gave to the city of London certain tenements, for the which the
Chamberlayne of London, pays yearly for ever, to.xiij. poor people of the
same city, every of the^ vii. pe^ce the weke, which is paid to them at
the.iilj quarter feasts of the year, and as any of those.xiii. persons dye,
the Mayor appoynteth one, and the Recorder of London, an other in their romthes.

Anno. 3.
M

S
John Heylisdom Myllyam Barret


The French men with galleyes and Grauesend ^oyled.
other ships, entered into the Thames and burnt diverse towns, and at the last
came to Grauesende, where they spoiled* the town, and set it on fire, and
returned into France with much rythes. This year was such a pestilence in
England, that most people dyed. Also a parlyamente at Westmynster, where was
granted, that all men and women, being of the age of.xiiij. years or upward,
should pay to ye king.iiii. d. by reason whereof great grudge and murmr grew
among the commons: and this was granted toward the wars in France.

Anno. 4.
M
William Walworth fishmo^ger

Walter ducket Will. Knighthode


This year the making of gunnes Gonnes invented.
was first found, in this manner: a certain Almayne (whose name is not known)
chanced to have in a mortar, powder of brymstone that he had beaten for a
medicine, and covered it with a stone, and as he stroke fire, it fortuned a
spark to fall in the powder, by and by there rose a great flame-out of the
mortar, and lift up the stone wherewith it was covered a great height: and
after he had perceived that, he made a pype of iron, and tempered the powder,
and finished this deadly engine, and taught it to the Venetians, when they
warred against the Genuates, which was in the year of our Lord. 1380. For
this invention he received this benefit, that his name was never known, left
he might for this abominable devise, have been cursed and evil spoken of
whilst y^ world stands: so says Polydore.

By the mean of the paime^t above named, A rebellio by Jack Straw an others.
this year ye commons of ^his land, specially of Kent and Essex, sodeinly
rebelled and assembled together upon black Heath, to the number of. 60000* and
above, which had to their captains, Watte Tyler, Jack Straw, Jack Shepard,
Tom Myller, Hobbe Carter, and such other: which were animated to this
rebellion, by one John Wall or ball, a seditious precher. They caused much
trouble and busynes in the realm: and chiefly about the city of London, where
they practiced much villainy, and destroying many goodly places of the nobles,
as the Sauoye, The Sauoy burnte and Saint John's in ^mithfielde ^poyled.
Saint John's in Smithfield, and other. They let forth all prisoners, and set
them at liberty: they spoiled all the books of law in the Innes of court,
the Records of the Counters, and other prisons. They fet the king forth of
the tower of London, compellynge him to grant all bondmen fredome, and that he
should never demand tribute or tax of his commons: and also required Jack
Straw, and Wat Tyler to be made Dukes of Essex, and Kent, and governors of
the kings person from thens forth, both in peace and war: which things he
granted, for he durst in no point deny the^. But William Walworth mayor of
London being in Smithfielde, nere unto the kings person, and seeing him stand
hoodlesse before Jack Straw, rebuke the said Straw of his great leudenes, Jack
straw slain.
and with a dagger slew him, and brought the king into the city: Whereupon the
rude company was dispersed, and fled Why ye city of London gives the Dagger
in arms.
as sheep, some one way, and some an other. In memory of this deed, the city
gives the dagger in their shield of arms.

Anno. 5.
M
John Northa^pton Draper

John Rote John Hynde


This year was a terrible earthquake An earthquake.
throughout all England, which threw down many castles, steples, houses, and
trees.

Anno. 6.
M
John Northa^pton Draper

Ada^ Baume John Selye


This year was a combat foughten A combat.
at ye kings palaice of Westminster, between one Garton appellant, and sir John
Ansley knight defenda^t, ye knight was Victor, and Garton was from that place
drawn to Tyborn, and there hanged for his false accusation.

Anno. 7.
M
Nicolas Brember grocer

Simon Winchcombe John Moore


This year was one Wall, or Ball taken at Couentre, by Robert Treuil Execution
at s. Albons
lian, and judged to be hanged at saint Albons, for that he was the animator
of the rebels spoken of in the fouethe year of this kings reign.

Anno. 8.
M
Nicolas Brembre grocer
S
Nicholas Exton


The King went toward Scotland with a great army, but when he drew nere ye
borders, such means was sought that a peace was concluded.

Anno. 9.
M
Nicolas Brembre grocer
S
John Organ


King Richard married the daughter of Dinceslaus, emperor of Almayn.

Anno. 10.
M
Nicolas Exton goldsmith
S
William Stondon


The Earl of Arundell went into the Duchy of Buyan, for to strengthen such
soldiers as the king at that time had in those parties, or to scour the sea
of Rouers. The earl Keeping his course encountered with a mighty flete of
Fle^myngs laden with Rochell wine, and set upon them, took them, and brought
them to diverse ports of England: whereby wine was then so plentuous, that it
was sold for.xiii. ^.iiii. d. and* xx ^ a tonne, of the very choice.

Anno. 11.
M
Nicolas Exton goldsmith
S
Hugh Fostalfe


This year Thomas of Wodstoke duke of Gloucester, y^ earls of Aru^dell, Warwike,
of Darby, and of Notingham, consyderyng how this land was misgouerned, by a
few persons about ye king entending reformation of the same, assembled at
Radecocke bridge, where they took their counsel, and raisyng a strong power,
came to London, where they caused the king to call a parliament whereof hearing
Alexander Neuyll, archbishop of York, sir Lionel were, marquis of Deuelen, and
sir Michael dela Poole, Cha^cellor and earl of Suffolk fearing punishment, fled
the land and died in strange countries. The king by counsel of the above
named lords during the parliament, caused to be taken sir Robert Tresilian,
chief Justice of England, sir Nicholas Brembre, late Mayor of London, sir John
Salisbury knight of household, sir John Beauchampe steward of the kings house,
sir Simon Burley, sir James Bernes and sir Roberte Belknappe knights and a
sergeant of arms, named John Dske, the which by authority of the said
parliament, were convict of treason, and put to death at the toure hill, and at
Tyborn. And John Holt, John Locton, Richard Graye, Millia^ Burgth, and Robert
Fulthorpe justice, with y^ other foresaid lords, which before had voided the
land, were banished and exiled for ever.

Anno. 12.
M
Sir Nico. Twyforde goldsmith
S
Tho. Austen


This year the king kept a great iustes in Smythfield, which continued Iustes
in smithfielde
xxiiij. days. This year on ye fifth day of August, was the battle of
Ottirborn where sir Henry Percy slew the earl Battle at Ottirborn.
Douglas of Scotland, and after was taken prisoner.

Anno. 13.
M
William Denour grocer
S
John Walcot


An esquire of Navarre accused an ^ combat*
englysh esquire called John Welshe of treason: for the trial whereof, a day
of fight was between them taken, to be fought in the kings palais at Westmin
ster: where John Welshe was victor, and constrained the other to yield. He was
Execution*
despoyled of his armor, and drawn to Tyborne, and hanged.

Anno: 14.
M
Adam Bawme* goldsmith
S
Thomas Diuent


The duke of La^caster uncle to king Richard sailed with a company of soldiers
into Spayn, to claim the realm of Castile: for so much as he had taken to wife
the eldest daughter of king Peter, that was expelled his kingdom by Henry his
bastard brother: he conquered the country of Galice, and made league with the
king of Portugal: but by great mortality, which fell among his people: he was
fayn to dismiss his army, and shortly after lost all that ever he had won.

Anno. 15.
M
John Hynde Draper
S
Henry Damer


A bakers man bearing a basket of A fraye in Fletestret^*
^orsebreade in Fletestreet, one of the bishop of Salisvuries men took out a
lofe, yt baker requiring his lofe, ye bishops man brake ye bakers head:
whereupon followed such parties taking, yt the Mayor and sheriffs and all the
quiet people of the city could not order the vnrulynes of the multitude, but
yt they would have him delivered to them, who brake the bakers head, or else to
break open the gates of the said bishops palaice, who was the kings high
treasorer: for the which the king seized the liberties of the city, and
discharged the Mayor and Sheriffs of the rule of the City, and committed the
government thereof to a knight of the court called sir Edward Dalingrige.

Anno. 16.
M

S
Gilb. Ma^sfield Thomas Newington


This year by the great suit and labor The liberties of London restored.
of doctor Grauesend then bishop of London, the liberties were shortly restored
to the citisens of London.

Anno. 17.
M

S
Dr^w Barentin Richard Whittingion


A truce prolonged between France and Englanoe for three years.

This year died Queen Anne wife to king Richard.

Anno. 18.
M
John French Mercer
S
Tho. Knolles


About this time was Wikliffe famous John Wiklife.
in England.

King Richard made a voyage into Ireland, which was more chargeable the^
honorable. And this year was great tempest of wynd in England.

Anno. 19.
M
William More bintener
S
Roger Elys


A truce for.xxx. years was made between England and France: and king Richard
took to wife Isabel the daughter of Charles the French king.

Anno. 20.
M
Adam Bame goldsmith
S
Will. Parker


The duke of Gloucester king Richardes uncle with the earl of Arundel and
Execution
other was put to cruel death: for so much as they rebuked the king in
certain matters over liberally.

Anno. 21.
M

S
Will. Askham John Woodcocke*


This year deceased John of Gau^t duke of Lancaster: He was buried in Poules
Church, on the north side of the quier.

The Duke of Hereford and also the the duke of Hereforde banyshed.
Duke of Norffolke were both banyshed the land.

Anno. 22.
M

S
John Wade John Warner


King Richard let the realm of England let to ferme
England to Ferme, to sir Willyam Scrope Earl of Wiltshyre, and to.iij.
knights, Bushye, Bagot and Grene, And then in April he went with an army
into Irelande; leaving for his Lieuetenaunt in England, sir Edmund of Langley
his uncle, and duke of York.

King Rychard being occupied in Irelande, Henry Bolynbroke, Duke of Hereforde,
and of Lancaster: which was banyshed into France, being sesite for of the
Londoners, came into England with a small power, and landed in Holdernesse in
Yorkshire, to whom the Commons gathered in great number, whereof King
Richard hearing, about September he returned, and landed at Mylforde haven,
he went to the Castle o^ Flint in Wales, where he rested him, entendynge to
gather more strength. In the which time, Henry Duke of Lancaster came unto
Bristowe, where he took sir William Scrope, Earl of Wilteshyre and Treasourer
of Enggland, sir John Bushy, and sir Henry Green. Sir John Bagot was there
taken, but he escaped and fled, the other three were put to execution. King
Richard being in the cas^ell of Flynt King Rychard taken prisoner by Henry duke
of Herford
was taken: and by Henry Duke of Lancaster, sent to the Tower of London: where
shortly after he yielded up and resigned to the said Henry all his power and
Kyngly title to the crown of England and France, knowledgynge, that he
worthily was deposed for* h^s demerytes and misgouerning of the common weal.

King Henry the fourth.
Anno regnl. ^.


Henry, the son of King Henry was chosen prince of Wales, and duke of
Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and heir apparent to the Crown: he deposed three
Dukes, that is to say, of Albumarle, Excester and Su^^^^y, and the ^arqu^s of
Dorset.

An. reg. 1.
M

S
William Walderne William Hyde


Sir John Hollande duke of Excester A conspiracy against king Henrye*
brother to King Richard, the duke of Albumarle, ye duke of Surrey with the
Earls of Salisbury and Gloucester, and other that favored Richard of Burdeux,
conspyred against King Henry, and appointed privily to murder him at a feast,
which should be holden at Windsore: but their treason Execution*
was disclosed, and they al put to death with as many knights and esquires as
were of that aliance and confederacy.

King Richard was put to death in King Rychard murdered.
Pomfret castle, by a knight called sir Piers of Exton, and after brought to
the tower of London, and so through the city to Poules barefaced, and there
stood ^^i. days for all beholders: and from thence to La^gley, and there buried
in a house of Friars: but he was since removed by Henry the.v. and lies at
Westminster. Upon the death of this king Richard. John Gower does write as
follows.

O myrrour for the world mete,
Which should in gold be bette, Dox clam^tis.

By which all wise men, by forsight,
Their prudent wits may whette:
^o God does hate such rulers as
Here viciously do live.
And none ought rule, that by their life
Do ill example give.
As this king Richard witnesses well,
His end this plain does show,
For God allotted him such end,
and sent him so great* woo.
As such a life deserude: as by
The chronicles thou may know,
Anno. 2.
M

S
John Wakell William Ebot


While the king was in Wales, certain persons envying that he had so shortly
obtained and possessed the Realm, blased abroad amongst the vulgar people,
that king Richard was yet living, and desired aid of the common people to
reposesse his realm and royal dignity. And to the furtherance of their
invention, they set upon poastes, and cast about the streets raylyng rimes
against king Henry. He being ne^led with those discourteous pricks searched out
the auctors: and amongst other were found culpable of this crime, sir Roger
Claryngdon knight, with two of his servants, the Priour of Launde, and
eyghte Friars Mynoures or graye Friars, who were drawn, hanged and Execution
quartered at Tyborne in the month of February.

Owen Glendour of Wales rebelled Rebellion in Wales.
and king Henry went thither with a strong army, but they fled to their
mountains.

This year was great scarsitie of Dearthe o^ corn
wheat and other grain, so that wheat was sold at London for.xvi. s, a quarter

Anno. 3.
M
John ^hadworth Mercer

Will. Venour John Fremingham


This year the Condite standing upon Condite i^ Cornehill bu^ded.
Cornehill in London was begone to be made (where as before time it was a prison
for priests called the Ta^^e in Cornehill.

A great bataile at Shrewesbury, began Battle a^ Srewesbu
by sir Thomas Percy, earl of worcester, and other against the King, where
sir Thomas Percie was taken Execution
and beheaded, and sir Henry Percye slain, with many other noble men.

Anno. 4.
M
John Walcot Draper
S
Robert Chicheley


The Lord of Casteil in Britayne landed within a mile of Plymmouthe, Plimmoth
spoiled
with a great company, he lodged all night in Plimmouthe, and on the morrow
robbed and spoiled the town, and returned again to their shyps.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Thomas Fauconer Tho. Poole


The Britaynes and Frenchemen, which the year before had spoiled and robbed the
town of Plimmouth, were discomfited and slain of the english men, in a
battle on the sea, nere the town of Dartmouth.

This year one William Serle was taken in the marches of Scotland, and
Execution
brought to London, and there hanged, drawn, and quartered for murdrynge the
duke of Gloucester at Calice.

Anno. 6.
M

S
Will Lowsche Ste. Spilma^


Sir Rychard Scrope then archbishop of York, and the Lord Mowbray then marshal
of England, with other, gathered great strength to have put Execution
down the king, but they were taken at York, where they were both beheaded.

Anno. 7.
M
Io. wodcock Mercer

Henry Barto^ Will. Cromer


This year was the bridge and Chapel Rochester bridge builded.
of Rochester finished by sir Robert Knols, who also new reedified the body of
y^ church of white friars standing in Fletestrete, and there was buried: That
Church was first founded by the auncestores of the Lord Gray Corner.

Anno. 8.
M
Richard Whittingto^ Mercer

Nicolas Wotton Geff. Broke


This Richard Whittington Mayor of Whittington college builded.
London above named, builded y^ house in London, named Whittingtons college.
He builded a great part of the hospital of saint* Bartholomewes in west
Smithfielde: he builded the library at the gray friars in London, now called
christ's hospital: he also builded a great part of the east end of the guyld
hall in London, beside sundry other no table works done by him.

This year sir Henry Earl of Northumberland, Execution
and the lord of Bardolfe coming out of scotland: with a strong company, were
met and foughten with, and discomfited, and their heads were stryken of, and
sent to London.

Anno. 9.
M

S
Henry Pomfret Henry Halton


This year was a great froste which Great frost.
began in December, and lasted fyftene wekes.

Edmond Holland Earl of Rent was by the king made admiral of the sea, who
scouring and skimming the sea, at the last landed in britayn, and besieged the
Castle of Br^ake and wan it: but he was there wounded with an arrow, whereof he
dyed sone after.

Anno. 10.
M

S
Thomas duke William Norton


This year in Smithfield was held a Great iustes in Smithfield.
great Iustes between the Henowayes and Englishemen* in the which were many
feats of arms done.

Anno. 11.
M

S
John Law William Chichley


John Badley Taylour was brent in Execution in Smithfield. The market house
called the stocks builded.
Smithfield for the Sacrament of the Altar.

This year the market house called the Stocks in London was begone to be
builded.

Anno. 12.
M
Tho. Knolles Grocer.

Io. Pen Tho. Pike


This year a squire of Wales named Execution.
Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled against the king, was brought to
London, and there drawn, hanged, and quartered

This year* was the Guilde Hall of Guyld hall in London new builded.
London begone to be new built: and of an old and little cotage, made into a
fair and goodly house as it now apereth

Anno. 13.
M
Robert Chicheley Grocer.

John Rainwel William Cotton


This year the.xii. day of October, the Thames flowed thrice in one day.

And this year the king caused a new coin of nobles to be made which were of
less value then the old by.iiii. d. in a noble.

Anno. 14.
M
William Waldren Mercer

Rafe Leu^hind William Seuenoke.


This year after the great and fortunate chances happened to King Henry, being
delivered of al civil division and discentio^, he minded to make a vot age
against the infidels, and especially for the recovery of Jerusalem: and for
that cause prepared a great army, and gathered much treasure, entending to set
forward in the same spryng. When he had thus prepared al things necessary for
his voyage: he was taken with an Apoplexy, of the which he languished till
his appointed hour. During which sickness (as autors write (he caused his
Crown to be set on the pillow at his beds head, and suddenly his pang so sore
troubled him, that he lay as all his vital spirits had been departed: such as
had cure of his body, thinkyng him to be dead, covered his face with a linen
clothe. The prince his son being thereof advertised, entered into the Chamber,
and took away with him the crown and departed, the father being suddenly
revived out of his traun^e, quickly perceived yt lack of his croun, and
having, knowledge that the prince had possessed *it, caused him to repair to
his presence, requiringe him for what cause he had so misused him self. The
prince answered, sir to my judgment you seemed dead, wherefore I as your next
heir, took it as mine, and not as yours: well son said the king what right
I had to it, and how I enjoyed it, God knows, Well qu^d the Prince, if you
dye king, I will have the garlande; and trust to keep it with the sword as ye
have done: ^^ll said the king, I commit all to God, and remember you to do
well, and with that turned him self, and shortly after departed, in a chamber
of the Abbottes of Westminster, called Jerusalem, the xx. day of March, in the
year of our lord. 1412. When he had reigned. 13. years, six months and nine
days, and was buried at Cantorbury.

King Henry the fyfth.
Anno Re^gni. I.
in deeds of arms expert and cunning, whereby he coquered manfully his enemies,
and brought France to his subjection: before the death of his father he
applied and gave him self to al vice and insolency of life, and drew unto
him riotous and wildely dispased* persons: but when he was admitted to the rule
of the land suddenly he became a new man, and turned all the rage of wildnes
into sober and wise behauior, and vice into virtue: and that he might not be
again corrupted, he charged all his old companions, that upon pain of their
lives, none of them should come within ten miles of the place that he was lodged
in.

This year about harvest time, was sir John Oldecastel knight appeached
Oldcastel.
for an heretic, and committed to prison, but he brake out of the tower, and
went to wales, where he lived.iiii. years after.

Anno. 1.
M

S
John. Sutton John Mycol


Certain adherentes of the forenamed sir John Oldecastell, assembled them in
Thickets field, nere unto S. Gyles in great number, whereof the king being
informed, took the field before them, and took of them so many, that all the
prisons in and about London, were filled. The chief of the^ which were.xxix.
were condemned by the Clergy of heresy, and attaynted of high treason, as
mouers of war against their king, by the temporal law in the Guild hall, and
adjudged for treason, to be drawn and hanged, and for herefye to be consumed
with fire, which was executed accordyngly in January following. The chief
whereof was sir Robert Acton knighte, John Brown Esquier, and John Beuerley
priest.

Anno. 2.
M
Thomas Fauconer Mercer
S
John Michell


This year the king made great provision to sail into France with an army, and
while he was shipping of his people, sir Richard earl of Cambridge, sir Richard
Scrope treasorer of England and sir Thomas Graye knighte, were arrested for
treason, and so strayghtlye examined, that it was confessed that they were
purposed to have slain the king, by the corrupting of the French men:
Execution.
wherefore they were all three adjudged to dye, and were headed at Hampton? Then
king Henry took shipping with a great power, and sailed into Norma^ die, and
took the town of Harflew, where he was compassed about with a great host of
frenchmen, to ye number of. 40000 He having but. 13000. footmen, and 2000.
spears. He slew of his enemies Battle of Agincourt
10000. and took pri^oners nie as many* This was called ye battle of Agincourt

Anno. 3.
M

S
William Cambridge. Allein Euerard


This year the* Emperor Sigi^mond came into England, to entreat a means of
peace between the kings of England and France: but all was in vain, for in
the end no peace could be con*cluded, and king Henry went again into France.

Anno. 4.
M

S
Robert Wodington John Couentre


This year in France king Henry obtained many victories, and got all the
towns and holds in Normandy, saving Rohan, which he strongly besieged.

This year on Ester day, was a great A fraye in saint Dunstons Church
fraye in saint Dustons Church in the East part of London: the beginners
thereof was the lord Strange, and sir John Trussel knight, through the quarrel
of their two wives: through the which fraye many people were sore wounded and
hurt, and one Thomas Petwarden Fishmonger slain out of ^^^^de, wherefore both
the fraiers were brought to the counter in the Pultrey, and the lord Strange
for beginning the said fray, was the next sunday accursed at Paul's cross.

Anno. 5.
M
Richard Marlowe Iremonger
S
John Gedney.


This year sir John Oldcastell was Execution.
sent unto London by the lord Powes out of Wales, the which sir John for
he^esye and treason was conuicte, and for the same was drawn to saint Giles
field, where he was hanged on a new pair of Gallows with cheynes, and after
consumed with fire.

About this time the person of Wrotham The person of Wrotha^ with his concubine
in Norfolk, which had haunted new Market heath, and there robbed and
spoiled many of the kings subjects, was with his concubine brought up to
Newgate where he lastly died

Anno. 6.
M

S
Rafe Barton Io* Parnesse


King Henry conquered Roan, subdued al Normandy, and was proclaimed Regent of
France for term of the life of Charles being then king. And after his
decease ye croun of France with all rightes belonging to the same: to him and
his heirs. For confyrmation whereof he took to wife Catherin^ the daughter of
Charles.

Anno. 7.
M

S
R. Whitttngham John Butler


This year king Henry returned into England and so to London, and at
Westminster Katherin his wife was crowned the xxiiii. day of February.

Anno. 8.
M

S
John Butler John Wells


The duke of Clarence king Henry's brother was ouerset by the Dolphin of
France, and slain, to the kings great displeasure.

King Henry went again into France and made war upon the Dolphin.

Anno. 9.
M
Robert Chichely Grocer
S
Will. Weston


The beginning of this year. Q. Catherin was delivered at Windsor of a yo^g
prince, whose name was Henry, and the tenth day of August was the new wether
cock set on Paul's steple.

And this year the Queen returned into France to King Henry, where was a
ioiful meting, but ^f^er followed sorrow: for shortly after the king being at
Bois in Vincente, he wexed sick and Shene and Sion builded.
died, the last day of August, in the year of our lord.1422. when he had
reigned nine years five months and ten days, he builded the Shene and Sion,
and lies buried at Westminster.

King Henry the syxt
Anno Regni. 1.
lord.1422. he was deposed the fourth day of March in the year, 1460. So he
reigned.xxxviii. years, six months and four days, continuing the time of
his youth, he was committed to the governance of Duke Humfraye of Gloucester
his uncle: when he came to ^ans state, he was of wit, and nature, simple,
gentle, and meke, and loved better peace then war, quietness of mind then
business of the world: honesty then profit, rest and ease, then trouble and
care: all trouble, vexation, unquietness, and injuries, that ever happened to
him, (which were many and great) he suffered so patiently that he reputed them
to be worthily sent to him of God for his offenses. He favored good letters
excellently well: in token whereof he erected Kings college at Cambridge and the
college at Ea^on b^ilded
two famous Colleges, the one at Ca^bridge, called the kings college, the
other at Eaton: by means whereof good learning greatly increased.

In the beginning of his reign, died king Charles of France, by reason
whereof, the kingdom of France should come unto king Henry, and the nobles of
France (except a few that held with the Dolphin) delivered the possession
thereof unto the duke* of Bedford Regent of France, to the use of king Henry.

Anno. 1.
M
William Walderne. Mercer
S
R. Tattersale


A subsedie was granted for three years, five nobles of every sack of wol that
should pass out of the land.

A priest was burned for heresy, called Execution
William Tailor.

This year the west gate of London, Newgate builded.
now cal^ed newegate, was newly builded by the executors of Richard Whittington
late Mayor of London.

Anno. 2.
M
William Crowmer Draper
S
Thomas Wadforde


This year the duke of Bedford wan from the Dolphin of France, many strong
holds and towns, and nere to a town called Vernell, he discomfited the
Dolphins whole power, for in that fight were slain.iii. earls and many other
noble men, and.5000. common soldiers.

Sir Roger Mortimer, for treason Execution
was condemned by act of parliament, and hanged and quartered.

This year James king of Scotts, was delivered who had remained prisoner in
England.xviii. years, and he married the lady Jane daughter to the earl of
Somerset, cosyn to king Henry.

Anno. 3.
M

S
Simon Seman Io. Bywater


This year the king of Portingale came into England, and was honorably
received. The first custom.


This year by the parlia^^^^t holden at Westminster, was granted to the king
for three years* to help him in his wars, a subsedy of.xii. d. in the pound
of all marchandizes brought in, or carried out of this realm, and.iii. s. of
every tonne of wine, the which was then called tonnage and pondage, but since
^t has been renewed at sundry parliamentes, and now is called custom.
Furthermore, it was enacted that all merchant strangers should be lodged
within an english host, within.xv. dais of their coming to their port sale,
and to make no sale of any marcha^dise or they were so lodged: and then
within.lx. days following, to make sale of all that they brought, and if any
remained unsold at the said.lx. dayed end, that then all such merchandise so
unsold, to be ^orfeyte to the king.

Anno. 4.
M
Io. Couentre Mercer*
S
John Brokel


Grudge and variance between the Parliament at Leicester
duke of Gloucester protector of England and his half brother the bishop of
Winchester, which was appeased by the regent of France, and debated by a
parliament at Leicester.

Anno. 5.
M
John Raynewell Fishmonger
S
Io. He^ghtham.


This John Raynewel Mayor of London Three wards in London discharged of
Fy^tenes.
before named, gave certain lands or tenem^tes to the city of London, for the
which the same city is bound to pay for ever, all such fyftenes as shall be
granted to the king (so that it pass not three fyftenes in one year) for
three wards of the same, that is to say, Dougate ward, Bellynsgate ward, and
Algate ward.

Anno. 6.
M
John Gidney Draper
S
Rob. Otley


This year a woman dwelling in wh^t Chapel parish without Algate of London,
was in the night murdered by a Britayne or Frenchman, whom she had cherished and
brought up of alms Who conueying such jewels and stuff as he might carry, was
taken in Essex, and brought up to London: but as sone Murder quite with murder.
as he came in the parish where he had committed the murder, the wives cast
upon him so much fylthe and ordure of the street, that notwithstanding the
resistaunce made by the Constables, they slew him out of hand.

Anno. 7.
M

S
T. Dushous John Abbot


This year y^ duke of Norfolk, was like to have byne drowned, passing through
London bridge, his barge being set upon the piles whelmed over, so that he and
very few escaped, being draw up with ropes, the rest were al drowned.

Anno. 8.
M

S
William Russe Rafe Hollande


This year was King Henry crowned at Westminster.

Anno. 9.
M

S
Walter Chertsey Robert Large


This year at Abington, began an insurrection Commoted at Abington.
of certain light persons, that intended to have wrought much mischief, but
they were quieted by the lord protector, and the chief author being vaily of
the town, named Welliam M^undeuil, a weauer, otherwise naming him self Jack
sharp of wigmores Land in Wales, with other were put to death.

This year was one Richard Russel Execution at Tyborn.
a wolman, drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne for treason.

Anno. 10.
M
Ioh. Wells grocer
S
Step. Grown


This John Wels of his goods caused The Standard in cheap builded.
the condite named the Standard in cheap, to be builded in Anno. 1442. This
year king Henry was crowned at Paris.

Anno. 11.
M
Io Parneis Fishmo^ger
S
John Olney Io. Padde^^ey


This year was seen in the southwest, a A comete
sterre called a Comete or blasing sterr.

Anno. 12.
M
John Brokley Draper
S
John King


The earl of Huntington, was sent with a company of souldioures into France,
where he atchiued many great feats of Arms.

Anno. 13.
M

S
Th. Barnwell Simgnd Air


This year was a great frost, that such A great frost
marchandi^e as came to the Thames mouth, was carried to London by land. This
frost endured from the.xxv. day of November unto the.x. day of February, which
was.x. wekes.

Anno. 14.
M

S
Th. Catworth To. Clopton


Charles of France recovered the city of Paris, and wanne by force the town of
Harflew, and of saint Denis expelling and murdring the Englishmen in great
number.

Anno. 15.
M

S
Th. Worsted William Gregory


This year on the third day of January, dyed Queen Catherine mother to king
Henry the syxt, and wife to Henry the fyfth, and lies buried at Westminster.

This year on the fourtene day of January A part of London bridge fell down.
the gate of London bridge with the tower upon it next to Southwark fell down,
and ii. of the furdest arches of the said bridge: but as god would no man
therewith perished.

This year all the lions in the tower of London dyed, which had been there a
long time*

Anno. 16.
M
William Eastfield Mercer
S
William Hallio


The king caused a great obite to be kept in Pouls church, for Sigismund the
Emperor, who was knight of the Garter.

Anno. 17.
M
Stephen Brown Grocer
S
Nicholas Yoo


This year on new years day, a stacke Three men slain
of wodde fell down at Baynardes castle, and flew three men, and hurt mainy
other.

There was so great a dearth in England, Great dearth.
that the poor people made them bread of fetches, peason, and fern roots.

This year by the fall of a stayre at Xviii. persons murdered.
Bedford.xviii. persons were slain.

In this year the Cundite in Fletestrete was begone by sir William E^^field The
condit in Fletstret builded
late Mayor of London, and finished of his own cost, without any one penny
charge to the city.

This year dyed Robert Chicheley An obite for master Robert Chicheley.
grocer, and twice mayor of London, who willed in his testament, that upon his
mind day, a good compete^t diner should be ordained for.2400. poor men, house
holders of the City, if they might he found, and.xx.li. in money distributed
amongst them, which was to every man.ii. d.

Anno. 18.
M

S
Robert Marshall Philip Malpas


A priest was burned at the Tower hill on the.xvii. day of June, which of
Execution at Tower hill.
the common people was counted an holy man, for yt he said, the postern should
sink, and such like things: they made their prayer to him, and arrered a great
heap of stones, and pight there a Cross by night, until a commandment was
given by the king to the contrary.

The posterne of East Smithfielde against the tower of London sanke by The
postern sanke
night.vii. foot into the earth, the.xvii^ of July.

Anno. 19.
M
John Paddisley goldsmith
S
John Sutton


Elianor Cobham wife to Humfrey duke of Giocester, Roger Bolinbroke aconning
negromancer, and Margery Iourdemain commonly called the witch of Eye were
accused, that by sorcery and enchantmentes, they practiced the kin*ges death,
as by an image of wax, whi the through their diuilish incantations should
little and little wast and consume, and so like wise the king to wear out of his
life. Wherefore being examined and convict, Elianor Cobham was judged to do
penance, as to bear a taper.iii. days, through the chiefest streets of the
City of London, and so to be exiled to the Isle of Man, Roger Bolinbroke was
diawen hanged and quartered at Execution
Tiborn, and Margery Iourdmayn the witch was burnt in Smithfield.

Anno. 20.
M
To. Clopton Drauer
S
Will. Combis


This year was a fray in Fletestrete A great fray in Fletstret
between the Innes of Court, and the inhabitants of the same street: which
fray began in the night, and continued till the next day where were many men
slain and hurt on both parties.

Anno. 21.
M

S
Tho. Bewmount Ri. Nordon


The steple of Paul's church in London Paul's steple a fire.
was set on fire with lightning, and lastly quenched by great diligence of
many men: but chiefly through the labor of a priest of Bow in cheap.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Nicolas Wilford John Norman


An act was made by the Common counsel of London, that upon the sunday should
no manner of thing within the francheses of the City be boughte of sold.

Anno. 23.
M

S
Stephen Foster Hugh Wyche


King Henry took to wife Margaret, the Kings daughter of Sicile.

Henry Chicheley bishop of Cantorbury Alsoules college and Bernarde college
b^^lded.
died, who in his life time builded two houses for students in the university
of Oxenford, called Alsoules college, and Bernard college.

Anno. 24.
M
Symond Air dra.
S
Godf. Filding


This Simond Air builded the Leaden Leaden hal builded.
hal in London, and also a beautiful chapel in the east end of the same.

Anno. 25.
M
John Only mercer
S
Godf. Boloyne


Humfrey duke of Gloucester, and Humfraye duke of gloucester arested.
protector of England was at the parliament of Bury, arrested, and.vi. days
after he was found dead in his bed. He was buried at saint albones.

William Wams. etc bishop of Winchester Mary Magdalen college builded.
and Chancelour of England erected the famous college of Mary Magdalen in
Oxenford.

Anno. 26.
M
John Gidney draper
S
Tho. Scotte


This year was taken the town of Fogers from the Englishmen, which was the
cause that Normandy was lost afterward.

Anno. 27.
M
Stephen Brown gro
S
Roan yielded
Wi. Marlow


This year Roan was yielded to the French king.

Anno. 28.
M
Tho. Chalton mercer
S
Th. Caninges


The Marquis of Suffolk was banished the land for.v. years who failing toward
France, was met on the sea by A murder
a ship of war, and there presently beheaded, by the capitayn called Nicholas
of the tower, and the dead corpse cast up at Dover upon the sands.

The commons of Kent in great number* A commotion in Ke^t by Jack Cade
assembled on black Heath, having to their captain Jack Cade, naming him
self Mortimer. Against whom the king sent a great army, but by the said
rebels they were discomfited, and sir Humfrey Stafford and William his
brother with many other slain: After this victory the captain and rebels
came to London and cut the ropes of the draw bridge, and entered the city, and
stroke his sword on London stone, saying: Now is Mortimer lord of this city.
Upon the third day of July, he caused the Lord Say to be brought to the Guilde
hall of London there to be arraigned: Which before the kings Justices,
desired to be tried by his peers, but the capitain perceiving his delay: by
force took him from the officers, and at the standard in Cheap smote of his
head. He also beheaded sir James Cromer at the miles end: And pytching these
two heads on two polle^ entered the City: and in despite caused them (being
borne before him (in every street to kiss together. After this murder,
succeeded open robbery within the city: But the Mayor and other sage
Maiestrates, perceauinge them selves, another to be sure of goods nor life,
determined to repulse this ungracious company, and sent to the Lord Scales,
keeper of the tower, who promised his aid, with shoting of ordinance: and
Matthew Gough was appointed to assist the Mayor: so the capitaines of the City
took upon them in the night to keep the bridge, prohibyting the Kentish-men
to pass. The rebels hearing the bridge to be kept, ran with great force to
open that passage: where between both parts was a fierce encounter. The
rebels drove the Citezens from the stoulpes at the Bridge foot, to the draw
bridge, and set fire on diverse houses: In conclusion, the rebels gat the draw
bridge, and drowned and flewe many. This conflict endured till.ix. of the clock
in the morning, in doubtful chance: so that both parts agreed to desiste
from fight till the next day, upon condition that neither Londoners should
pass into Southwarke, nor the Kentishmen into London. Then the archbishop of
Cantorburye being Chancellor with the bishop of Winchester, passed into
Southwarke, where they shelved a general pardon for all oftenders, under the
kings great seal, which they caused to be proclaimed, whereupon the whole
multitude retired home: but through a proclamation being made, that who so
could apprehend the said Jack Cade, should have a thousand marks, one
Alexander Iden found him in a gardeyn, who in his defense slew the said Jack
Cade and brought his body to London, where his head was set on London bridge.

The Bishop of Salisbury was murdered The bishop of Salisbury murdered
by the commons of the west country.

Anno. 29.
M

S
John. Middleton. William Dear


The whole duchy of Normandy was yielded to the french king by means of the
Queen, and the duke of Somerset: which caused so much trouble in England,
that mortal war ensued.

Anno. 30.
M
William Gregory Skinner

Matthew Philip Christopher warton


A commotion began this year by the The Duke of York began a commotion.
duke of York, and other noble men, which was appeased for a time, and the
malice dissembled.

Anno. 31.
M
Gddfrey Feldyng Mercer

Richard Lee Richard Alley


This year the Queen was delivered of a Prince, who was called Edward.

Anno. 32.
M
John Norman Draper

John Walderne Thomas Coke


Before this Majors year, the mayor The maio^ of London first rowe^ to
westminster.
sheriffs, and commons were wont to ride to westminster, when the Mayor should
take his charge: but this mayor was rowed thither by water: For the which, the
watermen made of him a song, beginning, Row the boat Norman. etc.

The fire of envy that a good space had covertly smouldered between the Duke
of York, and the duke of Somerset, with other of the queen's counsel, at this
time brake out in hot and fierce flames of wars. In so much^ that between
the King, who defended these persons, and the Duke of York, with his alies, at
saint Albons a cruel Battle at S. Albons
battle was fought: In the end whereof the victory fell to the duke of
york. And on the kings party was stayne the Duke of Somerset, the earl of
Northumberland, the Lord Clyfford, with many other honorable men, knights and
Squyers. After which time, the Duke with great reverence brought the King
from Saint Albons to London. Where by a Parliament, he was made protector of
the realm: the Earl of Salisbury Chauncellor, and the earl of Warwike Captain
of Calaice.

Anno. 33.
M

S
John Field William Tailor.


This year in London was a great Fraye in London by sainctuarye men.
fray at saint Martins le grand, by saintuary men, who issued forth and hurt
diverse citisens: but it was appeased* by the Mayor and other. There was such
greuons complaints made thereof to the king by the Deane of Saint Martins,
that the liberties of the city werin peril to be seized.

Anno. 34.
M
William Marrow Grocer

John Young Thomas Oulgraue


By means of the Quen^ and other lords, the duke of York was discharged of
his protectorship: which thing was cause of new grudge and malice.

A great riot committed in London against A ryote against the Lombard^
the Lombardes and Italians, because a mercers servant was cast in prison for
strikyng an Italian.

Anno. 35.
M
Thomas Canyngs Grocer

John Steward Rafe Derney


At Erith within.xii. miles of London Great fysshes taken
were taken.iiij. wonderful fishes: where of one was called Mors Marina, the
second a sword fish, the other two were whales.

A Fleet of Frenchemen landed at Sa^dwich spoiled.
Sandwiche, and spoiled the town with great cruelty.

Anno. 36.
M
Godfrey Boleyne Mercer

Wylliam Edward Tho. Rayner


A sained agreement was made between the King, the Queen, and the Duke of York
with his retinue^ for joy whereof a general procession was celebrate in A
general procession.
saint Poules at London. At which solemn feast, the king in habit royal, and
his diadem on his head, kept his state in procession: before whom went hand in
hand, the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Salisbury, the duke of Excester, and
the earl of Warwike: and so one of the one faction, an other of the other sect.
And behind the king, the duke of York led the Queen* with great familiarity
to all men's syghtes. But woe worth dissimulation: for their bodies were joined
by hand in hand, whose hearts were far in sunder, as appeared shortly after.

Anno. 37.
M

S
Rafe Iossolyn Richard Medtham


The noble Science of printing was found in Germany ac Magunce byone The
science ^f printing ^^stinuen^d.
John Cuthenbergus, a knight: he found moreover the Ink by his device, that
printers used xvi. year after printing was found, which was the year of our
Lord. 1458. one Conradus an Almain brought it into Rome: and Nicolas John son a
french man did greatly polishe and garnysh it. And now it is dispersed thorough
the whole world, as says Poli^ore Dirgile. William Caxton mercer o^ London
first brought it into England: about the year of our Lord. 1471. and first
practiced the same in the abbeye of saint Peter at Westminster.

The duke of York, the Earls of Salifburye and Warwike, with a great
Bloreheat field.
host met the king and other lords of England upon Blore heath nere to
London: where because Andrew Trollop a captain of Calaice, the night before the
battle should have been, fled with a company of the best soldiers to the
Kings part. The Duke of York, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwike,
mystrustyng them selves to be to weak, departed with a priuye company, and
fled: The Duke into Ireland, the.iij. earls into Gerneseye, and after to
Calays without any notable battle.

Anno ^38.
M
William Hulyn fishemonger

John Plummer Ioh. Stocker


The.iii. earls coming from Calice with a puisant army, the.ix. day of July
met king Henry at Northampton, and gave Battle at Northampton.
him strong battle. In the end whereof, the victory fell to the Earls, and
the kings host was dispersed, chased, and many slain: among which was the
Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Shrewesbury, the lord Egremount, with other,
and the king taken in the field.

The duke of york returnyng into The Duke of York made claim ^o ye crown
England, made such claim to the crown, that by consent of a parliament he
was proclaimed heir apparent, and all his progeny after him.

The queen in this mean time, had gathered a company of Northern men: and nere
to a town in the North, called Battle at Wakefield.
Wakefield, in a cruel fight disco^s^ted and slew the Duke of York, with his
son the earl of Rutland, the earl of Salisbury, was taken prisoner with diverse
other noble men.

Anno. 39.
M

S
Rich. Flemyng John Lamberde


The Queen with her retinue near Second ba^^ayle at* S. ^lbons.
saynet Albons, discomfited the* earl of Warwi^e and the Duke of Norfolk and
delivered king Henry her husband.

Edward, Earl of March, and eldeste son to the Duke of York: came up to
London with mighty power of Marchemen, accompanied with the Earl of Warwike,
and by agreement of a council was proclaimed king of England, and called
Edward the fourth: Shortly after, he pursued king Henry toward York,
Battle a Sherborn
where he gave a sore battle to the king and his company. This fight was so
cruelle and fierce, that in the fight and chase were slain.xxx. thousand of
the commons beside men of name: the which were the Earls of
Northumberlande, and Westmerland, King Henry rain t^flie the ^a^^
the lord Clyfford, Andrewe T^^llep, and other, to the number of eleven. And
king Henry lost all, and was feign to flee the land, when* he had reigned
eight and thyrty years.vi. months and four days. And Queen Margarete with
the young prince, fled to her father, the duke of Angeowe.

King Edward the fourth.
Anno Regni.i.
FOward the fourth, began his dominion over this Realm of England, the
fourth day of March, in the of our Lord. 1460. and left* the same the ix.
day of Aprile, in the year 1483. so he reigned.xxi^. years, one month and five
days. He was a man of noble courage and great wit: but in his time was much
trouble* and unquietness in the Realm.

Anno. 1.
M

S
John Look George Irelande


This year the Staplers of Caleis demanded of king Edward.xviii. thousand
pounds, which they had lent him to mainteyne his wars against king Henry:
but their suit was finally regarded, and lastly denied.

Anno. 2.
M

S
William Hampton Barth^ James


Margarete the Queen, and wife to Henry the sixth, la^ded in England, but having
small succor and evil fortune: was sayn to take the seas again, and by tempeste
of weather, was driven into Scotland.

Anno. 3.
M
Mathewe Philyppe goldsmyth
S
Robert Basset


The lord Mountague, having the Battle* at Exham.
rule of the North, disco^s^ted king Henry, coming out of Scotland with a
great power, to recover ye crown: this is called the battle of Exham, in
which were taken the Duke of Somerset the lord Hungerford, the lord Roas,
which were after put to death with many other.

King Edward was secretly married to Elisabeth Gray, late wife of six John
Gray. For which marriage rose great variance between the king and the earl of
Warwick, his chief friend and mainteyner.

This year was king Henry taken in King Henry taken prisoner.
a wodde in the north country, by one named Cantlowe, and arested by the earl
of Warwike, and presented to the king Edward, and sent to the tower, where he
remained long after in the Dungeon.

Anno. 4.
M
Rafe Iosselyn draper
S
John Stone


This year the king ordained a new New coin
coin, as the ryall, the angel, the half angel, and the farthyng: ryals
were x. ^. y^ angel.vi. ^.viii. d. And the grotes were made of less value then
they were by viii d. in an ounce. The silver that before was at.ii. ^.viii. d.
the ounce, was now inhanced to.iii. ^.iiii* d the ounce, and fine gold that
before was.xxx. ^. the ounce, was now inhanced to.xl. ^. the ounce.

And this year was queen Elizabeth crowned at Westminster on whitson^ay, or
the.xxvi. day of May.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Sir Hen. weuer William Constantine


This year the.xi. day of Februarye, the queen was delivered of a daughte^r who
was named Elizabeth.

Anno. 6.
M

S
John Brown Henry Brice


John Darby Alderman, for that he refused to pay for the carriage away of a
dead dog lying at his gate, and for unmeet language, which he gave unto the
Mayor, was by a court of Aldermen assessed with the fine of five pound which
he paid every penny.

Anno. 7.
M
Thomas Owlegraue Skynne^
S
T. Stalbrok


Sir Thomas Cook alderman of London, was accused of treason, and arraigned of
the same, and found not gyltie: but yet by reason of the Lord Treasorer, who
was not his friend, he was deteyned in prison, and could not be delivered,
until he had fined* with the king for. 8000. pounds, which he paid.

A great iustes was in Smythfielde, between the lord Scales, and the bastard
of Burgoyn.

Anno. 8.
M
William Tailor Grocer
S
Willyam Hariot


This William Tailor Mayor of London Charitable deeds of William Tailor.
before named, gave to the City of London certain tenementes, for the which
the city is bound to pay for ever, at every fiftene to be granted to the
king, for all such people as shall dwell in Cordwainer street ward, that shall be
sessed at.xii. d. the piece, or under Which charitable work ought not to be
forgotten, but remayn in remembrance to the exaumple of them, who are able to
do the like.

The grudge which the earl of Warwike had conceived against king Edward for
the forsaid marriage, declared it self openly* so that he adjoined him with the
duke of Clarence the kings brother, and by their means stirred so the
Northern men, that they diverse times rebelled, and turned the king and the
realm to much trouble. But shortly the king demeaned himself, that the
Battle at Badbery.
rebels were suppressed. Wherefore the earl of Warwike perceiuyng his part to
be weakened, fled with the duke of Clarence, and other into France.

Anno. 9.
M

S
Rich. gardener Robert Drope


The Duke of Clarence, the Earls of Warwike, Pembroke, and Oxenforde, landed at
Darthmouthe, to whom by means of* proclamations, that were publyshed in the
name of king Henry, the commons gathered in so great companies, that Edward
fearing his part, ^. Ed. fled into Flanders.
fled into Flanders to the Duke of Burgoyn. Then was Henry the sixth set at
liberty, and again proclaimed king by means of the earl of Warw^ke and
other* and Edward proclaimed vsurpe^ of the Crown: but that continued not
long.

The earl of Worcester was beheaded at the tower hill. Execution*


Anno. 10.
M
Io. Stokton mercer
S
John Ward


Queen Elisabeth wife to Edward the fourth, being in the sanctuarye of
Westminster, was delivered of a price, who afterward was Edward ye fifthe.

King Edward being returned out of Flaunders, arrived in the north part of
England, with a very small company of soldiers: but by means that he used, and
through his brother the duke of Clarence, who turned now to his part, he came
so puisant to London that he entered the city, and took king Henry Ba^nettte
field on Ester day.
in the bishops palaice, and then went against the earl of Warwike, whom he
vanquished and slew with his brother Marquis Mountague, on Glademore heath nere
Barnet, ten miles from London. Shortly after, at Teukesbury, he Battle at
T^uksbury*
overthrew Queen Margaret, the wife of Henry. In which battle was taken the
said Margaret, with Edward the Prince her son, the duke of Somer set, and
diverse other. King Edward again received his royalty, and was taken for king,
and discourteously slew prince Edward son of Henry y^.vi. after he had taken
him prisoner.

A commotion stirred by the bastard The suburbs without Algate and Bishops
gate burnt. Murder.
Faw combridge, and the commons of Kent and Essex, who robb^d and speiled the
suburbs of the city of London and fyred Bishops gate and Algate.

Henry the sixth was murdered in the tower of London, and buried at Ch^rtsey,
and after removed to wyndsor.

Anno. 11.
M

S
John Alleyn John Chelley


The earl of Oxenford was sent prisoner to Guynes, where he remained prisoner,
so long as Edward the fourth reigned, which was twelve years in all which
time the lady his wife, might never come to him, nor had any thing to live
upon, but what people of their charities would give her, or what she got by her
nedle.

Anno. 12.
M

S
John Brown Tho. Bledlowe


This Mayor was a good iusticer, he punished in his year many ^audes and
strompettes, and caused them to ride with ^aye hoodes, and made a pay^e of
stocks to be set in every ward of the city.


M
John Tate mercer
S
William Stocker Rob. Bellisd^^


In this year the erie of Ercester was found dead in the sea, between Dover and
C^^^^ys.

One John Gose, was burned at the Execution at toure hill
tower hill for heresy.

Anno. 14.
M
To. Drope draper

Edmu^d Show Thomas Hill


This Robert Drope mayor of London The cu^dite in Cornhil enlarged.
before named, builded the east end of the Cundyte in Cornehyll.

King Edward required of his subjects a benevolence, which they gave him, and
so he sailed into France with a great army, to aid the Duke of Burgoyn: but by
suit of the French king, a peace was concluded for.vii. years.

Anno. 15.
M
Robert Basset Salter

Hugh Prince To. Colwich


This mayor did sharp correction upon Bakers, for making of light bread, ill so
much that he set diverse of them on the pillory, whose names I pass over.
Agnes Deintie set on the pillorie.
And a woman named Agnes Deintie, was also there punished for sellyng of false
mynged butter.

Anno. 16.
M

S
Richard Rauson William Horn


This year by the diligence of this Part of London wall new buylt.
Mayor, the new wall of London, from Creplegate to bishops gate, was made as it
now is, the Mayor with his company of the Drapers, made all that part betwixt
All halowes church in ye same wall and Bishops gate, of their own proper
costs: and the other companies made the other dele, which was a great work to
be done in one year, considering the purueyance of the stuff.

Anno. 17.
M

S
Henry Colet John Stocker


This year the Duke of Clarence second brother to the king, being prisoner in
the ^ower, was secretly put to death, and drowned in a barell of malnesey,
within the said tower.

Anno. 18.
M
Richard gardener Mercer

Roberte Herdyng Robert Byfelde


This year was a great dearth, and Great pestilence.
also a great death at London, and in diverse* other parts of this realm.

Anno. 19.
M
Bartholo. James Draper

Thomas Jlam John Ward


This year at Tower hill were four Execution
felons hanged and burned for robbing of a church.

Anno. 20.
M
John Brown Mercer

William Daniell William Bacon


This year the king required great sonnnes of money to be lent him of the
citisens of London, who after diverse assemblies granted to lend him 5000
mark, which was repayde again in the next year following.

Anno. 21.
M
William Hariate Draper

Robert Tate Will. Wikyng Rich. Chawry


This year the Scots began to stir, against whom king Edward sent the Duke
of Gloucester, and diverse other, which returned again without any notable
battle.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Will. White John Mathewe


King Edward making great provision for war into France, ended his life
the.ix. of April, in the year of our Lord. 1483. when he had reigned xxii.
years. ^. month and.v. days. He was buried at Wyndsor, leauyng after him two
sons, Edward the prince, and Richard Duke of York, with.v. daughters, as
Elizabeth y^ after was queen, Cicelie, Anne, Ratherin, and Bridget.

King Edward the fyfth.
Anno Regni.i.
Gloucester, the same year the.xxii. day of June, so he reigned.ii. months and
xi. days. This Edward was never crowned, but cruelly murdered by Richard duke
of Gloucester his unnatural uncle; who after usurped ye crown and was called
Richard the third.

King Richard the third.
Anno regni. 1.
Queen Elizabeth took sainctuarye at westminst*
with rich gifts: then by his untruth and falsehoode, he wrested from the
queen Elizabeth (being then in saintuarie) Richard her younger son, and
brother to the Prince: Thirdly he caused to be published at Poules Cross, by
one doctor Shawe that Edward the fourth, his elder brother was not rightly
begotten of his mother, but by aduoutrie: and therefore that neither he, nor his
children had right to the crown: or as some write, he caused to be
published, that the prince and his brother were not rightefully begotten of
Queen Elizabeth: and therefore the right of the crown to be his, which he took
upon him, and shortly thervppon shamefully murdered the two young Murder.
children in the tower of London, and usurped the crown two years and two
months.

Anno Regni. 1.
M

S
Tho. Norla^d William Martyn


Grudge began between King Richard the third, and his nere friend the duke
of Buckyngham: in so much that for displeasure thereof, the Duke co^spired with
diverse other noble men against him, and intended to bring into the land Henry
earl of Richmond, as rightful heir to the crown. This Henry had fled into
Britayne, fearyng the cruelty of Edward the fourth: for which conspiracy,
the said Duke of Buckyngham with diverse other, was short ly after taken and put
to death.

Anno. 2.
M
Thomas Hill Grocer
S
Tho. Britayne Rafe Astrie


The noble prince Henry earl of Richmount, with a small company of frenchemen,
landed at Mylford haue^, nigh Pembroke, whose coming when it was heard of in
Wales, diverse noble men with their retinue, forsakyng Richard, gathered to him
in great number: so that his strength in short space greatly increased. At a
vyllage nere to Leicester, called Bosworthe, he met with his enemies: where
between them K. Richar^ slain in ye field.
was foughten a sharp battle: In conclusion, king Richard with diverse other,
was slain, and Henry obtained a noble victory: After which conqueste, he was
immediately crowned king of England in the field: and the dead corpse of king
Richard was brought to Leicester, and there buried at the Stay friars church.

King Henry the seventh.
Anno Regni.i.
HEnry the seuenthe began his reign over this Realm of England the xxii. day
of August, in the year of our Lord. 1485. and deceased in the year. 1509 the
xxii. day of Apryll: So he reigned xxiii. years, and.viii. months: he was a
prince of marvelous wisdom and policy, and of great justice, tempera^ce and
gravity. He so behaved him in the time of his reign, that notwithstanding
many and great occasions of trouble unquietness and war, he kept his realm
in right good rule and order. Wherefore he was greatly esteemed and reverenced of
foreyn princes.

This year master Thomas Ilam, Alderman of London, and merchant of the
Staple, new made the great Cunduite in Cheap of his own goods.

This year was the sweating sycknes, of the which a wonderful multitude
dyed: And in London besides other, there dyed Thomas Hill Mayor, on the.xxvii.
day of September, in whose place was chosen sir Wyllyam Stocker Draper, who
received his oath at the utter gate of the tower of London: but he likewise
deceased about seven days after, in the which seven days, departed other
four Aldermenne, as Thomas Ilam, Richard Rawson, Thomas Norlande, and John
Stocker, brother to Sir Wyllyam Stocker. And then was chosen for Mayor, John
Ward Grocer, who continued that office the full of Thomas Hills year, that
is to say, tylle the feast of Simon and Jude.

Anno. 1.
M
Hugh Brice goldsmith
S
John Swan


The.xxx. day of O^^ober, the king was solempnely crowned at Westmynster.

The King ordained a number of First ye^^men of the guard.
chosen Archers, and other strong and hardy persons, to give daily attendance
on his person, whom he named ^^omen of his guard.

The King sent the Lord Treasourer with master Braye and other, unto the
Lord Mayor of London, requirynge him and his Citizens of a pressed o^.vi. M.
mark: wherefore the Mayor with his brethern and common counsel of the City,
assembled them selves, and by their authority was granted a pressed of.MM.
pounds, the which was levied of the f^llow ships, and not of the wards:
for the more ease of the poor people.

This year the beautiful Cross in ^he cross Cheap ylded.
Cheap was new builded and made. Toward the buyldyng whereof, Thomas Fysher
mercer, gave.vi C. marks

This year wheat was at iii. ^. the bushel, bay salt at.ii. ^.viii. d. and
iii. ^. the bushel.

Anno. 2.
M

S
John Perciual Hughe Clopton


This year ye king married Elisabeth Henry ^aried (...) Elisa^^th.
eldest daughter of Edward the fourth: by which means the two families of
York and Lancaster, the which had long caused Diuysyon, was knyt together
in one.

About this time Francis Louel, and Humfreye Stafforde rebelled in the north:
with them was Martin Swart which co^motion was quieted by y^ policy ^^ttayle at
^^oke.
of the Duke of Bedforde, but not without bloudshedde: For there was slain the
Earl of Lyncolne, the lord Louell, Martyn Swart, and other, above, iiii.
thousand.

This year was borne Prince Arthur, in the month of September.

Anno. 3.
M
William Horn Salter
S
John Fenkyll


This year was Queen Elisabeth crowned at Westmnster upon S. Katherins day. In
July was an other pressed for the king made in ye city of London of.iiii.
thousand pou^ds, which was sessed on^ y^ crafts or felowships: shortly after
was the third pressed of.ii. M.li. which was levied as the other, which were
both repayed again the next year following These sums of money with many
^o, which his grace borrowed of his lords, and other, was to aid the arch
duke of Burgoyn, against the duke of Britayne. In the end of this Majors year
was John Ashsleye, the son of sir John Ashley knight, with.ii. other drawn
from Westminster to the tower hill, and there beheaded.

Anno. 4.
M
Roberte Tate Mercer
S
Rafe Tinley


This year was a task of the tenthe penny of all men's goods and lands:
through which the co^mo^s of the north slew the Earl of Northumberlande,
wherefore John Chamber their captain with other was hanged at York.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Wylliam Capell John Brook


This year one Roger Sha^elocke Desperation.
a tailor dwelling within Ludgate, slew himself: For whose goods was much
busynes between the kings am ner and the sheriff.

Anno. 6.
M

S
Henry Coote To. Revel Hugh Pe^berto^


Sir Robert Chamberlayn beheaded Execution


This year the king required a benevolence, which was to him granted toward
his journey into France.

This year Creplegate of London Creplegate of London builded.
was new builded at the costs and charges of sir Edmund Shaw goldsmyth late
mayor of the same City.

In July was Henry the kings second son borne at Grenewiche. Condite in
Gracious street.


This year the beautiful cundite in Gracious street was begone to be builded.
The stone work whereof was finished in the year. 1494. But the first water ran
out thereof, on the.xix. day of March, in the year. 1503. the.xix. year of
Henry the.vii, and not before. Which Cundite was builded of the goods and by
the executours of sir Thomas Hill grocer: as it does appear by certain
verses, written on the same Cundite.

Thomas Hill knight, late Mayor of this City,
With his wife Dame Elisabeth, of their charity,
For the love of God, and weal of the co^monaltie
Of their costs only, this thing did edi^ye,
Out of the ground, with all things necessary.
In this Majors time wheat was at xx. d and.xxii. d. ye bushel which was then
accounted dear.

Anno. 7.
M
Hugh Clopton mercer

Tho. Wood Will. Brown


This year king Henry took his voyage into France with a great army to aid ye
Brito^s against the french king.

Anno. 8.
M
Will. Martin skinner

Will. Purchase Will. welbeck


This year was a peace concluded between the kings of England and France,
and king Henry returned again into England*

In the month of January, two pardoners were set on the pillory.iii. market
days, for forgyng of a false pardon wherewith they had deceued many people, and
for that one of them had fained himself to be a priest, he was sent to Newgate,
where he dyed, and the other was driven out of the city with shame enough. And
this year was a fray made upon the Easterlynges or A fraye against the
Stilliarde men.
Stilliard men, by Mercers servants and other: For the which diverse of them
were sore punished, and the chief aucthors were kept long in prison.

Anno. 9.
M

S
Rob. Fabian John Winger


This year wheat was sold for.vi. d Cheap wheat and salt.
the bushel, and bay salt at.iii. d. ob. the bushel: white herring at.ix. s^.
ye barell red herryng at.iii. s^. the cade of ye best, red sprots at.vi. d. a
cade. and gascoyn wine at.vi li. ye tonne.

Anno. 10.
M

S
Nico. Alwin John Warner


This year white herring was sold at.xl. d. a barell being good.

Perkyn Warbecke which by the Perkyn Warbecke
counsel of Margaret of Burgoyn namyng him self Rychard of York: King
Edwardes second son, arrived in Kente: where he was driven back by the
vplandyshe men, and other of the inhabitants of the countreye, with the loss
of diverse of his Great execution.
men: and shortly after were hanged an hundred and threscore persons of the
forenamed rebels, in diverse and sundry costs of England. The.v. capitains were
Mountford, Corbet, Whitbelt, Quintin, and Genyne.

Anno. 11.
M
Sir Henry Colet mercer

Thomas Kneisworth Henry Somer


The Scots brake into ye north parts of England by ye setting on of Perkin
Werbeck, and did much harm to ye borderers.

Anno. 12.
M
John Tate mercer

John Shawe Rich. Haddon


By means of a payment that was Black heath field
granted to the king by act of parliament) a new co^motion was made by the
commons of Cornwall: which under the leadyng of the lord Audeley, with Mighell
Joseph ye black smith, and diverse other came to Black heth where the king met
with them, and discomfited the rebels, and took their cap ^^ins, which were
shortly after, draw^ hanged, and quartered: The lord Audeley was beheaded at
the tower hill, the.xxviii. day of June.

King Henry sent an army into Scotland under the guiding of the Earl of
Surrey, and the Lord Neuell, which made sharp war upon the Scots.

A marriage concluded between prince Arthur, and lady Katherine the kings
daughter of Spain.

Perkin Werbeck la^ded again in Cornwall, Perkyn Warbecke besieged Excetour.
and assaulted the town of Excetou^ and other places: but finally he took the
saintuary of Beaudley, and was after pardoned his life.

Anno. 31.
M

S
Bartho. Read Thomas windought


Perkyn Warbecke endeavored to steal away secretly out of the la^d: but he was
taken again by his kepers, and by the kings commandment cast in the Tower of
London: where after he was showed at Westmynster, and in Chepe on scaffolds,
and stocked, to the great wonderment of many people.

This year the English merchants English merchants received with procession.
(being long absente out of Flaunders coming into Flaunders with marcha^dise,
were received into Andwarpe with general procession: so glad was the town of
their returnyng, which was by their abse^ce sore hindered and impouerished.

Anno. 14.
M
Sir John Perciuall ^ar. tailer
S
Stephen Ienyns


At saint Thomas Watryng a stryplyng Execution
was put to execution, which* called himself Edward Earl of Warwyke, and
son of George Duke of Clarence: which George sense the beginning of king
Henry's reign was kept secretly in the* tower of London. This year master John
Tate alderma^ S* Anthonies church in London buylt.
o^ London began to edify S. Anthonies church in London with a notable free
schole to the same adioinyng, and also one alms house for poor people.

The.x^i. day of July, being sunday, and the next sunday following xii.
persons bare fagottes at Paul's cross.

This year good Gascoyne wine was sold for.xi. ^. the Tonne: wheat for.iiii.
shyllynges the quarter, and baye salt for.iiii. d. a bushel, and better
cheap*

Anno. 15.
M

S
James Wylforde Rich. Brond


This year the.xvi. day of November Perkyn Werbecke and other executed.
was arraigned at Westmynster, Parkin Warbeck, and.iii. other, which Perkyn,
and one John a ^ater, were executed at Tyborne, the.xxiii. day of the same
month of November. And soon after, on the.xxviii. day of November was the
earl of Warwike put to* death at the tower hylle, and one Blewet and Atwod at
Tyborne.

This year was a great death in Great pestilence.
London: whereof (after* Fabyan), dyed xx.thousand, but after Hall his
chronicle.xxx. thousand.

In May the king and Queen sailed The king and quen sailed to Calice.
to Calaice: and at saint Peter's they met with the duke of Burgoin.

Anno. 16.

S
John Hawes Will. Stead


This year the king builded new his Richmo^d Bainards castle and Grenewiche
buy it.
manor at Shene, and changed ye name thereof, and named it Richmont: and he
builded new his place called Bainardes castle in London, and repaired his place
at Grenewiche, with much other building*

King Henry trouthplighted his daughter Margaret to James the king of Scots:
and the, 4. day of October landed at Plimmouth, Katheryn daughter of the king
of Spain.

M
Sir John Shawe goldsmith
S
Henry Head


This sir John Shaw mayor of London before named, caused the kitchens and other
houses of office to be builded at the Guilde hall of London, and sens that time
the Majors feasts has been there kept: where as before that time they were
kept either at the Grocers, or the merchant Taylers Hall.

Prince Arthur being but.xv. years Prince Arthur married.
old, was married unto Katherin, daughter to Ferdinando king of Spayn, the
xiiii. of Noue^ber, which Arthur shortafter departed this mortal life at Ludlow
and was buried at Worcester.

The diche of London from Thames to Holborne bridge was new cast: so that
boats with victuals and fuelle, and other stuff were brought up to Holborne
bridge.

Anno. 18.
M

S
Henry Keble Nicholas Nines


In this year began the new work The death of Queen Elizabethe
of the kings chapel at Westminster, and Elizabeth Queen of England died at
the Tower of London in childebed, and was buried at westminster, Shortly after
was ^ame Magarete the Kings The king of Scotts married.
daughter, married to the King of Scotts.

This year the fellowship of Taylers in London purchased a grant of the King
to be called Marchantes Tayloures.

Anno. 19.
M

S
Christo. Hawes Robert* Wattes Tho Granger


The.xxi. day of November, was a dreadful fire upon thee north end of Fire
on London bridge.
London bridge. And upon the vii. day of January were certain houses consumed
with fire against S. Botulphes church in Thames street: and the.xxvii. day of
March was an house burned against saint Martins le grand, and the same day was
hurt don with fire in the parish of saint Peter the poor.

This year was holden a parliament where was ordained a new coin of silver: A
new coin*
as groates, half groates, and shillings with half faces: and in the same
parliament was granted to the King the lean of.36000.li.

Anno. 20.
M
John Winger Grocer
S
Will. Brown


This year the liberties of the City of London were again confirmed.

Anno. 21.
M
Thomas. Kneisworthe Fishmonger
S
Rog. Grove


This Thomas Kneisworthe Mayor The condit at Bishops gate builded.
of London, of his own goods, builded the Condite at Bishops gate.
Moreover, he gave to the company of the Fishmongers, certain tenements, for
the which they be bound to find iiii. scholars that study art, two to be at
Oxenford, the other two at Cambridge every of them to have.iiii.li. the year
for their exhibition. They be bound also to give to xiii. aged pore people of
their company, to every of them enery weke viii. d* and to every of them at
Bartylmeutide a winter garment of frise, or such like for ever. And also to
give to the prisons of Newgate and Ludgate, every year.xl.s. whose notable
works by him don, are well worthy of remembrance, and to be followed of others.

This year Philip king of Castil and The king of Castile landed in England.
his wife, were wether driven into England, as they were passing toward Spain
who were honorably received by the Earl of Arundell at the kings appointment
with.iii. C. horses all by torchelight.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Will. Copinger Tho. Johnson Will. ^itz Will.


This year the king of his goodness Prisoners delivered
delivered out all prisoners in London which lay for.xl.s. and under.

Anno. 23.
M

S
William Butler John Ryrkeby


In the end of April dyed William Brown mayor, and for him was chosen
Laurence Ailemer draper, who served out that year.

This year sir William Capell was put in suite by the king for certain
things by him dove in the time of his Maioraltye.

Anno. 24.
M
Stephen Genings M.tailor
S
Richard Smith


This year was begone the goodlye The hospitail of the Sauoy builded
hospital of the Sauoy, nere unto Charing cross, which was a notable
foundation for the poor don by king Henry the seventh.

This year died this most noble and The new chapel at Westminsterbuilded
famous prince king Henry the seventh which was in ye year. 1509 the.xxii. day
of April, when he had re^gned.23. years and viii. months, and was buried at
Westminster in the new chapel, which he had caused to be builded: and left
behind him Henry prince of Wales, wht the after him succeeded, lady Margaret
queen of Scotts, and lady Mary promised to Charles king of Castile.

King Henry the eight.
Anno regni. I.
year of our Lord.1509. and deceased in the year.1546. the.xxviii. day of
January: so he reigned.37. years.ix. months and.vi, days.

Margaret mother to Henry the.vii S. John's college and Christ's college builded
builded.ii. colleges in Ca^bridge, the one called S. John's college, and the
other Christ's college: and William bishop of Lincoln builded Brasenos in
Oxenford.

King Henry married the Lady Katherin King Henrye married lady Katherin.
late wife to prince Arthur.

Richard bishop of winchester builded Corpus Christi College in Oxenforde.

Anno. 1.
M

S
George Monoxe John Doket


This year sir Richard Empson knight, and Edmond Dudley Esquier who had been
great counselours to the late king Henry the seventh, were beheaded at the
tower hill the.xvii. day of August.

This year master doctor Colet deane of Poules erected a free schole in Paul's
Paul's schole builded.
church yard in London, and committed the ouersighte. Hereof to the masters
and wardeins of the company of Mercers, because him self was borne in London,
and son of Henry Colet, who was a Mercer and mayor of London.

Anno. 2.
M
Henry Keibel mercer
S
John Rest


Henry, the first son of king Henry was borne on new years day: for joy whereof,
a great iustes was kept at Westminster: and on saint Mathewes day following the
child died.

Anno. 3.
M
Roger Achiley Draper
S
Th. Mirfin


Sir Edmond Haward and the lord Thomas Haward took Andrew Barton, and.150.
Scotts, with two great ships.

The.xv. day of January was holden a parliament, in the which two fiftens
and.ii. tenthes of the clergy were granted to aid the king in his wars, that
he intended against the French king.

Anno. 4.
M
William Copinger fishmo^ger
S
Rob Holdernes Rob. Fe^rother


This year was finished the beautiful steple with the lantern of Bow church
in Cheap.

The nauies of England and France Battle on the sea.
metynge at Britayne Baye, fought a cruel battle, in the which the regent of
England and a Caricke of France being crappled together, were burned and their
captains with their men all drowned, the english capitayn was sir Thomas
Kneuet, who had with him 700. men, in the french carricke was sir Piers Morgan
with.900* men.

Anno. 5.
M

S
John Dawes John Bridges Rog. Basforde


King Henry being confederate with the Emperor and the king of Spain, passed
with a great power into France where having in wages under his banner the
Emperor Maximilion, and all the nobility of Brabant, Flanders and Holland: he
disco^fited the whole power of Turney and Turwin
France, and conquered Turwin and the great city of Turney. In this time the
king of Scots, notwithstanding that he was sworn on the Sacrament to keep
peace, invaded this land with a mighty army, but by the good diligence of the
Queen, and the policy and manhood of the Earl of Surrey the kings Scots field.
lieuetenaunt, he was him self slain with.xi. of his earls, and the Scotts
discomfited, but not without great loss of Englishmen.

Before this time the Towns about London, as Is^ington, Hoxden, and such other
had so enclosed the common fields with hedges and dyches, that neither the young
men of the city might shoot, nor the ancient persons walk for their pleasure,
except either their bows and arrows were broken or taken away, or the
substantial persons arested or endited, saying: That no Londoner should go out
of the city, but in the high wais This saying sore grieved the Londoners, and
suddenly this year a great number of the city, assembled in a morning, and a
Turner in a fools cote came crying through the city: shouels and spades: and
so many people followed, that it was wonder, and within a short space all the
hedges about the towns were cast down, and the dythes filled, and every thing
made plain. When the kings counsel hard thereof, they commanded the Mayor to
see that no other thing* were attempted, and to call home the citizens, which
when they had done their enterprise came home without any more harm doing: and
so after the fields were never hedged.

Anno. 6.
M

S
James Yarforde John Mundye


A peace concluded between England and, France, and Jews the french king
coupled in marriage with lady Mary y^ kings sister: on new years day following
he ended his life, wherefore king Henry sent again for his sister by the duke
of Suffolk and other.

This year Richard Hunne a merchant taylour of London was found hanged in
Lollers tower.

Anno. 7.
M

S
Henry Worley Richard Gray William Bailey


Lady Mary king Henry's daughter Lady Mary borne.
was born at Grenewich in February.

Lady Mary the kings sister before married to the French king, returned into
England, and shortly after was married to the duke of Suffolk.

Margaret the Queen of Scots, king Henry's eldest sister, fled into England
and lay at Harbottell, where she was delivered of a child, called Margaret. In
May she came to London, where she tarried a whole year before she departed into
Scotland.

Anno. 8.
M
John Rest Grocer

Tho. Seimer Rich. Thursto^


This year was such a froste, that all Great frost.
men with carts might pass between Westminster and Lambeth.

On May even this majors year, the Evil May day. An. reg. 9.
beginning of the.ix. year of king Henry was an insurrection in London of young
persons, against aliens: of the which diverse were put to execution, with their
captain John Lincoln, a broker, and the residue came to Westminster with
halters about their necks and were pardoned. This was called evil May day.

Anno. 9.
M
sir Thomas Exmen Goldsmith

Th. Baldrie Richard Simon


Many died in England of the sweatyng The sweatinge sickness.
sickness, and in especially about London: wherefore the term was one day kept
at Oxenforde, and adiourned again to Westminster.

The admiral of France came into England as ambassador with a great company
of gentilmen and the City of Turney was delivered again into the French
kings hand, for the The city of Turney yielded french.
which he should pay.vi. C. thousand crowns: ann for the castle that the
king builded.iiii. C. thousand and 23000. pounds turnoys, and a peace was
concluded between the kings of England, France, and Castile for term of
their lives.

Anno. 10.
M

S
John Alleyn James Spencer


This year the Earl of Surrey was sent into Ireland as deputy, and the Earl of
Kyldare was of his office discharged.

Anno. 11.
M

S
John Wilkenson Nico. Partrige


As king Henry was at Cantorburye with the Queen, in a readiness to have passed
the sea, he heard of the Emperors coming, with whom he met at Dover, and
accompanied him to Cantorbury: where after the Emperor had saluted the queen
his aunt: he took shipping into Flanders: the last day of May king Henry
passed over to Calais, and met with Francis the French king at the camp
between Arde and Buisnes. Immediately after he met with the Emperor, with
whom he went to Granelyn, and the Emperor returned with wim unto Calais, where
he had great cheer: after which time they departed, and king Henry returned
into this realm.

Anno. 12.
M
sir John Bruge Draper

John Skeuington John Remble


In this Majors year the.xvii. day of An. reg. 13. The duke of buckingham
beheaded. King Henry first named defender of the faith.
May, which was in the. 13. year of the king, was the duke of Buckingham
beheaded at London

King Henry wrate a book against Luther, and therefore the bishop of Rome named
him Defender of the says. To which book Luther answered very sharply,
nothing sparing the authority or majesty of the king.

All frenchemen were attached in the city of London, and cast in prison. The
v. day of July the cardinal Wolsee rode through London to Dover to mete with
the Emperor, being accompanied with.ii. Earls.xxxvi. knights an. C.
gentilmenne.viii. bishops.x. abbots.xxx. chaplaynes all in velvet and saten.
and. 700. ye^men.

This year was a great pestilence and death in London, and other places.

Anno. 13.
M

S
John Britayn Thomas Pargeter


This sir John Mylborne builded Alms huoses builded
certain almose houses, wherein be placed.xiii. aged poor people, who have
their dwellings rent free, and also.ii. s.vi. d. the piece paid to them the
first day of every month for ever.

Charles the fifth Emperor of Rome came into England, and was honorably An.
reg. 14 The Emperor Charles coming to London
received into London, by the mayor the Aldermen, and Commons of the City, the
syxt of June, the king him self accompanyinge him: from thence he went to
Windsor, and sat in the stal of the garter. After great feasts, iustes and
honorable enterteynemente, he departed to Hampton, and sailed from thence into
Spain. During this time the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral brent Morles in
Britain, and then returned into the Realm. Not long after he passed over to
Calaice, and entered Picardy, and brent diverse tounes and castles. He besieged
Hesding, but because winter drew nere, he raised his siege, and returned home.

Anno. 14.
M
Sir John Mondye goldsmith
S
John Rudston


The Lord Rosse and lord Dacres of the North, burned the town of Kelsey in
scotland, with four score Villages and also ouerthrewe eightene towers of
Stone, with all their bulwarks.

The Emperor Charles king Henry of England, Ferdinando duke of Austrige, the
bishop of Rome, the city of Venice, and diverse other in Italy were confiderate
against the french men.

The Turks besieged the Rhodes, The Rhodes taken by the Turks Au. reg. 15.
The King of De^mark came into England.
and on Christmas day took it, to the great shame and rebuke of Christen men.

The.xv. day of June the King of Denmark, and his Queen arrived at Dover, and
the.xxii. day of June, they came to London, and lay at the bishop of Bathes
place.

The Earl of Surrey burned.37. villages in Scotland, and despoyled the
country from the East marches to the Weste, and ouerthrewe diverse holds and
castles.

Anno. 15.
M

S
Mic. English Nichol. Ieninges


In December at the city of Couentry one Philyp, Scholemaster to the kings
hanchmen Christopher Pikering clarke of the Larder, and Anthony Maynuile
gentleman, intended to have taken the kings treasure of his subsedye, as the
Collectors of the same came toward London, and there with to have araysed men
and taken the Castle of Kiling worth, and the^ to have made battle against the
king, for the which they were drawn, hanged and quartered at Tyborne, the
rest that were taken were executed at Couentrie.

The soldiers of Guines took a An. reg. 16.
great booty at a fair in the town of Morguison, and sir Robert Ierningham
and certain dimilaunces of Calays took diverse French prisoners.

Anno. 16.
M

S
Raufe Dodmer Will. Roche


Clement bishop gf Rome, sent unto The golden rose.
king Henry in token of great love, the golden rose.

Great triumph in England for the taking of y^ French king by the Emperor.

The Cardinal obtained license of Cardinal suppressed abbeis.
the bishop of Rome, to suppress certain abbayes, to the intent to erect two
colleges, one at Oxenforde, an other at Ipswich, and to indue the^ with lands:
which colleges he began so sumptuously, that it was not like they would come
to good end.

King Henry was like to have been King Henry in ieopardy.
drowned by leaping over a diche in following his hawk.

This year was the castle or tower, set up at Grenewiche.

This year the coin was enhansed Coin enhaunced.
in England.

A murmuring was in all parts of the realm for payment of money, and in
Suffolk.4000. men rose against the Duke and other commissioners, which were
appeased by the duke of Norfolk and other.

A true between England and France for a certain space.

Anno. 17.
M
Sir John Allen mer
S
John Calton


The.xi. of February, five men of the St^iarde, did penance at Paul's And an
Austen friar, called Doctor Barnes bare a faggot at Paul's, ye same day there
was present at that time the lord Cardinal with xi. bishops, the bishop of
Rochester made the sermon against Martin Luther and his doctrine.

The same year the syxt day of September, An. reg. 18 Gould enhaunced.
was a proclamation for gold, the French crown was valued at iiii. s.vi. d.
the Angel at.vii. s.vi. d. the Ryall* at xi. s.iii. d. and so every piece after
that value.

Anno. 18.
M

S
Ste. Pecock Nic. La^bert


The third day of July, which was Anno. 19
in the.xix. year of king Henry, the lord Cardinal of England rode toward
France, where he concluded a league between king Henry and the French king,
which both sent their defiance to the Emperor, and a strong army into
Italy, to deliver the bishop, and drive the Emperors power out of that country.

The.xv. day of July, was one Harman Execution
drawn and hanged for coynyng false gold.

This year was such scarsitie of Scarsiti of bread.
bread at London, and al England, that many people dyed for default thereof.
And the bread carts that came from Stratford to London, were met by the way at
Miles end by the citizens, that the lord Mayor and Sherifes of London, were
feign to go and rescue the said carts, and se them brought to the markets
appointed for the same.

Anno. 19.
M
Sir James Spencer Vintener
S
John* Hardy


The first day of November, the lord Peace proclaimed
Cardinal with the Ambassadors of France, were at Paul's, and there was
proclaimed a general peace between king Henry of England and Frances the
french king, during their lives, and twelve months and a day after.

The eight day of December, three scholars of Cambridge and one Forster a
gentilman of the court, bare fagots at Paul's.

The fyfth of Ianuarye, the Cardinal General procession
with many bishops, abottes, and priors, went a procession at Paul's, and sang
Te deum, for the escaping of the Pope from the Emperor.

This year a French Crayer of.xxx. tonne, being manned with.xxxviii.
frenchmen, and a flemish craier of.xxviii ^ ship cha^ed to the ^ower wharfe*
tonne, and xxiiii. fleminges, meting at Margate, the one chased the other
alo^g the river of Thames to ye tower whare of London: where the lieuetenaunt
stayed them, and took both the captains and their men.

The.xvii. day of June, the term was An. reg. 20* ^ sweating ^ickenes.
adiourned to Michelmas after, because of the sweting sickness that then reigned
in London, and other places of this Realm: and also there was no such watch
in London at Midsomer, as beforetime had been acustomed.

The vii. day of October, came to London A legate from Rome.
a legate from Rome, called Cardinal Campegius, who afterward with Cardinal
Wolsey, sat at the Black friars in London, where before them was brought in
question the kings marriage with Queen Katherine, as to be unlawful, but they
long time protracted the conclusion of the matter* which delay king Henry
took very displ^asauntly: in so much that shortly after, the Cardinal Wolsey
was deposed from the Chauncelorship of England.

Anno. 20.
M

S
Ra. warre^ Ioh. Long


The.xxix. day of November the parysh priest of Honey lane, and the usher of
Saint Anthonees schole, bare fagottes at Paul's, and two other bare tapers of
wax.

The.viii. day of may, a pouchmaker An. reg. 2^
bare a faggot at Paul's.

A peace was agreed upon between king Henry of England, the Emperor, the
French king, the king of Boheme, and Hungary. The third day A parliament at
the Black fires.
of October, the king came to his place of Bridewell, and there he and his
nobles put on their robes of parliament, and so* came to the black Friars, and
there sat in their robes, and began the parliament.

The.xviii. day of October, was the Cardinal discharged
Cardinal discharged of his Chauncelorship, and the king seized all his goods
and his palais at Westminster, called york place into his hands.

The xxvi. day of October, was sir s. Thomas more made chauncelor
Thomas More made Chauncelour of England, and sworn and kept his rome all one
day.

William Tyndale translated the The new Testamente printed in english.
new testament into English, and printed the same beyond the seas.

Anno. 21.
M

S
Mic. Dormer Walter Champion.


Commandment was given by king Henry to the Bishops, that Tyndales
translation of the new testament should be called in, and that they should see
an other set forth to the profit of ye people.

The.xxiiii. of January were.iii. men Execution
drawn from newgate to the tower hill and there hanged and quartered, for
counter^eyting the kings coin.

The xvi. day of May was a gybet Anno. 22. Execution
set up in Finsbury field, and a man hanged in chains for murderinge doctor
Miles Dicar of saint Brides.

The v. day of July, was one hanged Execution
in chains in Finsbury field, for murdering mistres Kneu^ts maid at saint
Anto^ins.

King Henry, upon occasion of delay Suit to Rome for^ydden
that the bishop of Rome made in his controversy of deuorceme^t, caused
proclamation to be made in September for^ biddinge all his subjects to
purchase any thing from the court of Rome.

Anno. 22.
M

S
Will. Dau^cie J. Choping


The Cardinal being before cast The Cardinal dece^sed
and convict in a praemunire: in November was arrested by the earl of
Northumberlande at Cawood, and died at the abbey of Leicester, the. 28. day of
November and was there buried.

The v. day of April, was a cook named One boyld in Smithfielde
Richard Rose, boiled in a cauldron of brass in Smithfield, for poysonyng the
bishop of Rochesters servants and other.

The wole clergy of England, being Anno. 23. Clergy in praemunire.
judged by the kings learned council, to be in the praemunire, for mainteyningr
the power legatiue of the Cardinal, were called by process into the kings
benche to answer: wherefore in their convocation, they concluded a submission,
wherein they called y^ king suprem King ^yrste named supreme head
head of the church of England, and were contented to give the king. 100000.li.
to pardon them their offenses, touching the praemunire by act of parliament.

The Kings palaice builded at saint James, which before was a house of
susters.

The xix. day of Angust a batcheler of law called Thomas Bilney was burned.

The xxii* day of October, one Pa^t^ner a merchant and a glasier, bare fagottes
at Paul's cross.

Anno. 23.
M

S
Ri. Gresham Edw. Altam


The xxvii. day of November, was a Execution.
monk of Bury burned in Smithfield

The.i^^i. day of December, was one Execution.
Ryce Grifyn a gentilman of Wales, beheaded at the tower hill, and his man
hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyborne for treason.

The.xxvii. day of January, a Duche An. reg. 24 Execution.
man bare a faggot at Paul's cross, and the last of April, was one Baynam
burned in Smithfield.

The xxv. day of May, was taken be Great fishes taken.
twene London and Grenewiche, two great fishes called Herlpoles, both a male
and a female.

This year, the oath that the clergy Clergy ^worne.
was wont to make to the bishop of Rome, was made void by statute, and a
new oath confirmed, wherein they confessed the king to be supreme head.

Sir Thomas More-after suit made Thomas (...).
was discharged of the Chauncelorship the.xvi. day of May. And the fourth of
June, the king dubbed Thomas Audeley knighte, and made him keeper of the great
seal. And not long after, lord Chauncelor of England.

Thomas Cromwell master of the Thomas Cromwell.
kings Jewel house, began to be in great favor with king Henry, and was
now of the counsel.

The xv. day of June, were five men Execution.
drawn from Newgate to the tower hill, and there hanged and quartered for
^oyning of silver, and clipping of gold.

The ^yfth day of July, was a priest Execution.
drawn, hanged, and quartred for clipping of gold.

Also in July, the king put down the Crichurch put down. Tower of London
repaired.
priory of Chrichurch in London.

In August and September, the king repaired the tower of London.

The first of September, was lady Anne Bulleyne, made Marquis of Pembroke at
Windsor.

The vii. day of October the king went to Caleys and to Bulloigne, and came
over again the xiii. day of November.

Anno. 24.
M
sir Stephen Pecocke Haberda.
S
John Martin Nic. Pincho^


The.xv. day of December, was a great fire at the bishop of Lyncolnes place in
Holborne.

King Henry who had married the King Henry married lady Anne Boleine
lady Anne Bulloyne, on the xii. day of April being Easter eve, next following
caused her to be proclaimed Queen of England.

The twelfth day of May, one Pauier Anno. 25. Desperatio^
being the town clerk of London hong him self.

On Whitsonday being the last day Queen Anne crowned
of May, was the lady Anne Bulleine solemnly and honorably crowned at
Westminster.

The xvii. day of July, were two A murder
Merchants slain on the water of Thames toward Westminster, by one Wolf
and his wife.

The 7. of September, was the lady Lady Elizabeth borne
Elizabeth daughter to king Henry borne at Grenewich, and there christened at
the friars church, the x. day of September. The v. day of October, was a Fire
at barnardes castle.
great fire at Baynardes castle.

The.24. of October, being sunday there was a scaffold set up at Paul's cross
and thereon stood a nonne, named Anne Barton of Courtopstrete beside Cantorbury,
Anne barto^
two Monks of Cantorbury, two obseruaunt friars, the person of Aldermary in
London, called master Gold, an other priest confessoure to the said Nonne,
and two lay men: there preached at that time the bishop of Bangor, called the
Abbot of Hyde, where he showed their offenses, and so from thence they were
sent to the tower of London.

Anno. 25.
M
sir Christopher Askew Draper.
S
Th. Kitson


This year Pope Clement cursed king Henry and the realm of England.

This curse was hanged on a churchdore at Dunkirke in Flaunders, and taken
down by one William Lock, a Mercer of London.

The.xxviii. day of January, was a A great fish taken
great fysh taken at Blackewall, called a whale, and was brought up to
Westminster to the king to see, and so brought down to broken wharfe, and
there cut out.

Commissioners were sent all over An 'othe ^to the king
England, to take the oath of al persons to the act of succession, for the
refusal of which act, doctor Fysher bishop of Rochester, and sir Thomas
More late lord Chancellor of England were sent to the tower of London.

The first day of April Wolf and his Wolf and his wife hanged.
wife were hanged on two gybets, at the turninge tree in Lambith marshe, for
murdringe of the two merchant* strangers before named.

The xx. day of April were two monks Execution.
of Cantorbury, two obseruant friets, the person of Aldermary in London, and
the Nonne called the holy Maid of Courtopstrete in Kente: all these were
drawn from the tower of London unto Tyborne, and there hanged and beheaded,
and their heads set on London bridge, and other gates of the City of London.

The xx. day of April all the crafts Oath to the king.
and companies in London were sworn to the king, and to the Queen Anne, and
their heirs.

The, xv. day of May was a great fire Au. reg. 16
at Salters hall in Breadstret.

The v. day of June were all servants and prentises of the age of.20. years, or
above, sworn to the king and Queen Anne his wife and to the issue of them.

The.ix. day of July was the lord Datres of the north, arrained at Westminster
Lord Datres
of high treason, where he so wittily and directly confuted his accusers, that
to their great shame he was sound by his peers, not gilty.

The xxii. day of Iulye, was John Frith brent
Frith* burned in Smithfield for his opinions, and with him on young man called
Andrew Hewet a tailors servant.

The xi. day of August was all the places Friar houses suppressed.
of the obseruant Friars put down, and Austen Friars set in their places, and
the same obseruantes were put in places of gray friars. etc.

The thyrtenth day of August was a Fire at temple bar.
great fire at Temple bar, and much hurt done, and certain persons burned.

The xvi. day of August was burned The kings stable brent
the kings stable at Charing cross called mewes, wherein was burned many great
horses, and great store of hay.

Thomas Cromwell was appointed and sworn master of the Rolls the ix. day of
October.

Anno. 26.
M
Sir John Champneis Skinner
S
Nic. Lewson


In November by a parliament the Bishop of Romes authority abrogated.
bishop of Rome with all his authority was clean banished this Realm, and
commandment given, that he should no more be called Pope, but bishop of Rome,
and that the king should be ^eputed as supreme head of the Church of England,
having full authority to reform all errors, heresies, and abuses in the same.
Also the first fruits and first fruits given to the king. An. reg. 27
tenthes of all spiritual dignities were granted to the king.

The.xxix. day of April the prior of the Charter house of London, the prior of
Beual, the prior of Exam, and a brother of the same called master Reignoldes,
and a priest called master John Hail, vicar of Thistil worth were al
condemned of treason, who were executed the fourth day of May, and their heads
Execution
and quarters set on the gates of the city of London, and at the Charter house
of London was set one quarter.

The eighte day of May the king Polled heads
commanded all about his court to poll their heads, and to give them
^nsample, he caused his own head to be polled likewise.

The xxv. day of May was* a great examination Examination of Hollanders Execution
of heretics, born in Holla^d there was examined.xix. men, and vi. women of
the same country borne.

The iiii. day of June a man and his wife borne in Holland were burned in
Smithfield for the arrians heresy.

The.18. day of June were.3. monks Execution
of the Charterhouse, named Exmewe, Midlemor, and Nudigate drawn to Tiborne,
and there hanged and quartred.

The xxii. day of June was doctor Bishop of Rochester beheaded Sir Thomas More
beheaded Disitation of abbcis
fysher bishop of Rochester beheaded at tower hill.

The vi. day of July sir Thomas More was beheaded at the tower hill for denial
of the kings supremacy.

In October the king sent doctor. Lee to visit the abbeis, priories and
nonneties in England, and to put out al religious persons that would go, and all that were under the age of.xxiiii. years, and al such monks chanons, and friars
that were so put out, the abbot or pr^or should give every one instead of their*
habit a priests gown, and.xl.s. of money. And the nonnes to have such apparel,
as secule^ women wear, and to go where they would, he took out of monasteries
their relics and chiefest jewels.

Anno. 27.
M
sir John Alleyn* mercer
S
John Cottes


The xi. day of November was a great A general procession
general procession at London by the kings commandment, for the recovering of
the French king to his health: The number of copes that were worn in this
Procession, was seven hunbred and fourtene.

The last day of December, the Names of Chauntries taken.
Lord Mayor of London gave commandment to all parishes in the same, to bring
in before him the names of a^ the Chauntries in their parishes, and who had the
gift of the same.

The.viii day of January died lady Lady! Katherine deceased. Small house^ o^
religion given to ye king. An reg. 28.
Katherine dowag^r at Kimbalton, and was buried at Peterborowe.

The *4. day of February were given to the king by a parliamen^ with the
consent of the abbottes* all religi^us houses that were. of.300. mark, and
under.

On May day king Henry being at a Iustes at G^ene which, suddenly departed to
Westminster, having only with him ^. persons. The next day An Bulleine
Execution.
Queen was had to the tower* and there for things laid to her charge, beheaded
the xi^. day of May.

The same time were apprehended Execution.
the Lord Rocheford brother to the said Queen, Henry Noris, Mark Sme^o^
William Brierton, and Frau^cis weston, all of the kings privy chamber, which
also about matters touching the queen were put to death the.xxii. day of May

The.xx. day of May, the king married Lady Jane daughter to sir John Seymor
knight, which at Whitsontide was openly showed as Queen. K. Henry married lady
Jane.


The.viii. day of June the king held his court of parliament, and the bishops
and clergy of this realm held a convocation at Paul's church in London: where
after much debatyng of many matters, they publyshed a book of religion,
entitled, Articles devised by the kings highness. In this book is specially
meutioned but.iii. sacraments, Co^motion in Lincoln shire.
with the which the Lincolnshire men were offended, and fearing the utter
subnertion of their old religion, taised a great commotion, against who^ the
king did send a strong power, whereof when the rebels had knowledge, they
desired pardon, brake up their army, and departed home: but their capitains
were apprehended and executed.

The men of Lincolnshire being pacified, within six days after, began a new
insurrection in Yorkshire, for the same causes: for they were persuaded, that
al their silver chalices, crosses, sewels, and other ornaments should be taken
out of their churches. These people were gathered together, to the number of
forty thousand, having for their badges, the.v. wounds, with the figure of the
Sacrament, and Jesus written in the myddest, in token that they intended to
fight for the mayntenance of christen religion.

Anno. 28.
M

S
Rich* Paget William Bowyer


The.xii. day of November, sir Thomas Neweman bare a faggot at Poules Cross
for that he song Mass with good ale.

The.xiii. day of November, one master Master Pagyngto^ slain.
Robert Pagyngton, a Mercer of London, was slain with a gunne, as he was going
to Mass at saint Thomas of Akers.

Against the rebels of Yorkshire, the King sent the Duke of Norffolke the
Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis of Excester, and other with a great army, by whom
after the day and place was appointed to fight, the Capitaynes of both
parties had communication of peace: and promise was made to the rebels, that
such things as they were grieved with, should be redressed by the kings
authority, where with they being contented; departed without bloudshedynge.
Ask, that was chief of this rebellion, in December came to London, and was not
only pardoned, but also received and rewarded with other gifts of the King,
but he did not long enjoy his prosperity.

About the same time a priest and a Execution.
boucher were hanged at Wyndsor, for speaking in the behalf of the Yorkeshyre
men.

This year in Decembre the Thames Great frost.
at London was all over frosen.

The third day of Februarye was Execution.
Thomas Fitzgarret late Earl of Kildare, and five of his uncles, drawn,
hanged, and quartered at Tiborn, for treason

In this month of February, Nicolas A new co^motion in Yorkshire.
Musgraue, Thomas Gilbye, and other, stered a new rebellion, and besieged the
City of Carlisle, from whense they were driven, and many of them taken, and put
to death. Sir Francis B^got, sir Robert Constable, and other, began an other
conspiracy, and for the same were attainted and executed in the month of June
following.

The.xxix. day of March being Execution
Maundy thursdaye, were.xii. men of Lincoln, drawn from Newgate to Anno reg.
29.
Tyborn: and there hanged and quartered: Five were priests, and.vii. were lay
men.

In June the Lord Darcy, the lord Hussy, sir Robert Constable, sir Thomas
Execution
Percy, sir Frauncis Bigot, sir Stephen Hamelton, sir John Bulmer and his wife,
William Lomley, Nicolas Tempest, and the abbots of Ierneye and Rivers, and
Roberte Ask were all put to death: sir Robert Constable was hanged on Beuerley
gates, Ask was hanged in chains on a tower at York: Sir John Bulmers wife
burned in Smithfield, the lord Darcy beheaded at tower hill, the lord Hussy
at Lincoln, and the other suffered death at Tyborne.

The lord Cromwell was made knight Cromwell
of the Garter.

In October on saint Edwards eue^ Birthe of prince Edward.
was borne at Hampton court, Prince Edward: and shortly after, Queen Jane left
her life, the.14. day of October, ber,

Anno. 29.
M
Sir Rich. Gresham Mercer
S
John Gresha^


The.viii. day of Noue^ber the corpse of the Queen was carried to Windsor, and
buried with great solempnitie.

The.xviii. day of January a salter of London was set on the pillory for
packyng and sellyng of rotten herrynge, and vsyng of false weightes.

The.xviii. day of February ^a servant Execution
of my lady Pargetors was drawn, hanged, and quartered for clyppynge of gold.

The.xxv. day of February sir Allein Execution
a priest and a gentylman were drawn to Tyborn, and there hanged and
quartered for treason.

The.xxi. day of March Henry Harffam Execution
customer of Plimmouth was drawn from Newgate to Tyborne, and there hanged and
quartered for treason. And one Thomas Ewel likewise was hanged and quartered.

The.xxii. day of May friar Forest was hanged and brent in Smithfielde An. re.
30. Execution
for denyenge the kings supremacy: with him was brent the Image of Daruell
Gatherne of Wales.

The.xxvii. day of May was a great fire at saint Margaret Pattens, called Fire
in London.
Roode lane, where were many houses burned: and.ix. persons.

In July was Edmonde Conyngshe attainted of treason for counter^eating Execution
of the kings sign manuell. And in August was Edward Clyfford for the same
cause attaynted, and both put to execution at Tyborne.

The first day of September being The hangman hanged
the sunday after Bartilmew fair, was one Cratwell hangman of London, and two
persons more hanged at the wrest lyng place beside London, for robbing of a
bouthe in Bartylmew fair.

In September by the special motion Images in churches taken down
of the lord Cromwell, al y^ notable images, unto which were made any special
pylgremages and offeryngs were utterly taken away, as the images of Walsyngham,
Ipswich, Worcester, the Lady of Wilsedon, with many other, and likewise all
shrines. etc.

In October and November the abbeys were suppressed, and al friars, monks,
Abbeyes suppressed.
chanons, nonnes, and other sorts, were rooted out of this realm.

Anno. 30.
M

M
Will. Wilkinson Nic. Gybson


This Nicolas Gibson sheriff and Grocer of London before named, builded a free
schole at Ratcliffe, nere unto London, appoyntynge to the same schole for y^
instruction of.lx. pore men's children in lernyng and virtuous educatio^, a
scholemaister and an usher, with a stipend of ten pound by the year to y^
master: and.vi. pound.xiii. ^.iiii. d to y^ Usher. He also builded certain
alms houses, adjoining to the said schole, for xiiii. poor and aged
persons, such as through impotencie and age are not able to sustain the
travel and toil of the world: who quarterly do receive vi. ^.viii. d. a
piece for ever.

The.xvi. day of Nouembre, was The friars in* London suppressed.
the Black friars in London suppressed, and the next day the white friars, the
next day the Gray friars, and the monks of the Charterhouse, and so all the
other immediately after.

The.xxii. day of November, was one Lamberte burnt.
John Nicolson, otherwise Lambert a priest, burnt in Smythfield.

Also in November, were Henry marquis of Excester, and earl of Deuo^shire and
sir Henry Pole knight, the lord Mountague, and fir Edward Neuell, brother to
y^ lord of Burgaue^ny sent to the tower. The two lords were arrelgned the last
day of December, before the lord Chancellor, and there found gyltie: the third
day after, was arreigned sir Edward Neuell, sir Geffreye Poole, and two
priests called Crofts and Collyns, and one Hollande a ma^yner, and all
attainted, and the.ix. day of January next following, were the said two lords,
and sir Edward Neuell Execution
beheaded at the tower hyl: the two priests and Holland were drawn to
Tyborne, and there hanged and quartered, and sir Geffrey Poole was pardoned.

The xxii. day of December, a priest, Henry Dance a bricklayer, and an organ
maker, bare fagots at Paul's cross.

On Ash wednesday, were John Jones Execution
John Potter, and William Maneryng, hanged in the princes liuereis, on the
southsyde of Paul's churcheyarde, for killyng of Roger Cholmeley Esquier in the
same place of malice pretended.

The third day of March, was sir Execution
Nicolas Carew of Bedingto^* in Surrey, beheaded at tower hill.

The.xxviii. day of April, began a An. reg. 31.
parliament at westminster: in the which Margaret Countess of Salisbury
Gertrude, wife to the Marquis of Excester, Reinolde Poole* sir Adrian Foskewe,
and Thomas Dingley knight of saint John's, and diverse other, were attainted of
treason. Foskew and Dingley were beheaded the.x. day of July.

This year the.viii. day of May, the Citizens of London mustered at the The
great Muster at London.
Miles end, al in bright har^eis, with coats of white sylke and c^oathe, and
chains of gold in three great battles the number was.xv. thousand, beside
wyff^ers and other wayters: who in goodly order passed through London to
Westmynster, and so through the sanctuary, and round about the park of S.
James: and so up through the fie^^e, home through Holborne.

The.viii. day of July, the Vicar of Execution
Wandsworth, with his chaplayne, and his servant, and f^yer Wayre, were all
four drawn from the Martha^sey unto saint Thomas a Wateryngs, and there
hanged and quartered.

The.xvi. day of September, Duke Frederik of Bau^^ie, the Paulsgraue of Rhine,
the Marshall of duke John, Frederick electour of Saxonye, with other, came to
London, by whom the marriage was concluded between king Henry and the lady
Anne, sister to William the Duke of Cleue.

Anno. 31.
M

S
Tho. Feyrie Tho. Huntlowe


This Thomas Huntlow sheriff before Charitable deeds of Huntlowe
named, gave to the company of the Haberdashers certain tenements, for y^ which
they be bound to give to.x. pore alms people of the same company every one of
them viii. d. every friday, for ever. And also at every quarter* dinner to be
kept by the masters of the same company, to be given to every one of those.x.
poor people before named, a penny lofe of bread a potle of ale, a piece of biefe
worth.iiii. d in a platter with porage, and.iiii. d. in money.

The. 14. day of Noue^ber, Hugh Feringdon, Execution
abbot of Reding, and.ii. priests the one called Rug, and the other named
Onion, were attainted of high treason, for denying the king to be supreme head
of the church, and were drawn, hanged, and quartered at Readyng. The same day
was Richard Whitinge abbot of Glastenbury, likewise attaynted, hanged and
quartered on Tower hill beside his monastery for the same cause. Execution
The first day of December, was John Beche, abbot of Colchester, put to
execution for the like offense.

In Dece^ber were appointed to wait Pe^cioners* first began
on the kings highness* person. 5^. gen tilme^, called Pencioners or spears.

The third day of January, was the K. Henry married the lady Anne of Cleue.
lady Anne of Cleue, received at Black heath, and brought to Grenewich with
great triu^ph: and the syxt day of the same month, she was married to king Henry

The.xviij. day of Apryl, was Thomas Thomas Cromwell.
lord Cromwell, created Earl of Essex, and made great chamberlayn of England,
which ever the earls of Oxenforde had before that time.

The knights of the Rhodes, was Order of y^ Rhodes put down in England
dissolved in England, whereof heringe sir William Weston knight, priour of S.
Iohnes, for thought dyed the fifthe day of May.

In May was sent to the tower, doctor Wylson and doctor Sampson bishop An. reg.
^^.
of Chichester, for releuynge certain prisoners, which denied the kings
supremacy: and for the same offense was one Richard Farmer Grocer of London,
a welthy man, and of good estimation, committed to the Marshalsey, and after in
Westmynster hall was arraigned and attainted in the Premun^re, and lost all his
goods.

The.ix. day o^ July, Thomas lord Tho. Cro^wel beheaded.
Cromwell, Earl of Essex, being in the counsel chaumber, was sodeinly
apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London. The.xix. day of the same
month he was attainted by parliament and never came to his answer: which
law, he was the author of, he was* there attainted of heresy and high treson.
And the.xxviii. day of Iulye, beheaded at the tower hill, with the lord
Hungerforde.

King Henry by authority of parliament Queen Anne deuorced.
was deuorced from the lady Anne of Cleue: and it was enacted, that she should
be taken no more as Queen, but called the lady Anne of Cleue.

The.xxx. day of July, Robert Barnes, Execution
Thomas Gerrarde, William Ie^ome priests, were burned in Smythfield. The same
day Thomas Abell, Edward Powel, and Richard Fetherstone, were drawn, hanged
and quartered, for denyeng the king to be supreme head of the church of
England.

The fourth day of August, were drawn Execution
from the tower to tyborn, six persons, and one led between two sergea^ts, and
there hanged and quartered: o^^ was the Priour of Dancaster, an other a Monk
of the Charter house of London: master Gyles Horn, a Monk of Westmynster, one
Philpot, and one Carew, and a friar.

The.viii. day of August, was the lady K. Henry^ married.
Ratherine Haward showed openly as Queen, at Hampton court: which dignity she
enjoyed not long.

This year was great death of hot burning agues and f^^xes, and such a
drought, that wells and small rivers A great drouthe.
were dried up, and many cattle died for lack of water: the sa^te water
flowed above London bridge.

Anno. 32.
M
Sir will. Roche Draper
S
Mart* Bows


The.xxii. day of December, was Execution An. reg. 33.
Egerton and Harman put to death for counterfaityng the kings great seal.

In April began a new rebellion in Co^motion in Yorkshire.
yorkshire, the beginners whereof were shortly taken, and put to execution in
diverse places: of which Leigh, Tatorsale, and Thorneton, were put to death at
London, the xxviii. day of May Execution
and sir John Neuell knight, was executed at York. The same day the countess
of Salisburye, was beheaded in the tower of London.

The.ix. day of June were Damport Execution
and Chapman, two of ye kings guard, hanged at Grenewiche, for robberies.

The.xxviii. day of June, the lord Execution
Leonard Gray, which before was deputy general of Irelande, was beheaded at
the tower hill. Execution


The. 28. day of June, were hanged at S. Thomas a Waterings, Mantell, Roiden and
Froudes, gentilme^, for a spoil and murder that they had don in one of the
kings parkes upon May Morning, the lord Dacres of the South, being Execution
in company with them: and on the morrow which was saint Peter's day, the lord
Dacres was led from the tower a foot between ye two sheriffs, through the
city to tyborn, and there put to death.

This summer the king took his progress The kings progress.
to York.

The first day of July, was a welsh man drawn, hanged, and quartered, for
prophesying the kings majesty's death.

Anno. 33.
M
Sir michel Dormer Mercer
S
Sir Roula^d Hill He^. Suckley


The lady Katherine Haward, whom the king had married, for her unchaste living
committed with Thomas Culpeper and Francis Dereha^, was by parliament Execution
attainted. Culpeper and Dereham, were put to death at Tyborne, the x. day of
Dece^ber. The.xiii. day of February, Execution
were beheaded within the tower, the lady Haward (otherwise called Q. Katherin,
and the lady Rocheford K. Henry married his sixth wife.
And shortly after, king Henry married the lady Katherin Parre, that had been
wi^e to the lord Latimer.

At this parliament the king was proclaimed king of Ireland, which name K.
Henrye named king of Ireland.
his predecessors never had, but were called Lord of Irelande.

The.x. day of March, a maid was boiled in Smithfield, for poysonynge A* maid
boiled in smithefyeld.
many persons.

In May, the.xxxiiii. year of his reign king Henry took a loan of money of
all such as were above the value Anno reg. 34.
of. 50. pound and up ward.

The Duke of Norfolk with an army royal was sent into Scotland, where he
bourned and wasted all the marches, and there tarried without any battle,
proffered by the king of Scotts, until the myddest of November followyng.

Anno. 34.
M
John Cotes Galter
S
Henry Hoblethorne Henry Hancotes


After the departure of our army from Scotland, the king of Scotts made a
road into England, and did much harm: but at the last, sir Thomas Wharton.
and sir William Musgraue, with a few of the borderers, met with the Scotts
on saynct Katherins eve, the xxiiii. of November, where (by the great power of
God) they being in number. 15000. were overthrown, in which conf^ic^e was
taken the lord Maxwell, the earls. of Glencarne and Sassilles, with all the
capitaynes of the army. And on saint Thomas even the Apostle, they were
brought to the tower of London, where they lay that night: the next day
following, they were by the kings charge apparelled all in sylke, and rode
through the city to Westminster, where they were sworn to be true prisoners,
and then were they delivered to the custodye of diverse noble men, which
honorably entertained them.

In this season, an Harolde of England, riding on the borders side, to do a
message, was met by certain rebels, which cruelly against all law of arms,
slew him in his cote armor, but they for this deed, were sent to the king the
year following, who executed them for that offense.

At newyeres tide, the Scotts that were taken by Carlisle, were by the king
sent home again with great gifts, upon condition to agree to certain
articles.

The third day of June the Abrine a An. reg. 15
lord in Irelande, with diverse of the wild Irish submitted the^ to king Henry,
and in July, the said Abrine was created Earl of Clawricarde.

This year in July king Henry sent Going to Laundersey
over. 6000. men to Landersey, whither also came the Emperor in proper person
with a great army, and sho^tly after came down the french King in proper person
with a great army, and offered to give battle to the Emperor, by reason whereof
the siege was raised.

The xxviii. day of July, were brent Execution
at Wyndsor three persons, Anthony Person, Robert Testwood, and Henry ^ilmer.

This year was a great death in London A pestile^c^
of the pestilence: and therefore Michelma^ term was adiourned to saint Albons,
and there was kept to the end.

Anno. 35.
M

S
John Toules Richard Dobbes


Sir William Bowier deceased the xiii. day of April, about Easter, and sir
Raufe Warren, served out the residue of that year.

A road was made into Scotland by the garryson there, who burned. 60.
villages, and took great prays both of men and beasts.

In November, the Englishmen that were sent to Laundersey, came home again.

This year being leap year chaunsed Four eclipses
four Eclipses* one of the Son the.xxiii. day of January, and three of the
Moon.

The beginning of March German Execution.
Gardener, Lark parson of Chelsey be side London, and Singleton, were executed
at Tiborne, for denying the king to be supreme head of the church: and shortly
one Ashbee was likewise executed for the same.

The.xxii. day of March, the Lord Admiral with a great navy, departed from
London toward Scotland.

The fourth day of April, a gonne Houses blown up with gunpowder.
powder house called the black swanne, standing upon the east sinithfield, was
blown up with other houses nighe adjoining, and therein were burned five men, a
boy, and a woman.

Upon May day died the lord Thomas Anno. 36.
Audeley high Chancellor of England: After whom succeeded lord Thomas
Writhesley.

The navy sent by the lord admiral with who^ was the lord Edward Seymor Earl
of Hertforde, the kings lieuetenant, and general captain of the army the
fourth day of May arrived at Lith, the haven of Edenboroughe, and took the
town of Lyth, and spoiled it: Lithe and Edenborough taken
after which they made toward Edenborough, where at a certain bridge the
Scotts had laid their ordinance: but by the policy of our Captains and
soldiers, the Scotts ordinance was won, and discharged against the^ selves
after this the town of Edenboroughe sent unto the army, pretending to deliver
the Town upon certain conditions, to the behofe of our King: But when the
army entered, they were invaded by them: for which cause the town was
destroyed and wasted.

King Henry and the Emperou^ agreed jointly to invade the realm of France
with two great powers.

A proclamation made, enhaunsinge Coins in ^hanced.
the value of Gold to the rate of xlviii. ^ and silver to iiii. shil^inges the
ounce. It is to be noted, that at this time the king caused to be coined the
base moneys, Base moneys coined.
which was called down the fifth year ^f Edward the syxt, and called in the
second year of Queen Elizabeth.

After the whitson holy days, the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord privy
seal, with a great army took their boyage into France, and besieged
Motterell, where they lay until the king had won Boloigne: Not long
after, the Duke of Suffolk with many other noble men passed the seas, and
encamped before Boloigne on the East side.

The xiiii. day of July king Henry King Henry went to ^oloigne.
with a goodlye company passed from Dover to Casaice, and the 26* day encamped
on the north side of Boloigne, after whose coming the town was so sore
battered with gonneshot, and certain of their Towers being undermined so
shaken, that after a monethe^s ^^ege the captain sent word to the king,
that he would yield the town to his behofe, upon condition that al which were
within, might depart with bag and baggage: which conditions king Henry
granted, and the Boloigners Boloign^ won.
departed to the number of. 4454. and the xxv. day of September the king
entered into high Boloigne, with the nobility of this realm, and the
trompettes blowing: The first of October king Henry departed from Boloigne
toward Dover.

The nynthe day of October in the night the French men came unawares upon the
Englishemen in base Boloigne, and slew of them a great number. How beit they
were shortly hased from thence.

Anno. 36.
M
William Laxton Grocer
S
John Wilforde


This year was taken by the kings ships of the west country, and of the
English coast, the number of. 300. french ships, and more.

The vii. day of June a great army of An. 37
Frenchmen came nere to the haven of Boloigne, and skir^ished with the
englishmen: and this army began to build a fort, which before they departed
they accomplished.

Word was brought that the french men intended to land in the Isle of
Wighte. Wherefore the king went to The king went to Portismouth, where wa^
drowned the Mary Rose Frencheme^ landed at the Isle of Wight
Port^smouthe. At which time of the kings abo^e there, a goodly ship of
England called the Mary Rose, with sir George Care we the captain, and many
other gentilmen, were drowned in the midst of the haven, by great negligence
and folly.

Certain frenchemen landed in the Isle of Wighte, but they were driven away
with the loss of their captayn and many soldiers.

In August the lord Edward Seymor Earl of Hertford was sent by the king into
Scotland, with an army of xii. thousand men, where he destroyed diverse towns,
and greatly endomaged the Scotts.

This year the.xii. day of September S. Giles church br^t
the Church of saint Gyles without Creplegate was brent.

Anno. 37.
M

S
George Barnes Rafe Alleyn


The.xxiiii. day of November a parliament begone at Westminster, where was
granted to the king a Subsedye of.ii. s.viii. d. of the pound of mouable
Chau^t^^^^s given to king Henry.
goods, and* iii^. shilings the pound in lands to be paid in two year, and all
colleges, Chauntreys, and hospitalles were committed to the kings order
duringe his life, to alter and transpose, which he promised to do to the glory
of God, and the common profit of the realm.

About this time the Lord Admiral landed in Normandy, and burnt the suburbs
of Tr^iport, and diverse villages along the Sea coaste, and destroyed and took
almost all the ships in the haven.

The stews and other like borthel houses The stew e^ put down
were by the kings commandment put down in all parts of the realm.

In February should a woman have been burned in Smithfield, for clipping of
gold, but the kings pardon came, she being at the stake ready to be burned

T^is year the citizens of London levied An. reg. 3^ The Condit a^a^g^t^ and
Lothbury builded.
in the city two fiftenes for the co^ueyance of more water to the city: and
then was the condites at A^g^te and at Lothbury begone to be builded.

This year the xiii. day of June, being ^ general ^rocession
Whitsonday, a continual peace was proclaimed in the city of London between
the king of England and the French king, with a solempe procession, at the
time of the proclamation giving land and praise to God: and at night
throughout the city great bon ^yers were made.

The xrvii. day of June doctor Crom^ recanted at Paul's cross.

The xvi. day of July were burned in Smithfielde Anne Ask we gent^lwoman, John
L^ssels gentilman, Nicolas Execution
Otterden Priest, and John Hadland Taylour: And Doctor Shaxton sometime bishop
of Salisbury, preached at the same fire, and recanted his opinions, perswadinge
them to do the like but they would not.

The.xxi. day of August, came into The admi^al of France ^anded at ^he tower
^har^e
England to do his duty from the French king, Mounsyre Deneball high
Admiral of France, with great Triumph, and also brought with him the S^cre
of Diepe, and xii. galeis well besene in diverse points, and landed at London at
the tower wh^rfe, where he was honorably received with many nobles and pi^res
of this Realm, with great shootynge of gunnes, and so brought to the
Bishop of Londons Palaice, and lay^ there two nights. On Monday the xriii.
day of August, he rode to Hampton Court, where the King lay: and before he
came there, Prince Edward received him with a company of five hundred coats
of velvet: and the princes liuerie were with sleues of cloathe of Gold, and
half the coat embroudered with gold. And there were to the number of eyghte
hundred horses royally apparailed, which brought him to the manor of Hampton
court to his father.

Anno. 38.
M
Hen. Hoblethorne merchant tailour

Rich. Iaruis Th. Curtise


In January Thomas duke of Norfolk was sent to the tower of London and
condemned to perpetual prison. And shortly after his son the Earl of
Surrey was condemned, and beheaded the. xix day of January.

These things being done, about Execution
the end of January, King Henry departed out of his life, appointing his ^^st
heir to be his young son prince Edward, and the second lady Mary his daughter
by his first wife Queen Katherine, and the third, lady Elizabeth by his second
wife Queen Anne Bolleyne.

Edward the syxt.
Anno Regni. 1.
which was richely hanged, every condite ^onning with wene: with pageantes,
being richely apparailed to receive him at every place, with Orations of S.
Paul's church lay at ancre
his praise. And on the Southesyde of Paul's churchyard, an Argosie came from
the Batt^lment of Paul's church, upon a Cable, being made fast to an anchor,
at the De^nes gate, lying upon his breast, ayding him self neither with hand
nor foot, and after ascended to the midst of the same Gable, and tombled and
played many pretty toys, whereat the king with the nobles of the Realm
laughed right heartily: the.xxv. of Februarye he was crowned King at
Westminster with great solempnitie.

The Lord Protector with the Images taken down
rest of the Counsel, sent Commissioners into all parts of the Realm, ^
willing them to take all Images out of their Churches, with them were sent
diverse preachers, to persuade the people from their beads and such like:
Procession forbidden
also procession was commanded to be no more used: And shortly after was a
Parliamente, wherein beside other Chau^tries given to y^ king
things, Chauntries were given into the kings hands, to be used at his
pleasure. And also an order taken for the use of the Lords Supper, that it
should be in both kinds of bread and wine.

In August the Duke of Somerset and the Earl of Warwick with a noble army
were sent into Scotland: and nere to Edenboroughe at a place called
Muskelboroughe, the Englishmen and Scotts met, where between them was
foughten a cruel battle. Muskelborow field.
The victory fell to the Englishmen, and the Scotts were slain above.xiiii.
thousand, and taken prisoners of Lords, knights, and gentilmen xv. hundred.

Anno. 1.
M

S
The. White Robert Chertsey


This second year of king Edward the syxt, the watch which in London Anno. 2
had been used at Midsomer, and of long time before had been laid down, was
now again used, both on the even of saint John, at Mydsomer, and on the even
of saint Peter next following, in as beautiful manner, and in as good order, as
it had been accustomed before time.

The last day of Iulye, Stephen Gardener bishop of Winchester, was for a
sermon made before king Edward and the Counsel sent to the tower of London,
where he remained all this kings reign.

This year in London was great A great pestilence
mortality by the pestilence. Wherefore a commandment was given to all
Curates, and other having to do therewith, that no corpse should be buried
before six of the clock in the morning nor after six of the clock at night,
and that there should at the burying of every corpse be ronge one belie at the
least, the space of three quarters of an hour.

Anno. 2.
M
sir Henry ^mcottes ^^shmo^ger
S
John O^ife


Sir Thomas Seimer high Admiral of England brother to the Lord Protector,
and the kings uncle, had married Queen Katherine late wife to King Henry, she
conceiuinge a stomach against the Lord protectors wife. And thereupon also
in the behalf of their wives, displeasure and grudge began between the two
brothers, which at the length brake out to the confusion of them both: For
the An reg. 3. Execution
twenty day of March was the lord admiral beheaded at tower hill.

This year about Whitsontide, and Co^motion in Cornewal and Deuonshyre
so forth until September, the commons in most part of this realm, made
sundry insurrections and comm^tions Amongst whom, diverse of the commons of
Cornwall and Deuonshyre, rose against the nobles and gentilmen: and in sundry
Camps besieged the town of Exceter, which was valiantly defended.

Also they of Norfolk and Suffolk Co^motion in Norfolk
encamped the^ selves in a wood, called saint Nicholas wood, nere unto
Norwiche, declaring them selves to be grieved with parkes, pastures, and
enclosures made by the gentilme^, who required the same to be disparked and set
among the commons. Into Deuonsh^re against Humfrey Arundel and his rebels, was
sent the lord Russel, lord preuy seal, with a number of soldiers. The lord
Gray was also sent with a number of strangers, which were horsemen, wherein
diverse conflictes they slew many people, and spoiled that country.

In Norfolk againg captain Kite a Tanner, and his company, sir John Dudley
earl of Warwick, went with an army: where both he him self and a great number
of gentilmen that were with him, metynge with the rebels, were in such
danger, as they had thought all to have dyed in the place: but God brought
it so to pass, that as went there as in all other places, they were partly by
power constrained, partly by promise of their pardon persuaded to subin^r them
selves to their prince, and delivered their chief capitaynes to punishment,
but yet after the loss of many thousands of Englishemen.

The king of France perc^auinge such sedition and trouble in England, did not
omit the occasion, but in the mean time* assaulted certain holds about the
town of Boloigne builded of the Englishmen for the defense of the same, and
namely took the forte called new haven, and thereby much indamaged the
English garrison that lay at Boloigne. The loss of this was laid to the lord
Protector because he having the chief government of the Realm, did not see
those parts better furnyshed: in conclusion the earl of Warwick, with the
consent of other nobles of the Realm, by open proclamation accused him of
misgouerneme^t as well in this as in diverse other matters. Wherefore when he
fled with the young king to Wyndsour castle, they caused him to be fette from
thens, and brought as a traitoure to the tower of London, the.xiiii. day of
October.

Anno. 3.
M

S
John York Richard Turk


This sir Roulande Hylle, to the great praise of his vocation, and to the
Charitable deeds done by sir Rouland hill.
synguler comfort of the weal publi^e of his country, erected many notable
monumentes and good deeds, which were to long here to write. Wherefore I
refer them to my Summarie.

Upon a Sunday being the nyntene A murder.
day of Ianuarye, were murdered in London, between Newgate, and Smythfyelde,
two Capitaynes which had served the king in his wars at Boloigne, and
other where: the one was called Bambo, the other Filic^rga, both Spanyardes:
this murder was committed by Charles ^auaro a Flemmyng, whom came in post from
Barwike to London to do that act. And being hanged for the Execution
same with his three men in Smithfield said at his death, he would never repent
it: they were all four hanged on the friday next after, which was the.xxv. day
of January.

The.xxvii. day of January, Humfrey Arundell captain of the rebels in
Devonshire, was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyborn, with diverse Execution
other, as Wynslade, Holmes, and Bery, etc. About the same time, Robert Kite,
capitayn of them that rose in Norfolk with his brother William, was condemned
and sent to Norwiche, where the said Robert was hanged in chains upon the top
of Norwiche castle.

About the beginning of Februarye, As. reg. 4.
the Embassadoures of England and France, consulted of a peace to be had
between both Realms, which after was concluded.

The.vi. day of February, the Duke of* Somerset king Edwardes uncle, was
delivered out of the tower, and the same night he supped with the earl of
Warwike at the sheriffs house called master York.

The.x. day of February, one Bella Suffolk man, was drawn from the Execution
tower to Tyborne, and there hanged and quartered for mouyng a new rebellion in
Suffolk and Essex.

On monday, being the last day of March, a general peace was proclaimed
between the kings of England and France, and in the same peace were included
the emperor and the Scotts.

The.xxv. day of April, the town of Bulleyn was yielded up unto the french
Boloigne yielded to ye French.
King, and his Capitaines cook the possession.

The.ii. day of May, one Ioane Knel otherwise called Ioane Butcher, or Ioane of
Kent, was burned in Smith field for heresy, yt Christ took no flesh of ye
virgin Mary, but passed through her body as through a conduicte.

Certain lewd persons attempted a new rebellion in some part of Kent, but
they were sone repressed, and certain of the chief, as Richard Lion, Goddard
Ioane bouther burnt
Gorran, and Richard Irelande, were apprehended and put to death for the same,
the.xiiii. day of May.

Anno. 4.
M

S
Augus Hind John Lion


This sir Andrew Iudde exected one A ^ree scole at Tu^brige builded.
notable school at Tunbridge in Kent wherein be brought up and norished in good
learning, great store of youth, as well brought up in yt shire, as brought from
other countries adioynyng.

This year upon a thurspay, being Three f^ud^
the.xvii. day of December, the Thames beneth the bridge did e^be and flow
three times within.ix. hours: and the same day and time, the bishop of
Wynchester was brought unto Lambeth by water, before the bishop of Canterbury,
and other the kings commisioners where were obie^^ed unto him certain
articles on the kings behalf, and day assigned him to answer.

It was enacted* that priests children should be legitimate.

This year on saint Valentines day, at Feuersham in Kente, one Arden, a An.
reg. 5.
gentleman, was killed by the consent of his own wife. For this a^^, just
punyshement was afterward taken upon those that were the ^oers and consenters
to the same. The wife her self was burned at Cantorbury the.xiiii. day of
March, the same day two other were hanged in chains at Feuersham, and a woman
brent: Mosby and his sister Execution
were hanged in Smithfield at London. And black Will the Ruffian that was hired
to do the act, after his first escape was apprehended and burnt on a scaffold
at Flyshyng in Sealande.

The.xiiii. day of February, being An Arrian burnt.
saturday* D. Stephen Gardener bishop of Winchester, was deprived of his
bishoprike, and so committed to the tower again. Into his place was translated
do^^or Poynet, who before was bishop of Rochester.

The.xxiiii. day of Apryl, being friday, a d^^hema^ was burned in Smithfield
for heresy, who held the detestable opinion of the Arrians.

The.viii^ day of May, a proclamation was made, that from and after the last
day of August then next ensuyng, our shi^lyng of the valu of xii. d should be
current but for.ix. d. and a grote for three pence: by reason of which
proclamation ens^^ed great dearth of al things, for the people couetyng to
raise y^ loss of their money* upon such kind of wares or vi^tual as they
occupied, did daily enhaunce the price, most miserbaly oppressyng the poor.

The.xxv. day of May, being Monday between the hours of eleven and An
earthequake.
one ofthe clock at after noone, was ^n earthequake of half a quarter of an
^owre long at Blechyngleye, at Godstone, at Croydon, at Aibery, and at diverse
other places in Southerye and Myddlesex.

The.ix. day of July being thursday, the forsaid proclamation, which was
appointed to take effect the last day of August next coming, was shortened unto
this present day, and took effect immediately The first fall of the money.
upon ye publishing of the same, which was done between ix. and ten of the
clock before noone, so that immediately, a shilling went for.ix. pens, and a
grote for.iii. d, and no word spoken of the small money, as pence and half
grotes, by reason whereof, there was no small money to be gotten to give the
poor people.

The sweating sickness began in London Sweating sycknes.
the.viii. day of July: and the.x. day of July it was most vehement: which was
so terrible, that people being in best health was sodeynely taken, and dead
in.xxiiii. hours, or.xii. or l^sse, for lack of skill in guydyng them in
their sweat. And it is to be noted, tha^ this mortality fell chiefly or
rather only on men, and those also of the best age, as between.xxx. and.xl.
years of age: wherefore this nation was much ale^rd of it* and for the time
began to repent, and remember God. But as the disease in time relented* so our
devotion also in short space decayed: the first weke died in London.800.
persons, and then it ceased.

The.xvi^. day of August, being monday, The second ^al^ of the money.
was proc^amation made, that the shilling, which of late was called down
to.ix. d. shor^ be current for.vi. d. y^ grote ii. d. y^ half grote.i. d. a
penny a ob.

The.xi. day of October, being sunday, the Lord Marquis Dorset was created
Duke of Suffolk, the lord earl of Marwicke, was created Duke of Northumberland,
and the earl of Wilshire, was created Marquis of Winchester, and sir William
Herberte, the master of the horse, was created earl of Penbro^e, and diverse me^
made knights

The.xvi. day of October, being friday, The Duke of Somerset committed again
to y^ tower.
the duke of Somerset was brought again to the tower of London, and in the next
morning the duchess his wife* was brought thither also: and there went also
with the Duke the lord Greye of Wylton, sir Rafe Dane, and sir Thomas Palmer,
and diverse other gentlemen of his familiars.

An. 5.
M
Richard Dobbes Skinner
S
John Couper


The.xxx. day of October being friday, was proclaimed a new coin of A new^
coin.
money, both silver and gold: soueraines of fine gold at.xxx. ^. Angels of
fine gold at.x. ^. and diverse other pieces of gold of lesser value: a piece of
silver of v. ^. and a piece of.ii. ^.vj. d. the sterlyng shillyng.xii. d. and
sundry other smaller pieces of money.

The.vi. day of November, being friday, the old Queen of Scots, rode The
queen of Scotts
through London and Cheap, with a great company of englyshmen waytyng on her,
after she had layne 4 days in y^ bishops place besides Paul's church. The Duke
of Somerset ^raigned.


The first day of December, the duke of Somerset was arreigned at Westmynster
halle, and was there acquitted of treason, but condemned of felony.

The.vii. d^ye of December, was a general Muster of the horsemenne, which
were in the wages of the nobles of the Realm: and for the which the kings
majesty allowed yea^elye for every man.xx. pound, the which muster was made
upon the caussey over against the kings palaice at saint James, the number of
horse was esteemed to be a thousand.

The.xxii. day of January, being friday, Edward duke of Somerset, king Execution
Edwardes uncle before mentioned, was beheaded at the tower hill.

On the.xx. day of February, the marchantes of the Styliarde at London, An.
reg. 6.
were put from their privilege of oc^upyinge, which they of long time before
had used.

The.xxvi. day of Februarye, Sir Rafe a Vane, and sir Miles Partrige Execution
were hanged upon the gallows at tower hill: and sir Michaell Stanhope, with
sir Thomas Arundel, were beheaded upon the scaffolde, which four were
condemned as accessarye in that which the Duke was condemned for*

The last day of April, through negligence A house ^lowen up with gunpowder.
of the gonne powder makers, a certain house with three last of powder, was
blowe^ up and buent, the said gunpowder makers being.xv. in number, were all
slain at the tower hill, a little from the Minoris beside London on the back
side of New abbey.

The.iii. day of August was borne a marvelous strange monster at a place A
monster
called Myddle^on.xi. miles from Oxenford, a woman brought forth a child which
had.ii. perfe^^bodies from the nauel up ward, and were so joined together at
the navel, that whenne they were laid in length, the one head and body was
eastward, and the other west the legs for both the bodies grew out at the
mids, where the bodies joined, and had but one issue for y^ excrement of both
the bodies: they lived xviii. days, and when they were opened, it appeared they
were women children Great fyshes taken.


The.viii. day of August, there were taken about Quinborough three great fyshes
called Do^phines, or by some called Rigs: and the weke following, at* Blackwall,
were.vi more taken and brought to London, and there sold: the ^east of the^ was
greater then any horse.

The same month of August, began the great provision for the pore in London,
toward the which every man was contributorie, and gave certain money in
hand, and promised to give a certain wekely. The first house which was begone
was at the Gray friars in Newgate market.

The.vii. day of October were two great fyshes taken at Grauesend, which Great
fyshes.
were called whirlepoles, they were afterward drawn up above the bridge.

The.xiiij. day of October, ye bishop of Durha^ Cuthbert Tunstall was deprived
from his byshoprike.

Anno. 6.
M

S
Will. Garrct John Maynarde


This sir George Garnes haberdasher gave ye windmil which stands toward the
east in Fins^ery field to the poor almose people of the same company. And
also he gave to be distribute to the poor people of the parish of S.
Bartholomew the little.xviii. d. in bread every sunday for ever.

The.xxi day of November. the children were taken into the Hospital at the
gray friars to the number of iiii. C

In the summer past, king Edward went in progress into the weste country,
where he had so much exercise of haukyng and hunting, as was thought by some
to be da^ngerous unto his health. Toward winter he returned to London, and
from thense to Grene wiche, where all the (...) season was passed with much
pleasantness and myr^he, until at length in Ianuarye he fell sick of a
cough, which ended in co^sumption of the lyghtes.

The.xx. day of May.iii. great ships Voyage to Moscouie.
well furnyshed were set forth for the aduentu^e of the unknown voyage to
Moscouia. And.ii. other shyps were sent forth to seek adventures southe
wards.

In May Lord Gylsorde the Duke of Northumberlandes fourth son, married lady
Jane the Duke of Suffolkes daughter, whose mother being the^ alive, was
daughter to Mary king Henryes sister.

The.xxii. day of June was a very great and terrible clap of thunder about
Great thunder.
rii. of the clock at noone, which bet open one of the doors of saint Denyse
c^^^^ch in London, and tore of both lock and lynyng of the same door.

King Edward being about the age King Edward deceased.
of xvi. years, as is said before, was long sick of a consumption of the
lights, and the *vi. day of July ended his life.

The x. day of July the death of king Edward^ was publyshed. The same day in
the after noone about fowero^ the clock, the Lady Jane daughter of the lady
Frances, the duchess of Suffolk, which Lady Jane was married unto the Lord
Gylforde Dudley the fourth son unto the Duke of Northumberland, was conveyed
by water to the Tower of London, and between vi^. and.viii. of the clock in
the evening, proclamat^o^ was made through out the city, whereby was declared,
that king Edward being dece^sed, by his will had assigned the said Lady Jane
to be queen, and thereupon so proclaimed Queen of England. This matter was very
grievously taken of ye common people, and a great number of gentilmen, for the
^one they bare to lady Mary, and the right of her title. For when it was heard
that the Lady Mary was fled to Framingham castle in Suffolk, the people of
the country almost wholly resorted unto her, and in Oxenford sir John
Williams: in Buckynghamshire, sir Edmunde Peckham, and in diverse other places
many men of worship, gathered great powers, and with all speed made toward
Suffolk, where lady Marye was, The.xiii. day of July by appoi^t mente of the
counsel of the duke of Northumberland, the Earl of Huntingdon, the lord Gray
of Wilton, and diverse other with a great number of men of arms, went to
fetch her by force, and was on their way as far as Bury. But the.xix. day
of Iulye, the counsel, partly moved wy^h the right of her cause, partly
consydering that the most of the Realm was wholly bente on her side: changed
their minds, and immediately came in^o Cheapesyde with the king of Heraldes,
where they proclaimed the lady Lady Mary proclaimed queen
Mary, Queen of England, keeping as prisoners in the Tower, lady Jane lately
proclaimed, and lord Gylford her husband: and the duke, returnyng to
Cambridge, on the twentye day at night, being apprechended of the guard, he
with other, was brought to the tower of London, the five and twentye of Iulye.
Thus was the matter ended without bloodshed, which men feared, would have
brought the death of many thousands.

Queen Marye.
Anno Regni.i.
of Durham, and other: which continued there prisoners at the Queen's coming:
to all these and many other, she granted pardon, and restored them to their
forme^ dignities. Likewise did she unto Doctor Gardener bishop of Wynchester,
whom she set at liberty, made him high chancellor of England, the lord
Courtney made earl of Devonshire.

The.xi. day of August certain gentylmen A wherrye ouerturned
mindyng to pass through London bridge in a wherrye, were there ouerturned,
and seven of them drowned

The.xiii. day of August one master Bourne a Canon of Poules, preached at
Paul's Cross, whose talk mysliked the audience, that some cried, Pull him
out, and one threw a dagger at him, which hyttyng one of the side posts,
rebounded back again: and then master Bradforde and John Rogers two
preachers of king Edwards time with much labor conveyed the said master
Bourne out of the audience into Paul's schole.

The.xxii. day of August the duke of Execution
Northu^berla^d was beheaded, and with him were put to death sir John Gates, and
sir Thomas Palmer called Buskin Palmer knights.

The xxvi. day of August in the eueninge The great Hary.
a ship was burnt at Wolwiche, called the great Hary, by the negligence of
mariners, she was of burden a thousand tun.

The last day of September the queen's A man stood on ye wethercok of Poules.
hyghnes rode thorough the city to Westminster in most goodly manner, and
pagentes in all places accustomed being most gorgeously trimmed: And as her
grace passed by Paul's, a certain duche man stood upon the wethercock with an
enseigne in his hand, flouryshyng with the same, very strange to the
beholders. And ye morrow her grace was crowned at Westminster by doctor Gardener
bishop of Winchester.

The fyfth day of October began the Parliament at Westminster, and mass of the
holy ghost was song.

The xxv* day of October the barge Grauesend barge.
of Grauesend by great misfortune of a catch running upon her, was overthrown
and.xiiii. persons drowned, and xvi. saved by swimming.

The xxiii. the xxv. the.xxvii. days of October were certain disputations in
the long chapel at the north doro of Paul's concerning Transubstantiation, but
nothing thoroughly determined.

Anno. 1.
M
Tho. White merchant taylour.

Thomas Offley Will. Hewet


The same sir Thomas White, a worthy patron and protector of poor scholars and
learning, renewed or rather erected a college in Oxford, that was in S. John's
college in Oxforde erect^d
great ruin and decay, now called S. John's college, and before Bernard
college, indowing the same with lands and revenues, to the great preferment
of learning and comfort of poor men's children.

The like College also now called trinity college, sir Thomas Pope knight
Trinity college erected
to his great praise and singular commendation erected, which sometime was
called Durham college, appoyntinge for the maintenance of the fellows and
scholars like possession.

Cardinal Poole, who fled out of England in the time of king Henry, and was
in great estimation in the court of Rome, and sent for by Queen Mary to return
into his country.

The xiii. day of Noue^ber D Cra^^er Archbishop of Cantorbury, lady Jane that
was before proclaimed queen, an^ the lord Gilford her husband were openly
arraigned and condemned for treason.

The.v. day of December the parliament was dissolved, in the which parliament
all statutes that were made either of Praemunire in time of king Henry the viii.
or concerning religion an^ administration of the sacraments under king Edward
the syxt, were repealed, and the latten service restored as it was in the last
year of king Henry the eight: and communication was had of the Queen's marriage
with king Phillip the Emperors son. etc.

The beginning of January the emperor sent a noble man called Ecmondane and
certain other ambassadors in to England to make a perfect conclusion of the
marriage between king Philip and Queen Mary.

The.xx. day of January the lord Chancellor with other of the counsel, declared
openly unto the Queen's majesty's household, that there was a marriage concluded,
between her grace and the king ^f Spain, which should be a great strength,
honor, and enriching to the realm of England.

This marriage was so grievously taken of diverse noblemen, gentlemen and
commoners, that for this, and religion they in such sort conspired against the
Queen, that if God had not wonderfully prevented them, it would have brought
much more trouble and danger. Co^motion in Kent
For sir Thomas Wyat in Kente, being one of the chief, about the.xx. day of
January, gathered a certain company, and much incensed the people of those
parts against y^ queen, saying: That she and the counsel intended not only by
alteration of religion to bring in the pope but also by marriage of a stranger
to bring the realm into miserable servitude. The Queen sent the duke of
Norfolk with a company of soldiors into Kent against Wiat, where y^ duke meting
with Wiat, not far from Rochester bridge was forsaken of his soldiers, and
returned to London. Also Henry duke of Suffolk father to lady The du^^of
Suffol^ proclaimed hi^ daugh^ter quen^
Jane, flying into Leicestershyre, and Warwikeshy^e, in diverse places as he
went again proclaimed his daughter queen* but the people did not inclin^ unto
him. Wherefore when the earl of Huntingto^ that was sent to pursue him, came to
Couentry, ye duke having no great strength of men about him, was brought thereby
into a straight, and hydyng himself ^n a park of his own by Couentry, was
bewraied, and by the earl of Huntington brought prisoner to London, and Duke o^
Suffolk taken The queen came to the Guild hall in London
the same day being the first of February, the Queen came from Westminster to
the Guilde hall in London: and there after vehement words against Wiat,
declared that she meant not other wise to marry, then the Council should think
both honorable and commodious to the realm: and therefore willed them truly
to assiste her in repressing such as contrary to their duties rebelled.
Moreover, she appointed lord William Haward lieuetenaunte of the city, and
the Earl of Pembroke general of the fyelde, which both prepared all things
necessary for their purposes.

Wy^te came near unto the City and entered into Southwarke, the third day of
February, wherefore the draw* bridge was broken down, ordinance bent to that
part, general pardon proclaimed to al them that would give over and forsake
the rebels. After Wiat had layne.i^. dais in Southwarke, he turned his
journey to King^^on on Shrouetuisday in the morning being the syxt of February,
where he passed over the Thames, and purposed to have come to London in the
night: but by means that the carriage of his thief ordinance brake he was so
let that he could not come before it was far day. At that time the earl
of Pembroke* and diverse other were in saint James field with a great power, and
their ordinance so bent that Wiate was fayn to leave the common way, and with a
small company came under saint James wall from the danger of the ordinance, and
so went by Charinge cross unto Ludgate without resistance, and there thought
to have be let in. But perceauinge that he was disapoynted of his Wiat taken
purpose he returned* and about temple bar was taken prisoner.

Proclamation was made in London that no man should keep in his house any of
Wiates faction. And shortly after about the number of fifty were hanged on.xx.
pair of gallouses made for that purpose in diverse places in and about the
city.

The.xii. day of February Lady Jane the duke Suffolkes daughter and her husband
lord Gylford were beheaded Execution
for fear least any oath should make lil* trouble for her title, as her father
ha^ attempted*

The xvii. day of February was proclamation made that al strangers should boyde
the Realm within.xxiiii* days next ensuinge, upon pain of confiscation of
their goods (al free de^^sens marchantes, ambassadors and their servants
except.)

The xvii. day of February Henry Duke of Suffolk was condemned of Execution
treason, and the fourth day after beheaded at the tower hill.

The. 23. of February, about. 240. prisoners of Wiats fa^^^^on went with
halters about their necks toward Westminster, who had their pardon in chepe*

The x. of April D. Cra^^er archbishop of Cantorbury, D. Ridley o^ London, and
Hugh Latimer ones by: shop of Worcester, were conveyed as prisoners from the
tower of London to Oxford* there to dispute with the divines and learned men.

The.xi. day of April sir Thomas Execution
Wiat was beheaded at tower hill* and after quartered, his quarters were se^ up
in diverse places, and his head (...) gallows at Hay hill, where it w^^(...)
after s^olne away.

The 27. of April the lord Thomas Gray, brother to the late duke of Suffolk,
was beheaded.

William Thomas a gentleman, and Execution
certain other persons were apprehended for conspiring queen Mary's death the
same William Thomas for that offense the.xviii. day of May was drawn hanged
and quartered at Tyborne.

The.xxiiii. day of May, being the ^east of Corpus Christi, a ioyner called
John Street would have taken the sacrament out of the priests hands in Smith
field, in the time of procession, but he was resisted, taken and put in Newgate.

The fourth day of June was taken Cross in Cheap
down all the gallows that were about London. The same day began the cross of
Cheap to be new gyldid.

The.xv. day of July Elizabeth a The sprite in the wall
wench of the age of.xvi. or, xviii. years, did open penance at Paul's cross,
where she confessed, that she being in^^ced by lewd council, had upon the
^iiii. day of March last passed counterfeit certain speches in an house, nere
unto Aldersgate in London, about the which, the people of the whole city were
wonderfully molested.

The.xix. day of July king Philip the emperors son, arrived at Southhampton,
King Philip
the.iiii. day after he came to Winchester, and there was honorably received
of the bishop, and a great number of nobles, the next day he met with the queen
with whom after he had long and familiar talk. The second day being saint
James day, the marriage was in honorable manner solemnised between him and Queen
Mary. Shortly after king Philip and queen Mary departed from Winchester, and
with a goodly company were brought to London, and there with great provision
were received of the Citizens the.xviii. day of August. At that time a man came
as it Paul's steple lay at Anchor
were flying upon a rope from Paul's steaple to the deanes wall.

In October the emperor sent ambassadors into England to yield unto his son
king Philip the Dukedom of Millayne.

Anno. M. 2. P. 1.
M

S
David Wodroffe Will. Chester.


The.xxiii. of November Cardinal Cardinal Poole
Poole came into England, and was received with honor in all places (...) he
passed* At the same time he was by Parliamente restored to his old estate and
dignity that he was put from by king Henry the queen's father and shortly
after came into the Parliamente house, where the king, queen and, other states
were al present. Then he declaryng the cause of his legasie, first exhorted
them to return to the communion of the church, and restore to the most holy
father and pope, his due authority, secondly he advertised them to give
thanks to God that had sent them so blessed a king and queen: finally he
signified, for so much as they had with great gentilnes restored him to his
honor and dignity, that he most earnestly desired to see them restored to the
heavenly court and unity of the church. The next day the whole court of
parliament drue out the form of a supplication, the sum whereof* was, that
they greatly repented them of that schism that they had lived in. And therefore
desired the Queen and the Cardinal that by their means they might be
restored to the bosom of the holy church and obedience of the seu of Rome. The
next day, the king, queen, and Cardinal being present, the lord Chancellor
declared what the parliament had determined concerning the Cardinals request,
and offered unto the king, and Queen the supplication before mentioned, which
being read, the Cardinal in a large oration, declared how acceptable
repentance was in the sight of God. etc. Immediately he* making prayer unto
God, by authority to him committed absolved them, and restored them to the
church of Rome. When all this was done, they went all unto the chapel, and
there synging Te deum, with great solempnitie declared the joy and gladness,
that for this reconciliation was pretended.

The ii. day of December being sunday, the kings majesty, the lord Cardinal,
and diverse other of the nobility repaired to saint Paul's church in London,
and so unto a window of the same directly against the cross, where the bishop
of Winchester being lord Cha^cellor of England made a sermon* declaryng how
this realm was again restored to the church of Rome.

The 27. of Dece^ber the prince of P^amont The prince of Piamo^t
duke of Sauoy, with other lords were received at Grauesend by the lord privy
^eale and other* and so co^ueyd along the river of Thames to Westminster.

In the beginning of January the parliament was dissolved: Wherein it was
enacted, that the statutes before time made for the punishment of heretics,
and the confirmation of the popes power should be revived, and in so good force
as ever they had been before king Henry's reign: and that such acts as were
made against the supremacy of the Pope should be clean abrogated.

The ix. day of January the prince of The prince of Orange.
Orange being received at Grauesend, was conveyed along the river of Thamis,
and landed at Suffolk place.

The iiii. of February John Rogers Execution*
was burned in Smithfield. The.vii. of February, the lord Strange being married
at the court, the same day at night was a goodly pastyme of Iuga cana by Iuga
ca^^*
cresset light, there were.lxx. cresset lights.

The xviii. of February the bishop of Execution*
Ely, with ye lord Mountacute and diverse other* well apparelled rode forth of
the city of London toward Rome ambassadors from the king, queen and counsel.

The xvi. day of March a weauer of Shordit^h, was burned in Smithfild.

On Easter day one William Flower with a wod^ni^, wounded a priest, as he was
ministrynge the sacrament to the people in S. Margaretes church at
Westminster: for the which offense, the said William had his right hand smitten
of, and for opinions in matters of religion was burned in saint Margarets
churchyard the.xxiiii. day of April*

In May the Lord Cardinal Poole the lord Chancellor of England, the earl
of Arundell, high steward of England, and the lord Paget went over sea to
Calice, and nere unto Mark^ treated with the Emperors and French kings
Commissioners, for a peace to be had between the said princes, who returned
again into England, about the myddest of June, without any agreement making.

The tenthe day of May, a ladde called ^ mylners ^onne counterfeated to (...)
^. Edward the* ^.
Wylliam Fetherstone, about the age of eightene years, who named him self to
be king Edward the.vi. was taken about Eltham in ^ent.

The.xxviii. day of May the aforsayd ladde was had out of the Marshalseye in a
carte, through London to Westminster, with a paper on his head: wherein was
written, that he named him self king Edward. And after that he had been thus
carried round about Westmynster hall before all the Judges and other, he was
then whipped about the said Hall, and after set at liberty*

About the first of July John Bradford Execution
was burned in Smithfielde.

The.xii. day of August was a terrible An. reg. ^.
fight* on the sea* between the Duchmen and Frenchmen, ne^^vnto Romney marshe,
where as.xi. ships were burnt and sonke, that is.vi. french ships, and
five great hulkes, and certain shalkes taken by the French men.

The fourth day of September king Philip passing out of England arrived at
Calice, and so went to Brussels in Brabant to visit the Emperor his father.

The beginning of October fell such Hye waters.
rain, that for the space of.vi. dais men might row with boats in saint
Georges field, the water came into Westminster hall, and there stood half a
yard deep. Also into the palaice of Westmynster, and into Lambeth Church,
that men might row about the church with ^a whirrie.

The.xvi. day of October doctor Ridley, and doctor* Latimer were burned ^t
Oxenforde,

Anno. M. ^. P. 2.
M

S
Thomas Lee Io. Macham


In October and November a parliament was holden, in the which y^ queen yielded
up unto the spiritual men, the first fruits and tenthes of all byshopriks
benefices, and ecclesiastical livings before the end of this parliament dyed
Stephen Gardener Chancellor of England on the ix. day of November, and was
buried at Winchester, in his place was appointed doctor Heath archbishop of
York.

Philpot was burned the.xviii. day Execution.
of November.

The.iiii. day of March appeared a A blasing sterre.
blasing sterre, and continued the space of xii. days.

William Fetherston who before had named him self to be king Edward, now
said, he had of late seen and spoken with king Edward, for the which he
Execution.
was drawn to tiborne, and there hanged and quartered the.xiii. day of March.

The xxi. day of March D. Cranme^ archbishop of Canterbury was burned at
Oxforde: and the same day the lord Cardinal Poole song his first mass a^
Grenewich in the friars Chusche: on sunday next following he was consecrated
archbishop of Cantorburye, at the same friars church with great solemnity: and
on the feast of the annunciation of our lady, he was stalled at Bow churcheyard
in Cheap.

On Palmesonday even being the 28. of March, part of the prison house of
Newgate at London was burnt by casualitie of fire.

A conspiracy was made by certain Co^spiiacye
persons in England, whose purpose was to have robbed the queen's Eschequer, to
the intent they might be hable to mainteyne war against the Queen. This matter
was vttred by one of the conspiracy: whereby Vdall, Throg, morton, Peckham,
Daniel, and Stanton were aphrehended for the same, and diverse other fled into
France.

The xxviii. day of April, Throgmorton, Execution.
and Richard Vdall were drawn to Tyborne, and there hanged and quartered. The
xix. of* May Stanton was likewise executed at tyborne. The viii. day of June
one Ro^^y, Dedike, and Bedle were also drawn to Tiborne, and hanged and
quartered.

The.xxvii. day of June were.xiii. persons brent at Stratford the Bow for
matters of religion.

The vii. day of July Henry Peckh^ An. reg. 4.
and John Daniel were hanged and headed at the tower hill.

Anno. M. 4. P. 3.
M

S
William Harper John white


About this time began the burning fevers and other strange diseases, whereof
Seven aldermen deceased in London
died many old persons, so that in London there died from the last of November
in Anno. 1555. unto the last of December in Anno. 1556.vii. Alderm^ whose names
we^ Henry* Hersdon, sir Richard Dobbes late mayor, sir Willi-Laxton late mayor,
sir Henry Hublethorn late mayor, sir John Champneis blind late mayor, sir John
Oliffe late sheriff, and sir John Gresham late Mayor.

The 16. of December a smith being A desperate act
arraigned at Newgate having a knife in his sleue, drue the same, and thrust*
it into the side of his fellow prisoner, who gave witness against him, so that
he was in great peril of death thereby: for the which act his hand being strik^
of, his body was hanged on a new gibbet set up for yt purpose: ye same time the
keeper of Newgate was arraigned and indicted for that the said prisoner had
weapon about him, and his hands loose, which ought to have been bound.

The.iiii. of January a ship passing before Grenewiche (the court being
there) shot of her ordinance, and one piece being charged with a pellette of
^^one, was shot into the court: but thanks be unto god it did no hurt: but
passed through the walls.

The.xxvii. day of February an ambassador An ambassador from Moscouie.
came to London from the emperor of Cattay, Moscouie, and Russeland: who was
honorably met and received at Totnam by the merchantes venturers of London,
ridynge in velvet coats and chains of gold, and by them co^ducted to the
bars at Smithfielde, and there received by the lord Mayor of London, with
the aldermen and sheriffs: and so by them conueyd^ thorough the City, unto
maysten Dimokes place in* Fanchurche street, where he lodged until the.xi^* o^
May next following, at the which time he took his journey to Grauesend, and
ther^ took shippyng with the primrose, and iii. other ships to sail to
Moscouie.

The lord Sturton murdered two A murdere^
men: and for the same was arraigned and condemned at Westmynster: he was
conveyed through London to Salisbury, Execution
and there hanged with.iiii. of his servants, the.vi. day of March.

King Philip, who had been in Flanders to take the possession of the low
countries, in March returned into England, and the.xxii. day he passed
through London, being accompanied with the Queen, and the nobles of the realm:
But because great trouble was toward between him and the king of France, he
tarried not long here: but y^ third of July next following, passing the seas
again into Flaunders made great provision for war against the Saint
Quintins.
French king. The Queen in her husbands quarrel sent over an army of one
thousand horsemen.iiii. thousand foot me^.ii M. pioners, to aid king Philip
whereof y^ earl of Pe^broke was general

The.xxiiij. day of April Thomas Scarboroughe castle taken.
Stafford and other englishemen* to the number of.xxxii. persons coming out of
France, took the castle of Scarborough, which they enjoyed.ii. days, and then
were taken, and brought to London: where on the.xxviii. day of May the said.
Thomas Stafford was beheaded at the Tower hyl: and upon Execution An. reg. 5.
the morrow were three of his company drawn to Tyborne, and there hanged and
quartered.

This year on y^.xv. day of July died the lady Anne of Cleue at Chelsey, and
was buried at Westmin. y^ 8 of August

The.x. day of August were taken of France the chiefest capitaynes that the
French king had, as follows: The duke of Montmorency Constable of France,
and his son called Monsieur de Meru, the Duke of Monpencier, the Duke of
Longueuile, the Mareshall of S. Andrewe, the Ringraue Coronall of the Almaines,
Roche du Maine, the Conte of Roche fou^ault. The Vicount of Touraine, the Baron
of Curton, the prince of Mantua, beside many gentylmen and capitaynes.

The.xviii. day of Auguste was taken the town of S. Qui^tin by king Philip,
with the help of englyshmen.

This year before harvest* wheat Dearthe and plenty of corn in one year.
was sold for.ii^i. mark the quarter. Malte at four and forty shyllynges:
Beans at fortye shyllynges: Rye at forty shyllyngs the quarter, and pease
at.xlvi. shillynges.viii. d. But after harvest, wheat was sold for* v. s. the
quarter: malt at.vi. s.viii. d. rye at.iii. s.iiij. d. and in the countreye,
wheat was sold for.iiij. s. the quarter: malte for* iii^. s.viii. d. and ^n
some place, a bushel of rye for a pound of candels, which was.iiii. d.

Anno* M. 5. 10. 4.
M

S
Richard Malarie James A^tam


The first of January the frenchmen Calice lost
came to Calaice with a great army, and laid siege thereunto: and within.iiij.
or v. days were masters thereof: and shortly acter wan all the pieces on that
side the sea.

The French Ring also invaded Flanders, and spoiled and brent Dunkicke,
before king Philyp could com to the rescue: but before the French men returned
out of Flanders, the Flemmynges and the english ships meting with them upon
the sands between Dunkicke and Brauelyn slew of them a great number.

This winter the quarterne agues continued in like manner, or more vehemently
then they had don the last year where through dyed so many prieste^, that a
great number of parishes in diverse places of this Realm! were unserved.
Execution


This year in June were.vii. burned at one stake in Smithfield, and in July
were six burned at Brainforde.

Anno. M. 6. P. 5.
M
Sir Thomas Lee Mercer

Tho. Hawes Rich. Champion


King Philippe being absent out of this realm, Queen Mary being dan gerously
sick, ended her life, the. xvij day of Noumber, when she had reigned.v.
years.iiii. months and.xi. days The same day dyed Cardinal Poole, and a
little before two of her physicians, and diverse by shops and noble men, whom
the queen esteemed greatly

Queen Elizabeth.
Anno Regni. 1.
ELizabeth, our most gracious and soueraign lady to the great comfort of
England, was with full consent proclaimed queen the xvi^. day of November, in
the year. 1558. Not long after, she came from Hatfielde in Hertfordshire, unto
the Charterhouse in London: and went from thens to the tower where she remained
until the.xiiii. day of January following: at which time the Londoners having
made sumptuous prouisiion) she passed through y^ city to her palaice at
Westminster, she wyng very comfortable and gentil countenance unto y^ people:
the next day following, her grace was crowned in Saint Peter's church at
Westminster by doctor Oglethorpe bysh. of Carlisle.

The report of this was very joyful to such as in Queen Mary's time for
religions sake fled into Germany, and other countries whereupon they now
shortly returned home again.

The twenty day of Januarye, began a Parliament at Westmynster: A
parliame^tnt west minster.
and in this Parliamente, the First ^ruiles and Tenthes, were restored to the
Crown, and also the supreme government over the state Ecclesiastical:
likewise the book of common prayer and administration of the sacra mentes in
our vulgar tongue was restored.

Shortly after the queen's majesty appointed a conference or disputation to be
had at Westminster church, concerning matters of religion, but the matter
came to none effec^.

The.vii. of April was a joyful peace proclaimed betwixt our souerain lady
Elisabeth queen of England, and Henry the French king.

At the feast of John Baptist, the service in the mother tongue was fully
established throughout this realm, and the Mass with other Latin Service was
clean* abolyshed.

About Bartholome wtide the church Images burned.
wardens of churches in London with their persons and ministers, brought
forth the Roodes and other images of their churches, and brent them before
their church doors.

Anno reg. 1.
M
Sir Will. Hewet cloth worker

Tho. Lodge Roger Martin


Many men of war were conueyde An. reg. 2. The mayor of London begins his
year y^ 18. day of October, which is in the first year of the queen's
majesty's reign. And y^ queen's second year begins on the.17. day of
November fo^owyng. Houses ^lowen up ^n crooked ^ane ^ase mo^eys called ^n:
out of France into Scotland: whereby it was suspected, that they would
sodeinly invade this realm, whereupon the Queen's majesty sent the Duke of
Norffolke toward Scotland, as general, and the lord Gray of Wylton being
lieutenant, entered Scotland with a sufficient power to join with the Scotts
and Frenchemen. And in the end her grace sent sir William Cicill knight, her
majesty's principal secretary with master doctor wotton to treat with the
Frenchmen, who by their wisdoms enforced the Frenchmen to depart, to the
great quietness both of England and Scotland.

The.v. day of July through shoting of a gonne, which brake in the house of
one Adrian Arten a ducheman in crooked lane, and setting fire on a firkyn and a
barell of gunpower.iiii. houses were clean blown down, and diverse other sore
hurt and bruised.

This year on Michelmas even before noone, it was published by proclamation,
that the teston of the best sort being marked with the port ^uleys should then
forthwith be taken for.iiii. d. ob* and the second sort being marked with the
greyhound for.ii. d. q. the third and worst sort not being marked with one of
those marks before named ^ot to be taken for any value: the three penny piece
which was ^oyned for.iiii. pence should be but.i. d. ob. the.ii. d. piece for.i.
d. etc. And shortly after, her New coins.
grace restored unto al her subjects fine and pure sterlyng money, both of gold
and silver for their corrupt and base coin, calling in the same to her
majesty's myntes, according to the rates before mentioned.

Anno. 2.
M
Sir Will. Cheste^ dra^er
S
Thomas Roe


The.xxi. day of March, a notable grammar school was founded by the A gra^mer
schole* bu^^ded by the merchant taylers.
master, wardeyns, and assistentes of the right worshypfull company of the
merchant taylours of the city of London in the parish of Saint Laurence
Pounteney.

The.x. day of April was one William Geffrey whipped from the Marshalsey in
Southwarke to Bedlym without bishops gate of London, for that he professed one
John Moore to be Christ: and on his head, and about the carte were set
papers, wherein was written as follows: William Geffrey, a most One fayning
himself to be Christ.
blasphemous here^ike, denying Christ our Savior in heaven. The said Geffrey
being stay^e at Bedlym gate, the Marshals officers caused John More to be
brought forth, who was after tied to the cart, and whypt an arowes shote from
Bedlym: where at the last^ he confessed Christ to be in heaven, and himself to
be a synful man. Then was More sent again into Bedlem, and william Geffrey to
the Marshalsey, when they had layne prisoners nigh a year and a half before
that time, the one for professyng himself to be Christ, the other a disciple of
the same Christ.

The.iiii. day of June being wednesday between.iiii. and.v. of y^ clocks
Poule^ steple a fire.
in the after noon, the steple of Paul's in London, being stered by lightnyng
brast forth as it did seem to the beholders.ii. or three yardes beneth the
cross and so brent round about in the same place, that the top with the
cross fell of, and lighted on the south side of Poules church, and so the
spire brent down ward so terryblye and vehemently, that within less space
then.iiii. ho^^ers, the same steple and all the cos^^ of the same church were
consumed to ashes: which was a lamentable sight, and pitiful remembrance to
the beholders thereof.

Anno. 3.
M
Sir Will. Harper mar. ta^.
S
Alexa^. Auenon


The.xv. day of November, the queen's majesty published a proclamation wherein
her grace restored to the realm diverse small pieces of silver money, as the piece
of.vi. d.iiii. d.iii. d.ii. d. and.i. d. three halfpeny, and three farthynges.
And also forbad all manner of forain coins to be current within the same
realm: as well gold as silver, except two sorts of crowns of gold, whereof
the one was the french crown, and the other a flemmyshe crown.

This fourth year in England were An. reg. 4* M^strous byrthes.
many monstrous byrths, as in March a mare brought forth a foale with one body
being in good proportion, and two heads, having as it were a long tail
growing out right like a horn between the same two heads. Also a s^w farrowed a
pig with.4. legs like unto y^ a^mes of a man child with hands and fingers
disfigured. etc. In April a sow fa^ ^owed a pig y^ had 2. bodies.8. sete, bu^
one head many calves and lambs were monstrous, and one calf had a collar of
skin growing about the neck, like to a double ruff, which to the beholders
seemed strange and wonderful.

The. 20. day of May a monsterous A monstros child
child was born at Chichester in Sussex. The head arms and legs like unto an
anotomy, the breast, and belie very monstrous byg, from the nauill, as it were
a long string hanging: about the neck a great collar of flesh and skyn
growing like the ruffes of a shirte or neckerchief coming up about the ears
pleyting or folding. etc.

This year the Queen's Majesty in September, addressed a band of her subjects
to the town of Newhauen in Normandye: who were embarked at Portismouth,
because yt haven is most apt for transportation to that place, Upon whose
arrival the towns men New haue^
and inhabitants joyfully surrendered the^ selves and the town into the
possession of the Queen's majesty, which was kept by Englishmen from September
1562. to the. 29. day of July then next folowinge, which was in the year
1563. the gouernoure of which band was the right honorable the Earl of
Warwike, who with the capitaynes seruinge there (which were of great
experience) and soldiers trained by them to knowledge of service, togethet
with part of the old approved garrison of Barwike, did at that time both
manfullye defend the piece, and valeauntly encountered by sundry skyrmishes
and conflictes with the county Ringraue and his band, the most part whereof,
where happily atchiued, to the great overthrow of the adversaries part, and
singular commendations of ours.

Anno. 4.
M
sir Tho. Lodge grocer

William Alleyn Richard Chamberlain


When the frenchmen with huge armies Anno. 5
assembled out of al parts of France to recover the place of passage: the
stopping whereof, by our power, was the double woe of their common wealth, there
bred through the heat of time, and putrifactio^ of the air: a miserable and
unfortunate plague emonge our men, which maruelously increased with the death
of diverse of the best captains and soldiers, where withal there followed a
cruel and quick siege, whereat was present the Constable, and the best tried
number of warlike soldiers within the whole country of France. The marshes
were made passable and firm ground: which by men of great experience was
thought impossible. And with common help the Canons were placed, the castle and
walls were battered, and sundry breaches made beyond expectation How be it they
were rewarded by our gonners to their great terror and anoyance. The earl of
Warwike with ye remnant of our captains and soldiers in courageous order,
standing at the seuerail breaches ready to defend their asaultes: which
perceived by the enemy they caused their trompets to sound the blast of
emparle, that composition of either part might be made to avoid the imminent
slaughter and effusio^ of blood. This offer seemed not unmeet, both parties
concluded, the town was delivered the. 29. day of July, and all the english
licensed to depart.

This year as ye have hard, the plage of pestilence being in the town of New
haven, and many soldiers infected with the same returning into England, the
infection thereof increased, being before that begone in diverse parts of this
realm, but especially the city of London was so infected there with, that in
the same whole year, that is to say, from the first of January. 1562. until the
last of December. 1563. there dyed in the City and liberties thereof
(conteinyng 108. parishes) of all discases.xx. M.iii. C.lxxii. so that there
dyed of the 108. paryshes in London.
plague (being part of the number before named) xvii. M.iiii. C. and.iiii.
persons. And in the out parishes adioynyng to the same city, being xi.
parishes died of al diseases in the whole year aforesaid.iii. M.ii. C.lxxx.
and viii. persons, and of them of the plage being a part of the said number
last before named.ii. M.vii. C. xxxii so that the whole total sum of all
those that died of al diseses in ye holle year, as well within the city of
London and liberties of ye same, as in the out parishes adjoining was.xxiii.
M.vi. C.lx. and of them of y^ plage died in all.xx. M.i. C.xxxvi.

This year for so much as the pessilence was so hot in the city of London
there was no term kept at Michel mas. To be short, the pore citisens of London
were this year plagued with a A threfolde or a treble plague.
treble plague, as with the pestilence, scarsitie of money, and derth of
victuels: the myserie whereof, were to long her^ to write, no doubt the poor
remember it. God be merciful unto us, and defend us from the like, if it be
his will.

Anno. 5.
M

S
Edward Ba^ks Rouland Haiwarde


This Mayor kept no Majors feast at No Majors feast.
y^ Guyld hall, as it had been accustomed before time: Also he took his oath at
the uttermost gate of the tower of London.

This year thanks be given to God was a peaceable year, and the plague of
pestilence well ceased in London: nevertheless for fear thereof, Hillarye
term was kept at Hertford castle, be side Ware. An. reg. 6.


The.xxiii. day of Apryll was a joyful peace proclaimed with the sound of
trompettes between England and France. Watch on S. Peter's even at London.


This year through the earnest suite of the arinorers, there was on the Digile
of Saint Peter, a watch in the City of London, which did only stand in the
highest streets of Cheap, of Cornhyll, and so forth toward Algate: which
was to the commons of the same city (for the most part) (...) chargeable
(...) when in times paste, it was most co^mendably done, wher^s this being to
very small purpose, was of as small a number w^l ^iked.

The second day of October in the a^ te^ ho^^^^ was a solem^ne obsequi^ kept at
saint Paul's church in London, for F^rdinando the Emperor, late being
departed out of this mortal life, and like wise the moro^^next after (...) the
for^none.

Anno. 6.
M
Richard Mala^y (...)
S
Ly^nell, Du^ket


The.xx. day of November in the An. reg. 7. Houses shaken with gunpouder
morning about vi. of the clock through negligence of a may^^n with a candel,
the shuffe ^a^lynge in an hundred pound weight of gunpouder, th^e hous^s in
Bu^klers bur^, were ^ore shake, the maiden was so bu^^t, that she died thereof
within (...) d^y^ after. It is to be li^ted, that if, this (...) h^d layne in a
low^^part of the house, as it lay in a garret, it had done much more (...):
Wherefore I ^d^ys^^^^ to look warely to such ware.

The.xxi. day of December being S. Thomas day began a frost, which continued
^yl the.iii. day of January: (...) new years even, people went over the Thames
on the ice, and along the Thames from London bridge to Westminster, and great
number of people, played at the footeball: on new years day* being monday, on
tu^sday and wednesday diverse gentlemen and others, set up pricks on the
Thames, and shot at the same. And the people both men and women went on the
Thames, in greater numbres then in any street in London? The costardemongers
played at the dyce for apples on the ice: on the wednesday at night it began to
the w^ but men went over and along the Thames on thursday al night: but on
(...) day being the fyfth day of January at night, was no Ice on the Thames to
be seen: but that all men might come over and along the same, to was so
soberly consumed: which sudden (...) caused such great (...) and hye waters,
that it (...) down many bridges and houses, and dro^ned many people.

The.26. day of January being ^^^^day Eight tides in.ii. nights and a day
at night were two sides in the spa^^of.ii. hours at London, on the morrow was
like wise.ii. in the morning, and.i^. at night: on sunday being the.28. day of
January were likewise.^^. ^ides in the morning, and at right but one.

The *xx. day of June the lady Lin^^^^ was ^ente prisoner to the Tower of
London.

This year on Saint Peter's even at night was the ly^e ^^anding watch in London
as was the ^ame night.xii. months.

The.xvi. day of July about.vi. of Great tempest
the clock at night, began a terrible tempest of lightning and thunder, with
sho^res of ^ayle, which lightning and thu^der continued until.iii. of the clock
on the next morning. In the which tempest much harm was done in and about
Chelmsford in Essex, as by destroyng of five hundred acres of corn, the
beatinge down of all the glass windows on the east side of y^ said town, and
of the west and south sides of the church, the beating of the ^yles of their
houses, throwing down diverse barnes and ^hymneys with the batilmen^^s of their
church. etc. The hayle ^^ones being measured, were found to be ^i* inches
about. At the same time was much harm done in many other places of this
realm, as at Ledes, at Cran broke, at Dover in Rent. etc.

This year Christopher prince and margraue of Baden, with the lady Cicily his
wife sister to the king of Swe^hland arrived at Dover, and the xi. day of
September, they came to London, and were lodged at the er^e of Bedfordes place,
nere unto Iu^e bridge, where within.iiii. days after, she travailed, and was
delivered of a man child: which the last of September was baptized in the
Queen's majesty's chapel of Whitehall. The Queen's majesty in her own person
being Godmother gave the name Edwardus fortunatus.

Anno. 7.
M

S
John Rivers Iam. Hawes


The.xi. of November, the right honorable, Ambrose Earl of Warwike, married
Anne eldest daughter to the Earl of Bedforde: for the honor and celebration
of which noble marriage a goodly challenge was fyxed upon the court gate at
Westminster, to be observed and d^n the.xi. day of the same, the ^^nor whereof
ensues.

You that in warlike ways, and deeds of arms delight,
You that for countries cause, or else for Ladies love dare fight:
Know you four knights there be, that come from foren land,
Whose hau^ie hearts and courage great, has moved to take in hand,
With sweard, with spear and shilde, on foot on horseback too,
To try what you by force of fight, or otherwise can do.
Prepare your selves therefore, this challenge to defend.
That tro^pe of fame, your prowes gre^ abroad may sound and send.
And he that best can do, the same shall have the prise,
The day, the place, and form and fight, Lo here before your eyes.
At the tylt, with each one.vi. courses, at the torney.xii. strokes with the
swearde, three pushes with the puncheon staff, and.xii. blows with the sweard
at bariars, or twenty, if any be so disposed.

At x. of the clock at night the some day, a valiant seruisable man, called
Roberte Thomas Master gonner of England, desirous also to honor (...) ^east
and marriage day, in consideration the said earl of W^rwike was general of
thordinanc^ within h^^Maiesties realm and domin^ans made three great trains of
chambres, which terribly^ yielded forth^ the nature of their voice to the great
astonishment of diverse, who at the ^yri^g of the second was unhappily stayn^ by
a piece of one of the chambers to the great sorrow and lamentation of al those
that love their country and de^ence of the some, for further explication of
who^e pra^^^^ the (...) rome of this abri^ged summary will not suffice.

The.xxviii. day of December there rose a gre^ storm and tempest of wind, An.
reg. 8.
by whose rage the* Th^mes and Se^^ouerwhelm^d many persons, and the great gates
at the west and of S. Paul's church in London (between which stands the
br^senpylor) were through the forc^ of the wind then in the Western part of
the world blown open.

In January Mo^^si^^Rambuley a (...) in France was sent over into England by
the French king Charles the.^^. of that name, with the ^rd^^of saint M^^^^ell,
who at Winds^r was (...) the said French king with the knighthoode of the most
honorable order of the Garter and the.xxiiii. of January in the chapel of her
majesty's palace of Whitehall. The said Mo^^sie^ Rambuley invested Thomas duke
of Norfolk and Robert earl of Leicester, with the said order of saint Mighell.

Thus (good reader) I have brought as thou see this abridged Summary to these
our present days, meaning as time shall increase so to augment the same,
desyringe thee to take these* my trauayles in good part, ^yke as I have m^u^e
them to wards* thee.

FINIS*
The age of the world.
1 THe first age from the creation of Adam* to the ^^oude of Noe, which
continued. 1656 2 The second from Noe to Abraham. 291 3 The third age from the
birth of Abraham, till the departing of Israel out of Egypt, years. 50^ 4 The
fourth age from the departing of Israel out of Egypt, til the building of the
temple, years. 481 5 The fyfth age from the building of the temple, till the
captivity of Babylon, years 414 6 The sixte age, from the captivity of
Babylon till the birth of our savior Jesus Christ* yere^ 614 7 The vii. age
of the world took his beginning at the birth of our savior Jesus Christ, and
has continued til this present year of our Lord.1566. and shall last till the
worlds end. The age of the world at the birth of Christ was.3962. The age of
the world this present year of our Lord.1566. is.5528.
FINIS
How a man may sourney from any notable town in England, to the City of
London: or from London to any notable town in the same realm.
The way from Walsyngham to London.
FRom Walsyngham to Pikna^ xii. miles From Picknam to Bra^do^fery x. mile. From
Brandonfery to Newemarket x. mile. From Newmarket to Babram. x. mile From
Babram to Barkway. xx. mile. From Barkway to Puchrich* vii. mile From Puchriche
to Ware v. mile. From Ware to Waltham viii. mile From Waltham to London xii.
mile
The way from Barwike to York and so to London.
From Barwik to belforth xii. m^^^^ From Belforth to Anwik xii. mile From
Anwike to Morpit xii. mile From morpit to Newcastel xii. mi. From Newcastel to
Durha^. xii. mile. From Durha^ to Darington xiiii. mile From daringto^ to
northalerto^ xiiii. mil. From Northalerto^ to Topclif. vii. mile From Topclife
to York xvi. mile. From York to Tadcaster viii. mile From Tadcaster to
Wentbridge x. mile From Wentbridge to Da^caster viii. mile From Dancaster to
Tutford xviii. mile From Tutford to Newarke x. mile From Newarke to Grantham x.
mile From Grantha^ to Stanford. xvi. mile From Stanforde to Stilton xii. mile
From Stylton to Huntyngton ix. mile. From Hu^tington to Roiston xv. mile. From
Royston to Ware xii. mile From Ware to Waltham viii. mile From Waltham to
London xii. mile
The way from Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London.
From Carnarua^ to Co^wey xxiiii mile. From Co^way to Dinbigh xii. mile From
Denbigh to Flynt xii. mile. From Flynt to Cheste^ x. mile From Chester to Wyche
xiiii. m^^^^ From Wyche to Stone xv. mile From Stone to Lichefield xvi. mile
From Lichfield to Colsill xii. mile From Colsyll to Couentree viii. mile
And so from Couentre to London, as hereafter ^o ^^weth.

The way from Cokermouth to Lancaster, and so to London.
From Cokermouth to Kiswik vi. ^^. From Kiswik to Grocener viii. mile. From
Grocener to Kendale xiiii. mile From Kendale to Burton vii. mile From Burton to
Lancaster viii. mile From Lancaster to Preston xx. mile From Preston to Wygam
xiiii. mile. From Wygam to Warington. xii* mile From warington to Newcastel xx.
mile From Newcastle to Lichfield xx. mile from Lichfield to Couentre xx. mile
from Couentre to Danetre. xiiii. mile from Danetre to Tocester x. mile from
Tocester to Stony Stratforde. vi. mile. from Stony stratford to Brichyl vii. m^
from Brichyl to Dunstable vii. mile from Dunstable to S. Albons x. mile. from
S. Albons to Barnet x. mile from Barnet to London* x. myl^
The way from Yermouth to Colchester, and so to London.
FRom Yermouth to Becclis viii. m^. from Becclis to Blybour vi. mile. from
Blybour to Snapbridge viii. mile from Snapbridge to wodbridge viii. m^ from
Wodbridge to Ipswich v. mile from Ipswiche to Colchester xii. mile. from
Colchester to Eastford viii. mile from Eastford to Chelmesrord x. mile from
Chelmesford to Brentwod x. mile. from Brentwod to London xii. mile.
The way from Dover to London.
From Dover to Cantorbury xii. mile from Canterbury to sitingborn xii mile from
Sitingborn to Rochester viii. mi. from Rochester to Grauesend v. mile. from
Grauesend to Datford vi. mile From Datford to London xii. mile
The way from S. Burien in Cornwall to London.
From S. Burient^ y^ mount xx. mile From the mount to Thury xii mile from S.
Thury to Bodnam xx. mile From Bodnam to Launston xx. mile. From Launston to
Ocomton xv. mile from Ocomton to Crokehornwel x. mile from Crokehornwel to
Exceter x. mile. from Excester to Honiton xii. mile from Honiton to Charde x.
mile from Cha^de to Crokehorne. vi^* mile from Crokehorne to Shirborne x. mile
from Shirborn to Shaf^sbury x. mile. from shaf^sbury to Salisbury xviii. mi.
from Salisbury to Andeuor xv. mile from andeuor to Basingstock xviii. mi. from
Basingstock to Harford viii. mile from Harford to Bagshot. viii. mile from
Bagshot to Stanes. viii. miles. from Stanes to London. xv* miles*
The way from Bryst^w^ to London.
From Bristow to Marsfelde x. mile. from Marsfeld to Chip^^n x. mile. from
Chipna^ to Marlcborow xv. mile from Marlcborow to Hu^gerford 8. mile from
Hu^gerford to Newbery vii mile from Newbery to Readyng xv. mile from Reading to
Maidenhead x. mile from Maidenhead to Colbroke vii. mile from Colbroke to
London. xv. mile.
The way from Saint David's to London*
FRom S David's t o Axford. xx mile From Axford to Carmarden. x mile From
Carmarden to Newton x mile From Newton to Lanbury x mile From Lanbury to
Brecknock. xvi mile From Brecknocke to Hay. x mile From Hay to Harford xi^^j
mile From Harford to Roso^ ix mile From Roso to Gloucester xij mile From
Gloucester to Cicester. xv mile From Cicester to Fa^^^^gton xv^ mile From
Far^^^^gto^ to Habington. vi^ mile from Habington to Dorcester. vii mile From
Dorcester to Henley. xij mile From Henley to Maidenhed. vii* mile From
Maydenhead to Colbroke vij mile from Colbroke to London. xv mile

