PROFANO-MASTIX.

OR, A BRIEF AND Necessary Direction concerning the respects which we owe to
God, and his House, even in outward worship, and reverent using of Holy Places.

Showing chiefly When, and How, we ought to enter; How to behave our selves
being Entered, How to Depart; as also, How to esteem of Gods House at every
other time.

Written out of a true and sincere intent to teduce the Disordered and
Factious, to a better order then either their neglect, stubbornness, or
scrupulositie can purchase for them.

By JOHN SWAN Curate of Duxford S. Peter's.

GENESIS 28.17. How dreadful is this place. This is no other but the House of
God, and the Gate of Heaven.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. and are to be sold by Daniel Pakeman, at the sign of
the Rainbow in Fleet Street near the Temple gate. 1639.

TO The Right Worshipful Mr. ANTHONY TOPHAM, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane
of Lincoln, all health and happiness.
Right reverend Sir,
IN token of that humble respect which I owe to your self, I am bold to
dedicate these poor endeavors to you; hoping that as my studies long ago
abetted by your furtherance, so a tribute of their fruits shall be now
accepted at your worthy hands: for though I reckon my self bound to render
more than what is contained in these few papers, yet (as Plutarch speaks) non
Minus regium summaeque humanitatis, parva lubenti facilique suscipere animo,
quam magna largiri. And this I shall the rather hope, because herein I have
chiefly labored to cast out that filth and rubbish, wherewith the Philistims
have stopped Abraham's wells: for they be not the ancient, but the later times
against which we find a just complaint. And I would to God there were no
cause: But (alas) it is otherwise; insomuch that he now is said to be
unsound, who will not side with factious opposites, nor yield to soothe the
idle fancies, and needless fears of not a few. But as to a rotten mouth all
things relish with a rotten taste, Oris non elementi vitio; so things wholesome
and good, appear contrary to corrupt judgments: and therefore it makes not
much what such men censure; especially the Author being sheltered under the
favorable wing of your protection, which cannot but add more life to the
warrantable proceedings of him who wishes both your happiness here and glory
hereafter, And shall ever remain at your service to be commanded,

JOHN SWAN.
November. 5. 1638.
The Epistle to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Hope (ere long) to befriend thee with a work of better worth, if this (in
the mean time) may find thee courteous in the acceptance. Sure I am, that in
it (...), it cannot out be judged a n^^^ssarie labor: For, whilst it seeks
the pacification of contentious spirits, by striving to give satisfaction
concerning some things now in agitation, it aims at Gods glory; the manner of
whose worship has by degrees, grown to such a sordid and homely pass, as
Religion has (now adays) lost much of that bright beauty, which in Ages
heretofore she was known to have. But I remember the words of that wise King,
Solomon. Eccles. 7.10.
Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better then these?
for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this. Which is as if it should be
said; Late times may be as good as ancient, if Men were but willing to tread in
the same steps that they have trod: for the nearer a fountain, the better the
water. Stand therefore upon the ways (as the Prophet speaks;) and consider:
ask of the old ways, Ier. 6.57.
which is the best. And verily, among reformed Churches, there is none desires
it more then Ours; and might be happy in it, if we had among us no filthy
Vipers. But these as they are enemies to themselves; so also to others: for
whilst some do not only disobey, but defend their Disobedience, they poison
many more both by their example and Defense. And what though they gain a
popular applause in their envious proceedings against the Church? this is but
to make a bad case worse: For one man of judgment is better by far, then a
numerous multitude of the common sort; whose very wisdom is but as a light
feather in matters of this nature, as being too far above their reach. It
were good therefore that the Coblar would no^ prescribe beyond his Last; nor no
man meddle but in his right Vb^. for till then, there will be no end of
Schism nor Disorder; And so, no quiet to the Church of God here planted among
us. I say no more, but wish every society to pray for the peace of their Holy
Mother: Psalm. 122.6.
for (as it is written in the Book of Psalms) They which love her shall
prosper.

PROFANO-MASTIX; OR, A TREATISE FOR DIREction concerning the respects which we
owe to God and his house, even in outward worship, and reverent using of holy
places.
A Man that has but an indifferent insight into the poysonsome humors of
headstrong Schismatick's, and such as are daily infected by them, may easily
discern, that their affectation of paritie ends not in persons; but is
transferred even to places also: whereupon it comes to pass, that they do as
slightly esteem of Churches, as of common and ordinary places; and of things
sacred, as of things profane. But they may be ashamed (if any shame at all be
left them) thus to revive and foster the condemned heresy of Ae^rius on the
one side, and of the Eustasians on the other side. For whilst they stand thus
affected, they do equally give life and nourishment to the dead spirits of
each of those forenamed heretics.

And first concerning their Paritie which they would have among men of the
Church, how dissonant it is to Orthodox doctrine, Epiphanius and Saint Austin,
in particular, besides the general stream of other Fathers, have sufficiently
declared: Insomuch, that if even S. Hierome himself in any of his writings
seems to say any thing which may be thought not to jumpe directly, with what
the other Fathers, and Scriptures have taught concerning this; it is truly and
modestly imputed to him, by that learned Saravia de diverse. Minister. gradibus.
Saravia, as a private opinion, wherein he favored too much, that which was
condemned in him already mentioned; I mean Ae^rius. Now may a man but appeal
from S. Hierom in one place, to S. Hierom in another place: for writing contra
Luciferianos, he affirms plainly, that the Church of God consists of many
degrees, the highest whereof he makes to rest in the Bishops: and they,
Ignatius Epist. ad Smyrn. Diony fius eccles. Hier. c. 5.
as S. Ignatius (the disciple of S. John and Dionysius, (the scholar of S.
Paul) have declared, are terminated in Christ immediately. In a word; as the 70
disciples were inferior to the Apostles; so be ordinary Priests now to the
Bishops: for as they succeed the Apostles; so do inferior Priests the 70
disciples. Which if it had been cross to divine institution, neither would S.
Paul have created Timothy and Titus Bishops; the one of Ephesus, the other of
Crete: nor would the spirit of God but have cried out against it, when those
seven Churches of Asia were sharply taxed for their faults: For certain it is,
that albeit they were governed by Bishops, yet is there nothing spoken against
either their admitting, or retaining of such a government. Nay let me add,
that Philip preached, and baptized, and converted Samaria; but had not the
power to ordain them Pastors: and therefore Peter and John are sent to impose
hands, and give the holy Ghost; as in the eighth chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles may be read at large.

And secondly, concerning Gods house, that it should not be differenced from
another place, was (a long while since) the profane opinion of the Eustasian
heretics, and of the Messalians after them. But, that the stream of this
filthy wickedness might be the better stopped, this we know, This Council was
in the year of our Lord 324.
that about 1313 years since, at Gangra, a town in Paphlagonia, there was a
Council held; wherein this heretic was confuted, and he, with the rest of
his opinion, accursed. The Fathers of which Council, in their subscription
after their Canons, among other things, have these words; We honor (say they)
the houses of God, and assemblies which are in them, as holy and profitable.

And afterward, in the days of Charles the great, there was a Viz. Canon 38.
To which our 18 Canon well agrees, and both to that of S. Paul in 1 Cor. 11.
Canon made in the Council of Towrs, wherein the people were required to
behave themselves reverently in Churches. And in the next Canon of the said
Council (as also in the Council of Mentz, which was celebrated in the same
year) no Judgment seats might be allowed to be either in Churches or their
porches. And in the 48 Canon of that at Mentz, there was order taken, that no
wanton songs might be sung near unto a Church: Canon 52:
Nor might any one (except a Bishop or worthy Priest, or a religious faithful
Laick) be buried in a Church. The like things were done at the Council of
Arles: so also in the Council of Starburg, Canon 17.
which was 86 years after it.

Long before which times of Charles, the Emperor Justinian, Evag lib. 4. cap.
17.
about the year of our Lord God See Calviius in Chron.
534. would not receive into his Treasury the vessels of gold which Titus took
out of the Temple, when it was destroyed; but sent them to the Christian
Bishops of Jerusalem, there to be disposed of, as they themselves thought
meet. There was a Council afterward, viz. the third Council of Bracara
Helvic. and Alsted. in Crono^.
about the year of our Lord 675. which took order also concerning holy
vessels: for, in the second Canon of the said Council, it was decreed; that
Vessels dedicated to God, should not be abused, nor applied to secular and
humane uses.

Neither is it but to be admired, how zealous the Emperor Constantinus Magnus
was: Eusebius. de vita Constable. libr. 4. cap. 56. Et Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 14.
for, being about to make war with the Persians; he caused a Tabernacle or
moving Temple to be made to carry with him, that thereby he might always have
a holy place, and house for his God, sanctified and prepared for religious
worship. Nor may this seem strange: for as the Jews had a moving house for
their God, suitable to their own condition whilst they lived in their Tents: So
he, being to go from home, provided a Tabernacle to do his worship in;
whereas, at other times, he had standing Temples, or Churches, and these built
(even for their form of fabric) in some sort imitable to their fixed Temple
at Jerusalem. For the primitive Christians were such followers of Antiquity,
rather then incliners unto noveltie, that they built their Churches with such
distinction of Courts and places (although not for the same uses) as Solomon
did his Temple. For as the Jews had their Atrium exterius, their Atrium
interius, Sanctum, and Sanctum Sanctorum; so had the first Christians their
Locus Poenitentium, Auditorium, presbyterium and Sacrarium.

Nay, to go a little higher; Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 33.
when the Emperor Philip favored the Christians, and would have gladly joined
with them, he might not be permitted suddenly, until he had first stood in
Loco poenitentium, because in many things he was still faulty.

Nay, higher yet: for in the days of S. Paul, when the Corinthians had
profaned the Church which was at Corinth, they were reprehended for it. 1 Cor.
11.21, 22.
Shall I praise you in this (says the Apostle) I praise you not.

Howbeit things are now grown to such a pass, that if God be not served
slovenly, we are judged to be guilty of superstition, or Idolatry. Or, if
we respect the Church as the house of God, and will not suffer it to be
profaned, nor come into it but with fear and reverence; then we are all for
Popery, and I cannot tell what. L. Archbish. of Canterb. speech in Star-Cham.
June 14. 1637.
But I pray God (says our chief and reverend Prelate) that the time come not
upon this Kingdom, in which it will be found, that no one thing has advanced,
or ushered in Popery so fast, as the gross absurdities even in the worship of
God, which these men, and their like, maintain both in opinion and practice.
And certainly, this is a fear which stands upon too good a ground: Slight it
not therefore; but rather esteem that to be a religious care, which earnestly
desires a timely prevention. For as another (once also a maine pillar of Gods
Church among us) has discovered, there is nothing which does more retain many
in recusancie, then want of due reverence in the house of God, Bish. Andr. in a
Sermon upon Philip. 2.10.
and at his holy worship. I am privy (says he) there is no one thing does
more alien those, that of a simple mind refuse the Church, then this; that they
see so unseemly behavior, so small reverence showed this way. But sure, the
Apostle See the 1 Cor. 14.25.
tells us, our carriage there should be such, so decent, as if a stranger, or
unbeleever should come into our assemblies, the very reverence he sees there
should make him fall down and say, Verily God is among us; to see us so
respectively bear ourselves, in the manner of our worship. And therefore
though He was an Ambassador in the beginning of King James his reign for K.
Henry 4. of France. See the Conference at Hampton Court. page 38.
Marquess Rosney spoke home and fully, in regard of what he saw at the Court
and Canterbury (viz. That if the reformed Churches in France had kept the same
orders among them that we have, he was assured there would have been in that
Country many thousand Protestants at that time more then there were.) Yet had
he come into our ordinary parish Churches, he would have surely said, There is
much wanting in that reverent behavior which is required of devout
worshippers, and more Protestants might be in England, if all places were
alike ordered. Give me leave therefore to insist upon five things concerning
our assemblies, or worshipping of God in his house: and one more to be regarded
at all times else; as well when there is no Assembly, as when there is.

The five be these. First, that at the time of public worship, we be not Late
comers. Secondly, that we be not Ill Enterers. Thirdly, that our deportment,
at the time of our being there, be reverent. Fourthly, that our departure be
not till all be ended. And then, last of all, that it be such as becomes
those who are going to their own houses from the house of God.

Psalm. 87.2.
For, as the Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob; so the Children of God delight to be there, as knowing that then they
are come before him, in a more special manner, then when they were at home in
their own houses. Yea, and as they do desire the heaven that is above: So
also to be one with those in the heaven beneath. For that the Congregations of
the Church militant, is a kind of heaven upon earth, is more then manifest: and
S. John (I do believe) has an eye thereunto, in that sacred book of the
Revelation. Thus it was with David: Psalm. 42.2.
My soul (says he) is athirst for God; yea, even for the living God: Oh when
shall I come and appear before the presence of God. And in another Psalm; I
was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Psalm.
122.1:
And in the Prophet Esaias, it is foretold as a token of the flourishing estate
of Christ's Church, that many people shall say, Esaias 2.3.
O come, Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob. And in the Proverbs there is a blessing promised to them who seek
wisdom early: Pro. 8.17 ^^^.
as also to those who watch daily at her gates, and wait at the Posts of her
doors. And in the Acts, the good Christians were altogether with one accord in
one place. Acts 2.1. ^^ Acts 4.2^.
The neglect whereof is no sign of true zeal, but a motive rather to stir
up the coactive power of Governors to compel them to come in, when they are
called, that Gods house may be filled. It was so in the Parable, and must be so
also in every particular Congregation. I find it therefore ordered in the
ancient Church of Christ, that they which came not in the beginning should be
subject to censure, as well as those who were absent, or as they who departed
away before all was ended. To which purpose the authority of Cassian, and
forty seventh Canon of the Council of Agatha is fitly alleged.

But besides that sloth, which a slight regard of Gods house begets in many (as
well Sectaries, as other careless Christians) what do I also hear? Nothing
more, then that our prayers are common; And what of that? They are but as they
ought; The Church of God would never order that they should be other.
Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in 2 Cor. cap. 8.
Our prayers (says Chrysostom) are common; for all say the same prayer. The
reason whereof is given by certain Councels, Ne forte aliquid contra fidem,
vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit compositum; Lest perchance
something might be done through ignorance or earelesnesse, which might be
contrary to the faith; as is expressed in the twelfth Canon of the Milevitan
Council, in the year of our Lord 402. At which Council S. Austin was
present: For among others that subscribed, there was Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, and Augustine Bishop of Hippo. Five years before which, the third
Council of Carthage was Viz. in the ^eare 397.
celebrated; (there also was Augustine:) and in the 23 Canon thereof, it was
decreed, that not any prayers should be used in the Congregations, but such as
had been formerly approved. See Math. 6.7.8.9. and Math. 23.14.
Neither is all this but agreeable to our Saviors meaning; who (because he
delighted not in vain bablings) taught his Disciples to make use, both of a
short and set form? And also how unfitting it ever was, to give way to private
fancies in a public assembly, S. Paul declares; For when ye come together,
how is it (says he) that every one has a Psalm, 1 Cor. 14.26.
has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation? Let all things be done to
edifying: Long before which times, it was the counsel of Solomon, Eccles. 5.2.
Let thy words be few: for God regards not our prayers according to their
length; but according to their strength and pithinesse. And indeed to have
short forms, and often ejaculations, shows the eagerness of the spirit, and
is to be truly instant in prayer; to ask, to seek, to knock.

Dare any therefore be so bold, as to vilify the short and pithy prayers of
the Church, and thereupon persuade the simple that they have just cause to be
rardie comers? Dare they affirm that they are but shreds and pieces, and not
worthy the name of prayers; and that in the Letanie is a kind of conjuring?
Profane wretches as they are, to be thus disordered: They might easily
perceive, if they were not blind, that the Church goes piously to work,
according to the rule of Gods holy word: and may be no more blamed, no not for
her Lord have mercy on us, Christ have mercy on us, Lord have mercy on us, and
the like short eager requests; no more (I say) then our Savior blamed the good
woman of Canaan, devout Bartimeus, or told us that the humble Publican
displeased God, when he said no more but, See Math. 15.22.15. Mark, 10.48.
Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner: An admonition yet (I hope) may come in time.
Let these people therefore take heed, that God wipe not out their names out of
the Book of life; for scorning that Book which contains the services of the
living God: in which I know nothing contrary to his holy Word. Nay, rather this
I know, that it well agrees to the holy Scriptures; and in the substance,
form, and order thereof, to the forms of the ancient Church; containing
things, not only of excellent use, but of absolute necessity. For (that I may
the better invite thee) let me plead the cause a little further. Do thou
desire to confess thy sins? there is a form of exquisite confession. Or do
thou desire to be absolved? there is an order how the Priest shall absolve the
truly penitent and faithful soul. Or do thou desire to praise thy God?
there is an heavenly Te Deum for such a purpose? or do thou desire to make an
open confession of that faith which the orthodox Christians ever held? there be
the three Creeds; namely, that of the Apostles, Athanasius, and the Niceene
Creed: the two last of which are received of the Church, not as new, but as
expositions of the first. Their foundation is in Scripture, and are Regula
fidei, even as the Decalogue is Regula vitae. Or do thou desire to pray as
thy Savior teaches? there is the Pater noster, Doctor Boyse in his Post.
A prayer which excells all other in many respects; as being the Gospels
epitome, compiled by wisdom it self: so large for matter, so short for
phrase, so sweet for order, as that it deserves worthily to have the First and
Most place in all our Liturgy. The first, says Tertullian, as guide to the
rest. The most, says that learned Hooker, as a necessary complement to supply
whatsoever is wanting in the rest: This being tanquam sal, as a kind of Salt to
season all and every part of the divine service? Idem ibid.
In which regard (says our English Postiller) we use it often, as at the end
of the Letanie, at the end of Baptism, at the end of the Communion, and at the
end of other sacred actions. Or again, do thou desire to give public thanks
(as a good Christian ought to do) for public benefits, or to be eased from
general calamities, or to be secured from common evils? why there, in that
book, be forms and patterns for such a purpose, yea, for the asking of those
things which be requisite and necessary as well for the body as the soul.

And will none of these things move thee to come betimes to Gods house? I doubt
thy sanctity, and suspect thy soundness. The place is holy, the service holy:
And therefore let there be so much holiness in thee, as may bring thee
cheerfully, early and devoutly to this holy place; and there make thee to be
one with the rest in that holy business, which well beseemes a holy Christian.
For this is certain, that our holiness toward God concerns us one way, in
that we are men, and another way, in that we are joined as parts to that
visible mystical body, which is his Church. As men we are at our own choice,
both for time, and place, and form, according to the exigence of our own
occasions in private. But as we be the members of a public body, the service
which is to be done of us, must of necessity be public; And so consequently
be performed by us on holy days, and in holy places. And thus I have done
with the first thing; which is, that we be not late comers.



In the Scriptures you know that we read of Moses and Aaron, that they did
their reverence at the very door of the Tabernacle, Numb. 20.6. And, take heed
to thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, is the wise man's counsel
in Eccles. 5.1. He forewarnes thee, that he might fore-arme thee. And good
reason that his counsel should be regarded; otherwise the heart that thou
bring with thee, is no better then cor fatui, a fools heart: enough to make
a man be guilty of evil, when he should be doing of good. It is not
sufficient to say, that although such outward worship was requisite under the
Law; yet not now required. For before Iudaisme began, Jacob acknowledged
Bethel, Genesis 28.
the house of God, to be a place of fear and reverence. He did no sooner
perceive that it was an house of God, but he presently began to be perplexed,
for fear he had not behaved himself so in it, as of right he knew he ought
to do in all such places. And albeit our Savior said to the woman of Samaria
in the fourth chapter of S. John, that the time was then at hand, that God
should not be worshipped either at Jerusalem, or at mount Garazim; but that
the true worshippers should worship the Father in spirit and in truth; yet did
he not say any thing for the abolishing of public Places, purposely
consecrated and set apart for public worship. What then? I answer, that he
did declare the cessation of worship to be now at hand, both according to the
custom of the Jews worshipping at Jerusalem, and of the Samaritans
worshipping upon the aforesaid Mountain. For all such shadows, types, and
figures, as pointed to the Messiah, must cease, the body being come. And in
that regard he uses the word Spirit by way of opposition: or as it is set
against that commandment, which [in Heb. 7.16.] is called carnal. And so also
for the word truth; he speaks of it, not as we set it against a lie, but as
we take it in respect of the outward ceremonies of the Law, which did only
shadow that which Christ performed in very deed: as even the Geneva note
observes. Or if that of Spirit and truth be further urged, the better to
color men's want of reverence in the house of God; it is again answered, that
when outward or corporal worship, proceeds from spiritual devotion, and is
applied thereunto, it is then a Spiritual worship; because, by this rule, it
is joined to that, which ought to be the chief and principal mover in all
our postures. 2.2. q. 84. art. 1. Ad primum.
And so says Aquinas, Quod etiam adoratio corporalis in spiritu fit, in
quantum ex spirituali devotione procedit, and adeam orainatur. And indeed, so
long as man has a body as well as a soul, how shall he manifest his inward
fear and reverence, but by his outward devotion? or shall the soul be
subject, and the body free? It Is nothing so, he that made both requires (as
the Apostle tells us) that we glorify him in both. And so, outward reverence,
as well as inward fear, does necessarily belong to every Christian. The true
worshippers therefore should remember to address themselves with dread and
horror, and enter with preparation as unto God; prostrating, Eae quae exterius
aguntur, signa sunt interioris reverentiae. Aquin. sum. 2.2. q. 84. art. 1.
or bowing down their bodies; not only in token of their, both inward, and
outward humiliation; but also in regard of the reverence which they owe to God,
into whose house, and before whose presence, they are now entered. And indeed it
is an humble soul, that is both ready and willing to show and afford due
reverence: whereas the proud and haughty will rather kick against the pricks,
and ( Haman-like) expect, that all should bow the knee to them, but they to
none; no not willingly to him, who is the Lord almighty. But is it not written
of Solomon, 1 Kings 2.19.
that when Bathsheba came unto him, notwithstanding in dignity she was his
inferior, and then a petitioner to him, that he arose from his throne, and
bowed himself unto her? Much more ought we, that are worse then nothing, to
show all humility and reverence, when we come before the presence of God. It
is also written in the Gospel, that our Savior would not have his Disciples
enter into a man's house without salutation. And shall we not think it to be a
part of religious manners to do as much when we come into the house of God?
when we do it, it is a kind of dutiful salutation of the divine Majesty.
And therefore as we count them to be rude and disobedient, who will not bend
their knees to their parents at their first approaches, nor bow their bodies to
their betters when they come in place where they are: so be they both rude and
disobedient, who will not only refuse, but dispute the case, and scoff against
this kind of worship, or bowing of the body at our first entrings into the
house of God. It were easy to show, that all Nations and Religions, have been
careful to express some reverentiall gesture at their first approaches into
their Temples: and shall Christians now make question of it? We may be too
suspicious of superstition, and so be superstitious in avoiding that, which
we go about to taxeand condemn in others.

Nor is it but requisite that I also show, which way our posture be directed.
And so much the rather, because (in the opinion not of a few) here rests that
which is the greatest question. For what more frequent in the mouths of many,
then that such as worship toward one thing, and place, rather then toward
another, are mere Idolaters? But I beseech you condemn not without a cause,
nor let your zeal run before your knowledge: For adoration toward the Lords
Tables a lawful worship. It can be no Idolatry; because it is no prostration
before a false god, but before the true; it being every jot as lawful to make
use of the place whither, as of the place where. So that either it must be
unlawful to use Oratories or Churches to worship God in, or this must be
granted of directing our Aspect rather one way, then another. And why one way
rather then another? we shall find it to be, in regard of that which is most
sacred, and of most eminent relation to God in the Church. For, as Gods house
and honor go together; so the chief place must needs invite the worship of
God toward it, as to the most presentiall place: otherwise we should exclude
due decency from Religion, and be preposterous in our worship; of which more
shall be spoken afterward.



ex more generis humani; as one in his letter to his friend has truly
expressed: Nature having taught them, as in their addresses to men to look unto
their faces; So in their addresses to the divine Majesty, to accommodate their
posture toward something, where his presence was more declared and manifested,
then elsewhere. Thus in the wilderness, without any precept to bind them,
they worshipped God toward the Cloud, as the monument of his presence going
with them, Exodus 33.10. and 34.5, 8. Then afterward, when that monument was no
longer, they looked toward the Arc of the Covenant, or Mercy seat, both in
the Tabernacle, and the Temple. And for this, it was no more commanded then the
former. There is indeed, in Exodus 25.22. a promise made to Moses of a presence
there; which is enough to signify, that the Lord has his throne in the places
which are set apart and sanctified for his service: But neither was the
Tabernacle made, nor did Moses reveal any thing that was told him concerning
it, till after such times as we are sure they had worshipped toward the Cloud.
Nor last of all when it was erected, can it be any where shown, that there
went out a peculiar precept for such a practice: And yet the very saints of
God, whilst they were alive (as well as those in heaven who worship toward the
Throne) avowed the performance of it; Psalm. 5.7. Psalm. 28.2.99.5.138.2. Jon.
2.4. Mich 6.6. 2 King. 18.22 See also 1 K. 8.44. Dan. 6.10. 2 Chronicles. 6.20, 21.
as in many places of the Scripture well appears, some whereof are noted in
the Margin. But among them all I may not forget that godly resolution which was
in the Prophet David; whose purpose was so settled concerning this, that let
others be never so backward in it, he would be forward; Let others do what
they would; he would do what he ought. The most express text of which
intent is in the fifth Psalm, at the seventh verse, where his words be these:
Psalm. 5.7.
But as for me, I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies;
and in thy fear will I worship toward the Temple of thy holiness. The word
translated, I will worship, is in the Hebrew, I will bow; and therefore
Tremelius expresses it by the Latin word, Incurvabo. By which the Prophet
means, that for his part, being come into the outward Courts of Gods house,
into which (and no further) it was lawful for him to enter, he would bow
toward the Sanctum sanctorum, or chief place of Majesty, Psalm. 99.5.
in honor of God, (as he elsewhere shows) whose house it was in all the
parts; but there His in more particular: and therefore called, The Temple of
his holiness.

And may it not from hence be gathered, that they who would have all places in
a Church to be alike holy, are greatly wide from the truth of the matter? I do
suppose it true: and shall make it more manifest, that they who would have the
Belfree as holy as the body of the Church, the body of the Church as holy as
the Chancell, the Chancell as holy as the Sacrarium, or Altar-place, are much
mistaken. For first, as S. Paul has said in another case, Does God take care
for oxen? So may I say in this: Does God take care for Bells? or has he as
much respect to them, as to those things which are more immediately employed in
his service? I think him more stupid then a stone, who will believe it. There
was a great difference sure between the Ash-pans and the Altars, although both
were holy: So also between the Bells and the Chalice. And if so: then also a
difference between the Belfree, and the Chancell: For all things and parts are
not consecrated to one and the same height; as by and by shall be declared.
Secondly, by this their reasoning of a like holiness in every part and corner
of the Church, the holiness which they grant to be in Churches, seems in
some sort to be, as if it were inherent. But whether that be the consequence,
yea or no, I will not stand to argue; for sure I am, that in very deed there is
no such thing. Aquin. Sum. p. 3. q. 83. art. 3.
Churches (says Aquinas) and such inanimate things, though they be not capable
of grace, yet receive by their consecration a spiritual power, whereby they
are fit for divine service.

I shall therefore amplify that, which I have already touched; namely, that
the pre-eminence which we give to one place above another, is only relative;
that is, in relation to those holy offices unto which the places consecrate are
set apart: as also in relation to the presence of God in places consecrate. For
to speak of these things further, according to the Scripture phrase, The face
or presence of God, does in this sense signify [in the general] a peculiar
sacred place, where teaching, hearing, praying, sacrificing, and other duties
of Gods public worship uses to be performed. Thereby teaching us, that when
we come into Gods house, we come as into his presence. For instead of that
which is said in the 1 Chronicles. 16.29. Bring an offering and come before him. In
Psalm. 96.8. it is, Bring an offering and come into his Courts. I speak not
therefore of the gracious and comfortable effects of his presence: Esaias 66.1,
2. Math. 18.20.
For they (according to his promise) are best of all manifested by the
sincerity of our decent devotions: But I speak of that high honor, which he
himself vouchsafes to such places, as are dedicated to him for his public
worship, viz. that they are accepted as his houses; must be so esteemed; and
coming into them, we are come as before his face, or sacred presence, in more
special manner then when we were in any place else. For though he be ubique
yet he would not have us think, that he is ubique uniformiter, but aliter
atque aliter. And in that regard, even in places consecrate, one place may have
a more near relation to his presence then another, and carry with it (in
particular) a more special sign or demonstration of his residence.

And therefore, first of all, in case the Act of Consecration be but one, as
some object; yet in relation to those holy offices unto which the places
consecrate are set apart, it must needs admit of a different degree; because
as all places are not for one purpose, no more are all offices of a like
eminence; And so, a more awful reverence, both in, and toward one place then
another. Yea, so far were those particular degrees of Consecration evermore
extended, that they belonged as well to persons, as to places; both when Moses
was upon the Mount, and the people below, the Tabernacle pitched, the Temple
built, and the Priests assigned to their several charges.

And as then, the separation and difference observed redounded more and more to
the honor of God; so also now. For as there is no reason that the Lord should
lose any part of his honor by sending of his Son: So neither would he that
it should be lost. For Christ Jesus himself (who came to do his Fathers
will) in whipping the buyers and fellers out of the very utmost borders of the
Sanctuary, showed his zealous forwardness in the preserving of his Fathers
honor: and, that in future times, it should (of right) be as well regarded as
before. For when he laid his hands to the whip, and his tongue to the text, it
was no other time then after his Baptism, and at the very viz. In the last
week of his ministry, viz. on Sunday and Monday of the said week, as the
Harmonists witness.
point of his passion, when he was ready to finish the work of redemption, and
when the legal sacrifices, of Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, had Math. 11.13. and
Galat. 3.24, 25.
begun (even from the Baptists preaching) to be dead already. Whereby is
showed, that that holiness, and honor, which heretofore was due to Gods
house, and to God in his house, should not die with those ending figures of the
Law, but still abide; extending it self, to the praise and glory of God, so
far as the benefit of Christ's baptism and passion did; and should live as
long as either praying or preaching remained.

And secondly, although the Lord would have the whole structure to be
accounted as his house, and would (doubtless) that we should thereupon
account him more present there, Genesis 22.10.
then elsewhere; as Abraham said, In the mountain will the Lord be seen:
or, as himself speaks; Psalm. 132.15.
Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. Yet his very presence there,
has not one and the same degree. For if when we say, Est Dominus in loco hoc?
Lippom. in Genesis 28. ex August.
We expound it with S. Austin, that it is as if it should be said, Est hic
demonstratio domini; non enim Dominus in loco est: then it must needs follow
(even in our Churches) that in what part or place, we have the most lively
demonstration of his presence, by something which is either done or said there,
more then elsewhere, as in a place, Aquin. Sum. 1.2. quaest. 10. art. 4.
and at an instrument appropriated for that service, that there (I say) is the
very highest degree thereof; and so, the highest Court of (or for) his
holiness: which is not unfitly called the place of Majesty, throne, or most
presentiall place in all the Church. And although the particular service be not
always there in act, yet the demonstration cease not; because the same
place, and things, are reserved still for the same purpose, and Gods relative
propriety not abolished: the great sign of his presence still abiding.

Nor may this seem strange, that in one and the same house there should be
such differenced degrees of his Presence: for, besides the reasons alleged,
this we also find, that he himself is well pleased to call one part as the
place of his Throne; another, as the place for the soales of his feet: as is
expressy mentioned in Ezekiel, chapt. 43.7. Ezekiel. 43.7.
And this his old people always marked; keeping their distances, and directing
their postures accordingly.

In imitation whereof, the Primitive Christians ordered to have their Churches
built with the like distinction of places; and, that though the distribution of
the Sacrament, might be in other parts, yet the Consecration thereof, might be
but in one, wherein stood the sacred Altar or holy Table; which was answerable
to that Mercie-seate in the division of the Temple: upon which it was a custom
to lay the book of the holy Gospels, in stead of the two Tables of the Law;
and we have there the holy Eucharist, although the Pot of Manna be not now.

And well might they imirate such a platform. For as the Christian Religion is
come in place of the Jewish: so are our Churches come in place of theirs. Their
Tabernacle was a pattern of their Temple, and their Temple a type of our
Churches, even as all their service was a type of our Christ; as a learned
Doctor has delivered. Saint John is witness to it: for though the Revelation
be very mystical; yet seeing the visions of things appertaining to the
Christians, do so frequently allude to the fashions of the Jews, it is easy
to be gathered, that he insinuates how we are surrogated into their rooms
for whom the Temple was built: and so, are to cast the form of our Churches
after that fashion: yea, and setting aside their Types and Figures (which were
fulfilled in Christ) to serve God in our Holy places, and upon our Holy days,
as they did in and upon theirs. I may therefore conclude, that still there
ought to be a place of Majesty; which by the Ancients was called either
Sacrarium, or, (...): The last of which two words, properly signifying a
Christian Altar, shows, that the appellation of the place was derived from
thence: that is, the Altar sometimes gave the name to the whole place of
Majesty: yea, and sometimes (as some affirm) to the whole Chancell it self,
though that only within the Rail were properly the (...) or Sacrarium. And as
for the Ancients, Ignatius is an early one among them; He lived in the days
of Saint John: and writing no Prophecy, might speak that plainly, which Saint
John (as 'twas delivered to him) expressed mystically.

Or if you will that I open the matter more fully, then take it thus, viz. that
because Saint John alludeth to the customs of the Jews, and delivers his
Prophecy to the Christians, and speaks as if his Visions were represented to
him in the Heavens; it is as if it should be said, Gods Church is in it self
but one, though the parts be two, Militant and Triumphant: And therefore, as
the Church of the Jews was ordered according to the manner of these Visions;
So ought the Church of the Christians, in all and every of the Congregations
appertaining to her. And as it ought, so it was in those her days of greatest
purity; striving thereby to keep as near a resemblance of the one part of
Gods Church with the other, as she possibly could; whether in the Heavens, or
on the Earth. And in this the At the 35. page of his book.
author of the Holy Table (though perhaps beyond the intention) gives us his
voice. For, speaking of the Kings Majesty's Royal Chapel (which is ordered
according to the manner of those forenamed Visions) he has these words. I
hope (says he) I shall over live and die in an awful and reverend opinion of
that Sacred Oratorie, the vivest resemblance I know upon the earth of that
Harmony of the Cherubins we look for in the Heavens. Thus he: And it was
truly spoke. Wherefore it is the more to be admired, that he should east any
scorns or slights upon it afterward, and not rather be delighted to see all
other of Gods houses ordered according to so good a pattern: for what better
Harmony can there be, then that the Church on Earth conform her self to the
Church in Heaven. And that thus she has done, in the days of old, both
before and after Christ, shall be declared. As for example: First of all, in
the Heavens S. John witnesses that he saw a Throne, and one that sat upon
it: So in the Temple (as formerly in the Tabernacle) was a Mercy seat, the
sacred Monument of Gods presence there: And in the first Christian Churches a
(...) or Sacrarium, enclosed with a Rail, for the Holy Table; the sign
likewise of his Residence. Secondly, in the Heavens the Presbyters, or 24
Elders had the pre-eminence of coming nearest to the Throne: So in the
Tabernacle and Temple (as formerly at Mount Sinai) the people might not enter
into the Courts of the Priests; Nor in the Primitive times was it lawful for
any Layman to come within the bounds of the Altar. Nulli omnium qui sit in
Laicorum numero, liceat intra sacrum Altar ingredi, says the 96 Canon of the
sixth Council of Constantinople. The passages likewise between Saint Ambrose
and the Emperor Theodosius, mentioned by Theodoret, in his fifth book, and
seventeenth Chapter (besides other testimonies) make it manifest. And last of
all, In the Heavens he saw the Elders, and four living creatures fall down
and worship before the Throne, Revelat. 19.4. So, in the Tabernacle and Temple,
holy men used to worship toward the Mercy seat, as they had done before
toward the Cloud. Yea, and so also, in the first Christian Churches, they used
to worship toward the Altar or Holy Table: For the Greek Liturgies tell us of
a threefold prostration that was made before it: Nay sooner yet; for Reverence
done at it may be found by the learned, even in the days of that Ancient
already mentioned: I mean Ignatius, Ignat. ad Tarsens. Act. 11.26.
who was made Bishop of Antioch (where the Disciples were first called
Christians) not above seven and thirty years after Christ's Passion: he was
one of Saint John's scholars, Tertul. de Paenit. c. 9.
and died a godly Martyr. Tertullian (who was flourishing about 163 years
after the said Passion) does likewise testify, that the Penitents used to fall
on their knees before it. But did they therefore worship it? It were a
shameful accusation to say they did. A man when he says Grace before his
Table, or kneeles before his Bed, or other place, when he makes his private
prayers, may as well be said to worship either his Table or Bed, as these men
be said to worship the Altar. Or thus, Daniel may as well be accused for
turning his face toward Jerusalem, David for looking toward the Temple of
Gods Holiness, the People for directing their aspect toward the Cloud; Nay,
the very Saints and Angels for falling down before the Throne, as they accused
who prostrate or bow before the Altar. For as Daniel being in captivity,
although he turned his face toward Jerusalem when he prayed, prayed not to
it; nor David made the Temple of Gods Holiness, the object of his adoration;
nor the people in the Wilderness judged the Cloud to be adored; nor the
Saints and Angels in Heaven worshipped the Throne, although they fell down
before it: So in bowing, or falling down before Gods Altar, it is not the
Altar, Soerat. lib. 1. c. 25.
but God that is worshipped. Furthermore, Socrates also reports, that
Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, Ad Altar progressus, humi coram sacra
Mensa se in faciem prostravit; meaning, that coming to the Altar, he cast
himself on his face, or bowed to the ground before that Holy Table. Or as Viz.
He who was the author of the Holy Table, page 194. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 28.
some translate it out of the Greek Copy, He came into the Quire or
Chancell, and bowed before the Holy Table. Sozomen makes mention, that his
prostration was, when he came Ad Basin Altaris, at the foot of the Altar. Ad
basin Altaris procidens, totam noctem pronus humi jacebat. And in the days of
the fifth general Council, the Archbishop of the foresaid place exhorted the
people to do their accustomed reverence, or to adore at the holy Altar. Also,
in the days of Saint Ambrose, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17.
the Emperor is put in mind of the difference of places. And again, did not
the reverence of Holy Altars prevail so far with the furious Soldiers, and
barbarous Goths, that (as the said Ambrose tells us) they willingly fell
down and kissed them? Ambr. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
And if you think that this act of their was more then needed; I answer, that
there is an honor due likewise to the very things themselves: which consists
in a Veneration, or a reverent using of whatsoever belongs to Gods House; and
chiefly of those things which have most relation to his holy worship: otherwise
we should be absolute allowers of profanation, and be (in a manner) as bad
as those, whom our Savior himself drove away from out of his Fathers House.

More testimonies might be alleged, but these are enough; and too many
(perhaps) may some man think, who cares not to tread in the steps of the holy
Fathers: And yet even the author of the Holy Table thinks, that they did it
decently and devoutly; as may be seen at the 193. page of his book:
affirming more fully, some certain See page 99.
pages before, that although the Canon does not enjoyne it, yet reason, piety,
and the constant practice of Antiquity does. That Churchmen do it in Saint
Chrysostomes Liturgy; and the Laymen are commanded to do it in Saint
Chrysostomes Homily; bequeathing them to Donatus, who can practice all manner
of Courtesies for Maskes and Dances, but none (by any means) for Christ, at
their approach to the Holy Table. Whereupon he does not so much accept against
this kind of worship, as that the Communion Table should be called by the name
of Altar: a poor quarrel; and such as Antiquity knows not how to
countenance. It had been good therefore if our Church had never been troubled
with such verbal contentions. But to give satisfaction in this, let us look
among the Ancients for our better quiet.

And first I will begin with the second (or as some divide them) the third of
the Apostles Canons, where the word (...), or Altar, is twice used for the Holy
Table.

Ignatius also in his Epistles ad Philadelphenses, Trallenses, and Ephesies,
has the same word for the same thing.

Justin Martyr and Irenaeus are well enough known to call the Eucharist, Iren.
lib. 4. c. 20. and c. 34.
both an oblation and a Sacrifice: and therefore not to be doubted, but that
they called the place or seat thereof (as well as their Predecessors, and
suecessours) (...).

Tertullian likewise, in that testimony of his already mentioned, as also in
Lib. de Orat. in sine.
other of his writings, used the word Altar for the Communion Table.

And Saint Cyprian, in many of his Epistles, Viz. Epist. 42.55.64.70.73. etc.
does the like.

So also does Euscbius, who lived in the days of that famous Constantine.

Ambrose also, Ambr. lib. 5. Epist. 33.
who was in the days of Theodosius (a second Constantine) says no less.

And in Gregory Nissen the like phrase is Viz Sermon. de baptismo. Quid est
Altar niss seeds corporis, and sanguinis Christi? Optat. lib. 6.
used.

So also Saint Austin, Optatus, and generally so many others, as cannot without
tediousness be related. Howbeit, this must be remembered; that (as a worthy Mr.
Meade in his (...), ex Chrysostom, Hom. Quod Chrislus est Deus.
author has declared) Saint Chrysostom affirms it of our British Islands;
saying, The Britssh Islands, which lie out of this Sea, and are in the Ocean it
self, have felt the power of the Word: for even there also Churches and Altars
are erected.

Now if in these testimonies the Apostles Canons be misliked, it cannot be in
respect of the first of them; but rather that some other were added to them,
and continued under the same title still. Or, if the place of Saint Paul to the
Corinthians be objected, where he says, 2 Cor. 10.12
You cannot communicate of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils:
It is answered that there is another place equal to it, in Heb. 13.10. where
he also says; We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat, who serve
the Tabernacle. Not that the materials of the Table or Altar can be eaten: but
that they who come to the holy Communion, participate of that which is there
consecrated, and from thence distributed. And indeed we communicate from the
Altar, as from an Holy Table, of that heavenly banquet which in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper is afforded to us: And from the Table, as from an holy
Altar, we offer unto God the Memory of that Sacrifice which his dearly
beloved Son once offered upon the Cross. And so, though we have neither any
bloody Sacrifice, as among the Jews; nor any unbloudy propitiatory Sacrifice,
offered for the Quick and the Dead, as among the Papists: yet we have a
commemorative Sacrifice, done in remembrance of Christ, and of his death and
Passion. And therefore one and the same thing may be called both A Table and
an Altar. A Table for the Lords Supper: and an Altar for the Memorial
Sacrifice of our Lords death. Or will you have it yet more full and plain?
then know, that as the Apostle in the one place, calls the Altar of the Pagans
by the name of Table; so in the Viz. 1 Cor. 10.21.
other place, he calls the Table of the Christians by the name of Altar. Viz.
Heb. 13.10.
For as he compares cating with eating; so also Altar with Altar, or Table
with Table; using the appellation with indifferency, as we also find in some
other places of the Book of God, viz. Ezekiel. 41.22. and Malach. 1.7.

Nor again, if things be well weighed, can it but probably appear, that
Christ [in Math. 5.23.] taught Christians, that even in the days of the
Gospel, there should be something still, which should bear the name of
Altar, in the holy place of their Assemblies: at which they might not offer,
except they were in perfect love and unity one with another. For in that
Sermon where this duty is commanded, the Precepts given were not legal, but
Evangelicall; it being a degree above the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, to seek such peace as was then preached upon the Mountain: No
tradition of the Elders, or other Law, being known to urge any such direction,
as was there delivered.

Whereupon, considering one thing with another, it may be concluded, as in a
plain case, that by both names that sacred seat of the body and blood of our
Savior, as Optatus styles it, has been promiscuously and indifferently
called from the first beginning of the Christian Church.

They go wrong therefore who will be led by vulgar opinion, and astonished by
popular reports of they know not what. Rome indeed has made many things
offensive to ignorant ears: But it is neither vulgar opinion, fear, nor hear
say, that can disprove a truth. For, as she seeks no corners; so, being
suffered to display her colors, she cleares her self against all sorts of
opposites, be their temper what it will.

To return then to the matter in hand; Antiquity, and that grounded upon
Scripture, takes from it (as well as from what is appendant to it) all and
every just aspersion of innovation. And verily those Sainted times loved the
great God of Heaven and Earth too well to love any thing like him. They knew
him to be a jealous God, and therefore did not adore the thing or place toward
which they worshipped, but God alone to whom this homage is due. Just. Mart. ad
Orthod. quaest. 118. See also Ter^ul Apol. c. 16. Orig sup. Nu^. Hom. 5. Basil
de spirit. sanct. c. 27. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Mont. lib. 2. c. 19. cum mul^is
aliis.


It cannot be (says Justin Martyr) that at the time of our Prayer we should
look at all the parts of heaven at once; therefore we worship looking toward
one part: [ viz. the East.] Not that that is only of Gods making, or that he
has chosen that only for his dwelling; but because it is the place appointed
for that worship and service which we perform to God. Adding moreover, that
from whom the Church received the custom of praying, from them also it
received where to pray; that is, from the Apostles. Thus that godly Father and
blessed Martyr, who was famous about 117 years after Christ's Passion: expressly
witnessing, that this order came first from the Apostles, viz. that Christians
direct their aspect toward the East when they pray or worship. Tertullian
witnesses the same order: and so does Origin, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory,
Nissen, Saint Austin, Damascen, with many others. Nor can the Centurie writers
but affirm it; most of our Churches (excepting some of late) being built for
situation accordingly.

From which direction thus delivered, was clearly showed, that albeit in the
Jewish Tabernacle and Temple the Western part thereof was chief; yet not so
in the Christian Churches: for in ours, the Eastern part must be preferred.
And as with them the Western part was chief, because the Mercy seat was
there: so with us the Eastern part, because the Holy Table is placed here.

And for the situation of both these, there was just cause why they should be
rather so then otherwise. For the Jews we know were in the times of
darkness, in comparison of our times of light: Their Tabernacle therefore and
Temple had the place of highest Majesty in the West; toward which they looked
for want of the Suns appearance, Christ was then unborne. But we are in the
days of a better light, the Sun is risen and visits us, (...), ^s the Day,
or Eastern light from on high, Luke 1.78. We therefore, in acknowledgement
thereof, turn our faces toward the East, have there the place of highest
Majesty, and by turning thither profess our times to be the times of light.

To which may be added that of Damascen, Damas. de Orthod. fid. lib. 4. c. 13.
affirming that when Christ hanged upon the Cross, he was placed so as that
his face looked into the West; and therefore could not be seen, but of those
whose faces were directed toward the East. Which, together with the former,
was also a reason why the Christians had cause to prefer the Eastern part of
their Churches, before the Western, and to place the Altar of their
commemorative Sacrifice rather there, then elsewhere.

Yea, and further, because the Devil is Gods Ape, the Pagans looked into the
West as well as the Jews. That therefore, (in opposition to the one as well as
the other) we may renounce the Devil whom they served in their heathenish
Idolatry, as well as the religion of the Jews who deny Christ to be come,
we turn to the East, and so enter a covenant with the Sun of
righteousness. And of this last, Saint Ambrose (among other of the Fathers)
speaks after this manner: Thou art turned to the East, because he who
renounceth the Devil, is converted to Christ, and beholds him, directo
obtuitu, with a direct aspect. Unto which custom (as is probably supposed)
Saint John seems to allude, in Revelat. 7.2. For there the Angel ascends
from the East, to meet and embrace them that look toward him, and seal them
with the safety of that Sacrament by which Christians seal their service unto
him; as in Master Yates is well observed. Here therefore we are to seat the
Holy Table, as in its proper place. Nor was it ever otherwise among Christians,
when they might be suffered to do as they would, except in some particular
Churches, which can be no fit president to be opposed against a general
practice.

And thus as I can see no reason why any should be offended at a decent and
holy reverence when we come into the House of God, which all Religions have
been careful to perform: so, much less, that they should grudge against it,
when we do it toward that place, where the high and heavenly Mysteries of
our salvation are to be consecrated, and celebrated with all the solemnity,
and devotion we can possibly imagine. Here it is that we have our perfectest
communion with God. It begins indeed in Baptism, but ends in the Lords Supper;
(for higher we cannot go till we come in heaven) and they are the best
Saints that are admitted to it; at the least we judge them such, because such
they should be. For though all may come to the Word, and be present at our
ordinary Service; yet when this comes, all but the faithful must be gone.
Ite, Missaest, was that which was said of old: yea, and still the unworthy are
not to be admitted; but the rest invited to come and draw near, that they may
receive this Sacrament to their comfort, and have that high advancement of
being fed at Gods own Board with the body and blood of his beloved Son.

Say not therefore any longer, Why are not the Font, Deske, or Pulpit, as holy
as the Table: for this is the highest advancement that a Christian has: and
although the Lord be present in all his holy Ordinances; yet here more
specially, insomuch that the Holy Table or Altar must upon necessity be
evermore taken as the great sign of his presence, as carrying with it the
highest relation thereunto. Shall we come into these houses (says one) and
near those places, as we come into a common Inn or Alehouse? is there no
respect, no regard to be showed in the one above the other? I think reason and
discretion will teach us the contrary. For (as another also speaks) it is
just that that place have a pre-eminence above the rest, from which virtue and
efficacy is derived to the rest: for all benefits and mercies to be dispensed
to us, come from the death of Christ, which (as is most certain) is
represented there.

This place therefore may be well esteemed as a Mercy Seat, where God
(according to his being in such holy places) may be said to sit, graciously
reconciling a sinner to himself by the blood of his Son. For though in
Baptism there be some external resemblance of Christ crucified; yet here
more fully: and therefore specially commanded to be done in memory of his
Passion. Yea here (I say) the special place of Majesty, and that so, as it
may be well esteemed as a Mercy seat. For in brief, (that I may recapitulate
the sum of all;) First, as even that thing or place, which is dedicated to
the highest office in our worship, or to the most sacred Mystery of our
religion, must needs be the Most holy; although not by any internal inherent
quality infused, transforming the nature of it: but by an external adherent
quality, in relation to the business about which it is used, or for which it
is set apart: So also secondly, In what part or place we have the most lively
demonstration of his Presence, there must be the very highest degree thereof;
and so, the highest Court of (or for) his Holiness: wherein the resemblance or
Monument of his Residence stands, not as an Image, but as a sign or
testimony; even as the Arc was the sign of his presence in the Temple. For
now the greatest sign of Gods residence in his holy place, is the Altar, or
Holy Table, (call it which you will;) even as the Arc was heretofore the sign
of his presence in the Temple. Toward this part therefore (I say) a more awful
reverence is required, then toward, or in any other part beside. For in a word
to shut up this, although it were grief enough to the ancient Christians to
see any part of their Churches violated or profaned by the Pagans; yet, that
they should violate this Holy Place, was a great Cordolium indeed, and did
augment their sorrow to the very full. Whereupon Saint Chrysostom complains
after this manner, writing to Innocent the first Bishop of Rome. Neither was
here (says he) an end of those things: for the Soldiers entered even into the
very Sanctuary; Some whereof we know were not so much as initiated in Divine
Mysteries: and there they saw those things which were within; Yea, and the most
holy blood of Christ was spilt upon the garments of the foresaid Soldiers: as
it falls out in such a tumult. And thus much for Reverence in entering.

comes near unto us; so in Prayer we come near unto him. And if so (as so
it is) then surely bold and lazy postures are unsufferable; and irreverent
gestures more then unseemely. Some may not sit, when others stand; or scorn to
bend when others kneel. 1 Cor. 11.^
Saint Paul (who would have all things to be done decently and in order)
forbids the covering of the head; and would, that he who made the whole man,
should be worshipped of the whole. For, as we must show our faith by our
works; in like manner our inward humiliation, devotion, and honor to our God,
must be sure to appear in our 1 Cor. 6.20.
outward gestures, and comely postures at his holy service. God expects that we
serve in both; soul and body. For as the second without the first is a dead
oblation; so the first without the second, is but a maimed offering. Which
agrees to that of Saint Paul in another place, With the heart man believes,
Romans 10.101
and with the tongue he confesses. Or more plainly, to that of David, Oh
come, Psalm. 95.6.
let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lordour Maker. Or (if you
will) to that of Saint Paul yet once again; saying: Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies [as
well as your soules] a living sacrifice. The second Precept speaks as much:
For, if we may not bow unto an Image, because God is a jealous God; then
(without question) we must, in such parts of his service as require it, bow and
fall down when we worship Him. Did not the Devil therefore think it a great
point of honor to have our Savior show his worship and reverence toward him,
by falling down in worshipping of him? He did not say, It suffices if thou will
but inwardly adore me. Math. 4.9.
But, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. And
in heaven, Revel. 4.10.
as Saint John saw it represented to him, is not God worshipped by the bowings
(or fallings down) of those that be there? Verily (as I have already showed)
Heaven is always like it self. The Church Militant is a kind of heaven upon
earth: and therefore the Congregations in it, must imitate the Assemblies which
are Triumphant.

Here we must take no knowledge of either Father or Mother, Master or Dame, or
other of our Betters, so as we leave Gods service, and rise from our knees to
honor them. For they that do thus, seem to say to God Almighty; Stay a
while, I shall be for thee again anonne: My Master and Mistress are not yet in
their seats; I am now standing up unto them, and will by and by kneel down
again unto thee. But whoever they be who have used to do thus, must (if they
do as they ought) do so no more. For if they do, they prefer the Creature
before the Creator, and reverence their Master above their Maker. For it is a
Rule, that when the duty which we owe to God, and the duty which we owe to
Man, stand in competition both together, we must then leave all, Father and
Mother, Master and Mistress, to wait upon God. Have ye not houses to eat and
to drinkein; Despise ye the Church of God, says the Apostle: although in
another case. So may I say in this; There be other times and other places to
show your duty and respect to Man: But now remember your selves; you are met
together for the service of God. And if so, then in aword, There must be
nothing either said or done, which may make us forget the business we come
for.



in respect of himself, stands in no need of this; because of himself he is
all glory, to whom no creature can add any thing: yet, in regard of us, it
ought to be done; who do thereby acknowledge our own meandness and
subjection, and testify that reverent and religious esteem which we have of
his divine Majesty; to whom, and not unto our selves, all the highest degrees
of glory that can be imagined, are of all creatures to be ascribed: And so,
what Ceremony soever is best able to express this, is the most commendable,
and best beseeming us in our Devotions. Nor is it (among true worshippers) but
a spiritual, as well as a bodily worship. For (as before was said) Bodily
worship is performed in spirit, inasmuch as it proceeds from spiritual
Devotion, and is ordered to it. Yea, and being ordered thereunto, it cannot but
prove an adjuvant cause to edification: For even by outward ceremonies, and
sensible signs, our mind is incited to tend toward the Lord. And therefore,
Oh come, Let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker,
is an excellent invitation at the beginning of the public Service.

But I hasten further, because I desire to explain some other things; as
standing up at Gloria Patri, at the Gospel, at the Creed: and shall also
speak of Bowing at the name of Jesus, and of the Answers required in the
Liturgy. For all these things are such, as fall within the compass of this
third thing, which concerns our Carriage or Deportment.

And first of standing at Gloria Patri; it was a long while since observed, and
was a general custom to stand up at it, in all the Churches of France: And
this, above one thousand and two hundred years from hence. For Cassian, who
flourished about the year of our Lord God Helvic. in Chronol.
430, makes Cassiauus Instit. l. 2.
mention of such an order. Where note first of all, that it is no late
innovation; but an ancient practice. And secondly, as it is ancient; so also a
gesture commendable and pious: for it is a sign that we give small glory to
the Trinity, when we do it sitting, and show no more token of reverence to
the highest Majesty, then as if we were hail fellow well met, or companions
to the God Almighty.

Nor secondly, is it Popish or superstition, Standing at the Gospel.
to rise from our seats at the reading of the Gospel. For it is in regard of
the author of the speech, which is our Lord Christ: whom we bless and
magnify for his glorious Gospel: giving thanks also to God the Father, for
sending of his Son to be the publisher, and declarer, of such good things, as
are contained therein; from whom the Ministry thereof is appointed until the
end of the world, to bring men out of darkness into light, that they may be
saved. Whereupon it is, that we do not only stand up whilst the Priest
reads it, but also use to utter certain words of acclamation; as Glory be
to thee O Lord, at the beginning: and at the end, these, or the like words
follow; Thanks be to God for his glorious Gospel.

And why we do not so at the reading of the Lessons, is because the reason of
doing thus, holds not so fully there as here. For the Gospels are more select
places then the Lessons, and do most commonly declare historically, something
or other which our Savior either spoke, did, or suffered in his own person,
for us most miserable sinners. That incomparable Hooker gives the like reasons;
as may be better seen in his own writings.

Now who can find any harm at all in any one of these orders? See Polyd. Virg.
de invent. lib. 5. c. 8 and Calvis. anno 398.
Is there not rather a great deal of good? The last of which is also very
ancient: for I find that there was a Law made concerning it; about the year of
our Lord 400. which is now 1237 years since.

Also, Standing at the Creed.
concerning our standing at the Creed; well is it that so we do. For this is
a posture which we use in testification of our faith, and allegiance to Christ
our General; as our English Postiller has declared. For as we may know who
is the Captain of such or such a Soldier, when we see his Colors: so a
Christian, by this authentic Creed, is distinguished from either Jew, Turk,
Atheist, or Heretic. In token whereof it has been a long and laudable
Custom in the Church of God, to stand up at the rehearfall of it, openly to
manifest our faith and allegiance to Christ Jesus our General, viz. that we
will not shrink back from Him; but stand and acquit our selves like men, in
the defense of that faith, which he has taught us, in spite of all that shall
oppose it.

And next, Bowing at the name of Jesus.
as for bowing at the name of Jesus; it is no superstition: but (as the
seed-plats of the Church, I mean those two famous Lights of our Land, the two
Universities have determined) an outward sign of our inward subjection to His
divine Majesty, and an apparent token of our devotion. Or thus: It is to
testify and declare our submission to Jesus Christ in that exaltation
wherewith God the Father has exalted him, as a recompense for that profound
humility, and complete obedience, which he showed and performed. For (as the
Apostle speaks in that text, Philip. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.
in which this duty is commanded) seeing he humbled himself, and became
obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross; therefore has God also
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, That at the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow, etc. So that here it appears, that this honor is
assigned to him as a part of his reward See Bishop Andrews Sermon upon Philip.
2.8, 9, 10.
Propter mortem crucis, for the death of the Cross, For whereas the chief
Priests, Scribes, and Elders, at the time of his death Math. 27.37.40.
mocked him (in allusion to his name) saying, He saved others, himself he
cannot save: and whereas the Jews and wicked Miscreants have always ever
since derided the Christians with their crucified Jesus; it pleased the Lord in
his wisdom to exalt his Name so much the more, by how much it was debased, and
vilified by wicked men. And this he would should be expressed by some
external gesture, thereby to show the inward obeisance and subjection which is
due to Christ.

Against which whilst some object, that it cannot be meant of any actual
bowing of the knee; because Angels, Souls departed, Devils, and damned souls
have no knees to bow, they do but deceive themselves. For the Apostle,
speaking unto men, speaks after the manner of men; giving us to understand,
that as we are to show our reverence and subjection by bowing of the knee; so
they, by some such gesture as is truly correspondent to this of ours. We know
that in 1 Cor. 13.1
another place, he gives the Angels tongues; And therefore may as well in this
place give them knees: They have the one as well as the other; And so in their
kind, do what is here commanded us. They their way; we ours: for there be
many passages in the Rev. 4.10.2.5.8. etc. 14.7.11. See also Heb. 1.6.
Revelation which may clear this doubt.

And albeit some of these, of whom the Text speaks, be of a different quality
from the saints and Angels, and are therefore obstinately bent against Christ
Jesus, and will not for the present do their Reverence, nor be willing to show
any outward token of subjection, or obedience; yet, seeing Christ must reign
till he have put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25.
the time shall be sure to come, when the strongest opposites shall be brought
unto it, and (whether they will or no) be made to stoop, and to do open
reverence to that blessed name, which has bin so often scorned, and derided by
the Devils and wicked. And therefore, let every one that lives be afraid,
even how he leanes to perverseness, lest he come at last to be accounted
guilty of a desperate evil: For when we have done the best we can, it is no
whit more then Christ has merited. For worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing,
Revelat. 5.12.

Besides, were it so that this were not spoken properly in respect of us, who
have knees; it may as well be granted, that neither is it required of us that
we should confess: for the one is mentioned in the text of Saint Paul, as
well as the other. So that if we take away the propriety of speech from the
one, we take it also from the other,; and then, we are as little bound to
confess, as to bow: which were a tenet directly opposite to a known truth.
For, as with the heart Man believes, so with the tongue he confesses; as the
Scripture elsewhere speaks, viz. Romans 10.9, 10.

Nor again is there cause to fear, that although we bow at the name of
Jesus, and not at the name of God, that we do thereby advance the Son above
the Father. For first, this honor of Christ begins with the Father: he was
the cause of it: by Him was his Son exalted, both in his person and his name,
which he would should be acknowledged: and therefore (says the text) every
knee shall bow, and every tongue confess. And secondly, as it began with him,
so it ends with Him also: for (says the text again) It is unto the glory of
God the Father. And no marvel: for it redounds much to His glory, that we
should thus honor his Son. It is no will worship taken upon our own heads:
but such, as even the Father himself both desires should be done; and is not
only well pleased that it be done, but also glorified in regard that it is
done. From whence it appears, that this bowing to the Son, is in effect a
bowing to the Father also, at whose command, and unto whose glory we do it.

And although it be in it self a duty of the text, yet has the Church also
interposed her authority for the more strict and decent observation of it.
Canon 18. Injunct. 52.
In which, neither does our present Canon, nor that Injunction of Queen
Elizabeth, cause more to be done then what had formerly been observed in the
Church of God, in those ancient times which had been before. For when they
speak of reverence done at the name of Jesus, these words are also mentioned,
viz. as it has been accustomed.

Nor was it a late custom among the Papists: for even in the days of Saint
Hierom. the Christian Church was careful to observe it. His words be these:
Hier. in Isa. 45.23.
Moris enim Ecclesiastics est, Christo genuflectere: quod Iudaei, mentis
superbiam demonstrantes, omnino non faciunt. For it is (says he) the custom
of the Church to bow the knee to Christ: which the Jews, showing the
perverseness of their minds, altogether refuse to do.

Thus it was then: but how long before, I cannot tell. Only this I observe from
hence, that the ancient Church understood that text, where this duty is
taught, in the same sense that we understand it now. And therefore, how they
can be acquitted from enemies of the Orthodox verity, who fear not to stand
against it, no man (I suppose) is able to declare: And sooner by far may they
bring forth an argument of spite, then an evidence of the spirit, who speak
against it. The people must use the Answers of the Liturgy.


The next duty that I shall mention, is, that being in Gods house, and at his
service, care must be had to use all the Answers of the holy Liturgy; and
that cheerfully and aloude: not whispering, or between the teeth: nor (as
some do) silently, and not at all. For tell me (I beseech you) where is the
eagerness of your Prayers and Praises, if in a public Assembly ye be as
mute as fishes? Revel. 14.2.
I heard a voice from heaven (says Saint John) as the sound of many waters,
and as the sound of a great Thunder and I heard the voice of Harpers harping
with their harpes. Like unto which should be the voice of the Church on earth,
in all her several Congregations, when she utters her Prayers and Praises
to the God of heaven. For first, we are to come jointly to the place of
public meeting, like the concourse of many waters; whose voice stands to
signify the voice of a numerous, and full multitude, being met together.
Secondly, to be earnest in our devotions, like the sound of a great Thunder.
And then thirdly, shall this loud voice of ours be musical, like unto those
heavenly Harpers harping with their harpes. It may be, Multa vox ex Psallentium
multitudine, sed delectabilis ex consonantie suavitate: which is true, both in
singing and in other parts of Gods service.

And verily, it was the praise of the Primitive Church (in whose steps is the
best footing) to do all this, jointly and aloud: insomuch, that as (Saint
Hierom speaks) their Amen was like a clap of Thunder; as is here signified:
and their Halleluia, as the roaring of the Sea.

I should be glad therefore to see the people join with their Minister, both
in heart and voice; and to let so cheerefall and so good a light shine forth
before men, that thereby the forwardness and alacrity of one, may stir up
the dull drooping soul of another; and so, all be as they should, in the
House, and at the services of God. And thus much for Deportment being entered.

We must not depart till all be ended.
nor of Ill Deportment being entered; So neither may we be such giddie-headed
Fugitives, as to be gone away before the whole service be fully ended. For,
in the judgment of S. Chrysostom, Chrysost-homde non contemnend. Ecclesia.
He is no better then a Fugitive, who takes his leave before the time come
that he be dismissed. Nay, should he go to a Theater, he would scarce be
guilty of such a quick departure: but would first expect his Valete and
plaudite, and then depart. And is not the Priests blessing (besides the service
that he goes from) of a far greater consequence? Profane men and women,
thus to dishonor the God of heaven! Oh tell it not abroad, but to terrify
these idle and weary worshippers. They prefer their own desires before Gods
service: and so, in effect, make any thing else their God, rather then the
Lord: How else could they show such an irksome assent to his holy worship?

But it is not unknown what was the censure for this offense, in the days of
old. From the first words, (...) (in which the peoples silent attention was
called for) until the last words, (...), or Dimissio populi, they might not
depart: it being a censure no less then excommunication to be gone away
before the end; excepting in cases of extreme necessity. Thus in the Greek
Church. And in the Latin there was Ite, Missa est, twice pronounced by the
Deacon: once, when the Catechumeni were sent away; and once at the end of the
Communion, after the whole Service was fully ended. Our Can. 18. Eccles.
Anglic. See also Council. 4 Carth. and Council. Aurel. Can. 28.
Canon therefore does not ill beseem us, which treads so near such pious
times.

And seeing it is in the power of the Church to make such Laws, let it be in
the conscience of the officers to see them kept. Yea, in a word; as we pray
that God would hear us, and go not far from us: so, by the like relation,
we are to be careful that we run not away from Him. For it is but
justice, that God deal with us, as we with Him. And if we forsake, or fly
his House on earth, no marvel if he will not suffer us to enjoy the fair
beauty of it in the glorions heavens. In such a case as this, the complaint
can be no sooner taken up; Lord, why have thou forsaken us? but presently the
answer will be as ready; Oh wicked and slothful servant! why have thou
forsaken me?

They bowed themselves and worshipped. Their last posture being like their
first: as the Sea 2 Chro. 29.29.
Scriptures also bear us witness.

ANd now after all this, there is one thing more would be observed, namely,
that we ever remember for whom this House is set apart. If it be once Gods
House, it is always so: as well when no assembly is there present, as when the
Service is in doing. For by the relation of divine propriety, as it is always
holy; so always His. And this comes to pass in regard of the Dedication or
Consecration thereof to the divine Majesty. For when a thing is once dedicated
or consecrated to the Lord, the propriety thereof becomes so His, as it is no
longer Ours. Yea, thus to be Gods, is to be His in a peculiar manner, and not
as other things are.

And for all this we have sufficient warant; First in the goods of the Church;
as in that example of Ananias and Saphyra, Act. ^.4.
in the Acts of the Apostles. The goods were their own, before they had
devoted them: but then they nothing appertained to them. Secondly, in the
Vessels and Vtensils of the Church; as was seen, Dan. 5.23. Theod. l. 3. c.
12.13. and Sozom. lib. 5. c. 7. Math. 21.12. Ioh. 2.14.
not only in that example of Balthazar, but in that also of the wretched Felix,
and filthy Julian. And last of all, in the very place it self; as our Saviors
act (beside other examples) has well declared.

And therefore it is more then manifest, that they are in a great error, who
would have Churches holy no longer then the time of divine Service. For, as
there is always a great difference between a Priest and a Layman; So always
a great difference between a Church and another place.

Which [to conclude with] affords us these two Lessons. First, that we are at
all times so to behave us in Gods house, as that we be more reverend there
then elsewhere. It is the place where his honor dwells: Psalm. 26.8.
and to be uncovered in the Kings presence Chamber, is an usual thing, though
the King be not there. It should be as usual to do the like, much rather,
in the Houses of God, though the solemnity of service be not then: For there
can be but little love to God, when rudeness takes place of reverence, and
sequesters our respect from such persons, things, and places, as belong unto
Him.

Secondly, if it be Gods house, it cannot be also thine, we may not pervert
or turn it to any secular employment. For though the Devil deal cunningly,
and persuade (what he can) the contrary; yet let it not be thy fate to be
thus dangerously misled by such a Liar. For, as he deals falsely when he
would have us believe, that we may retain God in our hearts together with our
sins: So he deals as deceitfully when he would have us think, that Gods
House may serve for other uses besides his service. Retort it therefore back
again; that as God, when he calls to Man for his heart, means not that the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil should have one part, and he another: but
means that it be all for himself: So, if it be Gods house, he must and
will have it all alone. Before it was built to be an house to thy God, the
ground and cost were thine own, and thou might have done with them what
thou would; as in that before of Saint Peter to Ananias: But when thou have
once given them to God, it is no more Thine, but His house. Yea, and so His, as
that it be solely His. He loves no partner; nor is delighted with the doings
of a rude and wicked Prophaner: for Holiness becomes thine house for ever;
as it is in the 93 Psalm, at the 6 verse.

Quest. But be there no times, nor no occasions, wherein things sacred may be
applied to a common use?

Answ. There be, I grant, some cases wherein the Lord will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: but it is not for every one to judge of that. Howbeit, this I may
say; that Charity is a maine piece of piety: and in that regard, holy things
cannot be properly said to be profaned, when we are forced to make them
serve to the necessities of our Brethren; as was seen in David [ Math. 12.]
when he, and they that were with him, went into the house of God, and did eat
the Shewbread, as also in that of some of the Fathers, who were necessitated to
sell a part of the holy Vessels for the safety of the needy. And in like
case, I think, the Church is not profaned, though we be shut up there, for
our better safety; if, when we are there, we do not that which may profane
it.

But what is all this to that unsufferable liberty which some men take, either
in the making of it a place to teach a School, to lay lumber in, or a place
for Iuries to consult together at their Courts and Leets, or a place for
neighbors to come and commune in about their Sesses or other compositions, or
for a profane Glasier to mend his glass upon the holy Table, or to say (as
has been sometimes) that Plays and Enterludes may be acted there? No: These,
and the like, are far from that which may be done in such a place. And
therefore, as Christ whipped the Buyers and sellers from the Temple, overthrew
the Tables of the money changers, and seats of them that sold Doves: So should
every Christian Church, zealously expel all such kinds of profane doings from
the Houses of God: For it cannot but be well pleasing to the owner of them, to
see his honor thus advanced. And, God be thanked, we have those among us,
who are tenderly affected toward it. The Lord make them prosperous: and never
let them prevail (oh Lord) whose factious proceedings declare too well, that
they love to trouble the harmless peace of their Holy Mother.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
Perlegi hunc Tractatum, cui titulus Prophano-Mastix, dignumque judico quitypis
mandetur.

Tho. Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.
October 17. 1638.

