THE TRIVMPHS OF FAME and HONOR: OR THE NOBLE Accomplished solemnity, full of
Cost, Art and state, at the Inauguration and Establishment of the true worthy
and right nobly minded ROBERT PARKHVRST, into the Right Honorable office of
Lord Mayor of LONDON. The particularities of every Invention in all the
Pageants, Shows and Triumphs both by Water and Land, are here following fully
set down, being all performed by the Loves, Liberal Costs, and charges of the
Right Worshipful and worthy Brotherhood of the Cloth-workers the 29 of
October 1634.

Written by John Tailor.

Imprinted at London 1634.

TO THE MOST WELCOME AND expected Pattern and Patron of Virtue and Goodness,
the hopeful deserver of all the Costs and Honors which the Noble Fellowship
and Brotherhood of Clothworkers and ample Love of the whole City, in full and
generous Bounty bestow upon him, the Right Honorable and Judicious ROBERT
PARKHVRST, Lord Major of the famous City of London.
RIght Honorable Patron, to your state
In duty I these Triumphs dedicate,
Wherein your Worthy Brotherhood Approves
Greatness and goodness of their minds, and loves,
Their true affections and their liberal charge,
They have most bountiful expressed at large,
And London in these Triumphs is renownd
Above all cities in the worlds wide Round:
For no Kings Deputy, or Magistrate
Is with such pompous state inaugurate,
As Londons Mayor is, which most plainly shows
The Kings illustrious greatness whence it flows;
To whom then should my dedication run,
But unto you, for whom these things were done?
Your power is Londons watch-towre to epsy,
Dangers far off, and perils that are nigh:
Your foresight must see much, and it is plain,
Millions of eyes will look on you again,
For envy and detraction pries and stares
T'assault true honor, and t'intrap in snares
All that is good, for it is manifest,
That envy always feeds upon the best.
This city (the Kings Chamber) must be kept
Clean for his use, from foul pollution swept,
And sure, that power that has you thus advanced,
To be thus honored, loved and countenanced,
Will ever be your portion, and content,
And govern you in this your government.
That you (at helm) a steady course may steare
Twixt Justice, and blessed Mercy, many a year
Especially in this your greatest state,
Let Hospitality still keep your Gate;
And Liberality, with welcome stand,
To greet men with a free and open hand,
Then Muses, Graces, Arts, the praise shall sing
Of you (my Lord) Lieutenant to my King.
THE TRIVMPHS OF FAME AND HONOR.
T The first show that is to be presented on the water is a vessel like a Boat
or Barge, adorned with the arms and Impresses of the honorable City and
Company, with seeming properties of being laden, with Packs, dryfats, and
diverse other commodities, that merchants and others that are free of the
Company of Cloth-workers, do receive from foreigne parts by sea; this Barge
attends the Lord Mayor and meets him about Paul's wharfe or attends further up
the River. Thetis (the Goddess of the sea) and Thames, or Thamisis (being one
of her fairest daughters) sitting in the head of the Boat; Thetis being
habitimented in a mantle of sea-Greene, with a corronet of shells of diverse
sorts of seafish on her head with a great whelk-fish in her hand with
adornments of strange fishes and other significant representations. Thamisis
being habited in a white or silver colored Robe, having on her head a Chaplet
of green Reeds, Flowers and Rushes, and about her feet decked with Sedge,
Bulrushes and Flaggs, at which presentment Thetis speaks this following speech;

Know worthy Troop, that I great Thetis am,
Who (hearing of these Triumphs) hither came
From th'Azure court of my most deep Abyss
To grace my fairest daughter Thamisis,
I every twelve hours, by this Child of mine,
Do send you silks and velvets, oil, and wine,
Gold, silver, Jewels, fish, salt, sundry spices,
Fine and course linen, druggs of diverse prices:
What every Realm or climate can produce,
I see it safe transported for your use.
Thus from the bosom of the Deep my floods
(By Thames) do every Tide send up your goods,
For which this matchless well deserving River,
Your Cloth does back again to me deliver,
With other riches, which I over the Sea
Unto my other daughters do convay;
For your commodities I Will ever flow
Unto Danubius, Ister, Rhine, and Poe,
To Maze, Seine, Volga, Ems, Elve, and Tanales,
To Tygris, Nilus, Ganges, Euphrates,
To Tyber, Jordan, Xanthus, Jndus, Tagus,
Past Asphaltites, or Black Mortuus Lacus
As far as Sol or Cynthia spread their beams,
As far as Oceanus sends his streams,
So far will I your servant ever be,
In any thing you will deigne to put on me:
And humble thanks fair Thames and I do render
To you, who of her welfare are so tender,
Who with great cost and care do lend your hands,
To clear your servant Thames from shelves and sands:
Go on and cleanse her, as you have begun,
And she shall do for you as she has done.
We are assured that Heaven will ever bless
Your stores, who do her injuries redress,
Thetis and Thames, their services shall show
To you, as long as they do ebb and flow.
Thus with our humble dutious bending down,
Long may this City flourish with renown.

Then the Rowers (consisting of four in number, being two Saylours, two
watermen) being ouer-joyed, pike their oars, and every of them drinks his Kan
as a health, tossing them up, and presently falling into a Rugged friskin
dance, return to Paul's wharfe, and landing the said Barge, she is carried as
the foremost Pageant in the show through the City.

The second is a Pageant representing the figures of Time and Mercury (Time
being habited in a blew roabe with his Sith in his hand) which do wait and
attend the Lord Mayor in Paul's Chuch-yard, The speakers being Mounted on two
Griphons (the Supporters of the Cloth-workers Arms) which at the approach of
my Lord, Mercury (upon one of the Griphons) with his Caducens or charming rod
in his hand, with wings on his head to signify quickness of Invention,
Acuteness of wit, and Volubility of tongue with Eloquence of speech. He has
also wings on his feet to signify his swiftness; as Messenger to the Gods.
Time speaks as follows.

The Speech of Time.
Almost 500 days, beheld have I
The Triumphs of Great Londons Mayoralty,
And sure old Time, with Joy does truly say,
He n're was better pleased than at this day;
Not that I think a temporizing Lord,
Or Pleaser of the Time shall weild the sword,
But as your Honorable Predecessors
Have mended Time, by punishing Trangressors;
So Time hopes that th'addition of your year,
Will make him more Illustrate, pure and clear.
For of all fading things it is manifest,
As Time is used, he is either worst or best.
All those that rightly have their Honors won:
Have used Time well, (as you my Lord have done.)
This Honor was ordaind you, from your youth
You ever loved my loveliest daughter TRVTH,
And she has raised you; and she did prefer
You to this dignity to Maintain her.
I do command her, still with you to abide,
Do you defend her, she shall be your guide:
For truth-sake Time shall be your servant still;
And in your just commands, obey your will.
Time shall transport your Merchandise and wares,
Time shall assist you in your great'st affairs:
Time shall be always yours Auspitiously,
And Time will bring you to Eternity.
Here Is Hermes, from his Spheres circumferance
Has brought the Poet wit, and Eloquence;
And quick Invention, likewise he Inflamed
Into the Artists that these pageants framed,
That for your future Honor, this may be
A day of well Composed Variety
Of Speech and show, these Triumphs we present,
We hope (as they are meant shall give content)
We humbly wish, that you this year may find,
Full of true worth as is your worthy mind.

Next and near to this Pageant of Time and Mercury, is the form of a City
representing London, with walls, Battlements, Gates, Churches, Towers, Steeples
and lofty Buildings, and some Antique shapes here and there on the tops of the
highest Edifices: Also with shops and men at work upon cloth, as
Cloth-workers, fullers, shermen, and others, the walls of the City being
adorned round, with Arms and scoutcheons of the City and company as also
diverse figures, as 1 of Antiquity, 2 Record, 3 Memory, 4 Wisdom, and others
the like; also an ancient Matron in a civil grave robe with her hair long
hanging down in trammels dishevelled behind her back, sitting in one of the
Gates of the City, she speaks in the person of London to the Lord Mayor and
company as follows.

By me fair London in obedience shows
The service, love, and duty that she owes
To this days Triumph, but my aim is higher,
My thankfulness does up to heaven aspire,
Which unto me has so propitious been,
That I do see this day, and now am seen
The Queen of Cities, Empress of content,
And Princess of unmarched government;
Weigh well my state, and think on other states,
Thebes is ruined with her hundred Gates;
Numantia, Carthage, great Jerusalem,
And Babylon, what are become of them?
Constantinople does in sorrow lie,
And groan beneath the Turkish tyranny:
Rome, and all Cities that hold Rome supreme,
Their glorie's are eclipsed or but a dream;
Whilst fire and sword does Germany molest,
London's secure, with peace and plenty blessed,
Turk, Pope, and war, bear here no rule or sway,
For I one God, one King, one Law obey;
There Is my security, and my state does stand
Supported by the unsupported hand,
These are the means and instruments whereby
We rise to Honor, painful Industry.
An Idle Citizen is like a Moth,
One spoils b'example t'oher spoils the Cloth,
True Citizens are the true Cities sons,
The others are but bastards, mad that runs,
Like Runnagates, or cursed Imps of Caine,
And never shall to Honors seat Attain:
Work on my Lads, and you in time may be,
Good members of this Honored Company,
And though good Freeman (of this Corporation)
Deceased before his half years expiration,
Yet Heaven has soon provided for our good
Another worthy of this Brotherhood.
And now my Lord, I give my self and mine,
To your command and charge, and I divine
That as great is the Honor of your seat,
Your Government shall be more good than great.

The next is a Pageant in the form of a Tower, which does import a Tower of
Honor, on the top of which Tower sits one in royal robes, with a majestique
Impalement on his head, a scepter in one hand, and a Ball in the other: under
him (in the next descent) sit in equal distances the figures of a Lord Mayor,
a Bishop, a Lawyer, and a warlike Captain or General. On the right hand of
the Lord Mayor is placed the figure or emblem of Honor: next the Bishop is
placed piety or the fear of God: on the right hand of the Judge, a figure
representing power is seated, and by the General or Captain stands victory.
In the descent below the Lord Mayor is an apprentice, and by him stands
obedience: beneath the Bishop is a scholar, and by him is placed patience,
under the Judge a clark, and by him diligence, and under the Lord General is a
Common Soldier, and by him is placed virtue, which shows that by virtuous
actions and true industry mean men have ascended and may be raised to
Honorable places, which is an encouragement and pattern for others to pursue
and follow those most worthy ways to Honor and Renown. The Tower being round
or circular, and the Basis or Groundwork square or Quadrangle, on each corner
whereof sits, the four prime or Cardinal Virtues, namely Justice, Fortitude,
Temperance and Prudence, every one of them habited in Robes, significant and
Emblematically showing that those virtues do adorn and dignifie the above
presented noble personages. This Pageant attending my Lord Mayor, in Paul's
Churchyard or at the upper end of Cheapside near the little Conduit; he that
sits highest in the place and person of Honor speaks this following Speech.

The Speech of Honor.
Low steps begin to mount the highest hills,
Great Rivers have their heads from little Rills:
From servitude grows freedom, and from thence
(Through Industry) springs Worth and Eminence.
All such as will true Honors seat ascend,
Must do (as these have) first obey and bend:
For though Humility to man seems low,
The fruit of it as high as Heaven does grow:
It Is diligence does the puny-clarke prefer,
To be a Reverend Judge, or Counceller;
Pains and much peril often obtaines the grace,
A common Soldier gains a Generals place:
The poorest Scholars study (by degrees)
Ascends the height of spiritual dignities,
And from th'apprentice seven years servitude
Proceeds the grave gown, and the Livery-Hood,
Till (in the end) by merit, pains and care,
They win the Grace to fit in Honors chair;
Thus Humble service is advanced and reared
To Honors seat, obeyed, beloved and feared.
Authoritie's the touchstone of the mind,
And shows which way the bearer is inclined:
For having power joined to his will,
It makes him much more good, or much more ill:
It makes him to foresee, with Judgments eye,
That Justice without Mercie's cruelty:
That Mercy without Justice is much worse,
Breeds scorn, contempt, makes power to leese her force.
When you in scales of Equity do lay
The sword of Justice, who dares but obey.
Your faith and Honor are in marriage joynd
By oath this day, which no man can unbinde,
Therefore my Lord (whose service and true merit
Has made this Honor yours which you inherit)
It Is treble Joy that you do wisely know
To mix those virtues well, and to bestow
Them justly, as occasion shall incite:
To guard the good, and make wrong render right,
In which expectance all our hopes abounding,
Joy crown this day with Drums and Trumpets sounding.

Then his Lordship being come to Saint Laurence lane end in Cheapside, he is
saluted by Endimion, or a shepherd rideing on a Rams back, (the Ram being the
crest of the Cloth-workers arms) there being near or next unto him an ancient
monument of fame: at the approach of my Lord the shepherd entertaines him with
this speech.

The Speech of Endimion.
My Honored Lord, let me, (a rural Swain,
And humble shepherd from the lowly plain)
As plainly bid thee welcome to this state
Of Englands greatest civil Magistrate.
A shepherd joys to see this day, and I
Will fleece my flock's t'nrich thy company:
I am Endimion, that of yore did keep
Upon The Arcadian hills my harmeles sheep:
Whereas by study, and by observations
I found the Moons change and her variations,
And for my sake the Swains do still prefer
The book ycleap'd the shepherds Kallender.
Apollo kept Admetus sheep (it is said)
And Tamberlaine (whom Mighty Kings obeyed)
Was once a shepherd, and the Time was when
That shepherds were the noblest, ablest men.
This golden crested Ram, on which I ride
To welcome you, and see you dignifide,
Is the Celestial figne, (Aries by name)
Come from the Zodiac to adorn your fame.
And from the Ram, and his increasing breed
Near half mankind have means to Cloth and feed.
By picking wool, thousands releife do gain,
^s many carding, spinning does maintain:
Wooll-men, a great and wealthy trade do drive,
Weavers, in great abundance work and live,
The Clothiers, Fullers, Tuckers, Shermen, Dyers,
From the sheep fleece have feeding and attires,
But all these Trades, which I do here infer,
Have all relation to the Cloth-worker,
For were it not for him the rest were nothing,
He only makes it Cloth, and fit for Clothing,
Without the Cloth-worker, the Drapers Trade
And Merchants Traffic would decay and fade,
These from the fleece got Clothes and nutriment,
For (under heaven) the Ram's the Instrument.
And when bright Phoebus shall in March begin
To take the Ram for his celestial Inn
Such golden tincture on his fleece hee^le set,
Which many golden pieces shall beget,
And whereas men (to make their worths appear)
Do give their servants Liveries once a year,
The Ram (in bounty) passes man I note.
And gives his Master every year a coat
Thus poor Endimion, with the beast he tides,
Does wish you prosperous winds, and happy tides,
That by commerce, and good Negotiation,
Wool turned to Cloth, and Cloth by transformation,
Be turned to gold, that you may say with joy,
That Iasons fleece (to yours) was but a toy.

A dance of shephards with drinking in leather bottles in the (...). Lastly, at
night, when his Lordship returns from Paul's, the Pageants being six in number,
going all before him in their order, attending him to his house, then the last
Pageant being an ancient Monument of Fame, shall present it self to his
Lordship, in the front of which peace is erected a figure representing Fame,
with a silver Trumpet in her hand, the Monument being adorned with the Arms,
Escucheons, Hatchments and Impresses of diverse Lord Mayors that have bin of the
worshipful company of the Cloth-workers, whom (though Time has interred) Fame
revives, sounding their praises, and inforceth Time to revive their noble
Memory, encouraging his Lordship to follow them in all their Honorable
actions, that when Time shall determinate, his Lordships shield of Honor may
be added to the rest of his predecessors; and as this Pageant of the Monument
of Fame is a representation of the night, so the night, and this following
speech at his Lordships Gate is a conclusion and dutiful farewell to the days
Triumph and solemnity.

Time speaks.
Time, that this day his service has expressed,
In duty brings your Lordship to your rest:
Yet er'e I take my leave, (for your content)
I Will show the meaning of this Monument.
Then know, this ruind piece does show that stones
And tombs consume, as do their owners bones,
For Time is circular in his effects,
Builds and throws down, and ruins and erects:
But fortune, death or fame, or Time cannot
Make virtuous men, or virtue be forgot.
For Immortallity is pleased to make
Fame with his Trumpe the drowsy world to wake,
Who from demollished delapidations
Proclaims the memorable nominations
Of worthies of this worthy company,
Who Honored lived, and did with Honor die.
Sir William Hewet was, as you my Lord,
To poyz the balance and to weild the sword:
Sir Rowland Hayward next, next Sir James Hawes,
Did rule this City justly by the laws;
Next was Sir Edward Osboorne Londons Mayor;
Then Sir John Spencer gaind the honored Chair,
Sir Thomas Schinner after had the place;
Next did Sir Nicholas Mosley gain the Grace;
Then Sir John Watts his year with Honor past,
And Noble Freeman who deceased last.
King James the wisest, and the learned King,
Whose fame throughout the spacious world does ring,
He knew your merits, worth and dignity,
And therefore chose your worthy company
To be his Brotherhood; he did understand,
You were most fit for his fraternall band.
And you my Lord, whom Time has brought to be
The noblest Branch of this fraternity,
Time here salutes you, wishing you may move
More high in Honor, as you do in love.
It Is truly said, that man that rules his passions,
Does conquer more, than he that conquers Nations.
As you have ruled your self, let it appear
In ruling London this ensuing year,
So you, with Time shall be together blessed,
And Time shall bring you to Eternal Rest.

For a period to these Triumphs, (and to give desert her due) It were shameful
impudence in me to assume the invention of these Structures and Architectures
to my self, they being business which I never was inured in, or acquainted with
all, there being little of my directions in these shows; only the Speeches,
and Illustrations which are here printed I do justly challenge as mine own,
all the rest of the Composures and Fabrics were formed and framed by the
ingenious and industrious M'r Robert Norman Citizen and Painter of London, who
was indeed the prime inventor prosecuter and finisher of these works, with the
assistance of Zachary Tailor a quaint and well known curious Carvar, which
being gracefully accepted and approved of, after good CHRISTMAS, the authors
may be the more merry at the next.

The explanation of the first Pageant of Thetis.
THetis, daughter to the sea-god Nereus, she was wife to King Peleus, also
Thetis was the mother of Achilles, who was seven cubits in height, and the most
valiant Captain amongst the Greeks at the siege of Troy.

Danubia is a great River that runs through Hungaria by the famous Cities of
Buda, Brundusium, and Belgrad, and so it passes into Germany, by the Town of
Regensberg, and through Swabe, Bavaria, and Austria; it is also called Donawe,
but passing into Illyria it is at a part of Thracia called Istria changed into
the name of Ister, it receives 60 rivers into it, the most part of which are
navigable, it falls into the sea called Pontus Euxinus, or the Euxine sea.

Po a famous river in Italy. Seine a river in France which runs through Paris*
Volgu a river that runs through the large Empire of Russia. Ems in east
Frizland, from whence the City of Eniden has name Elve or Albe, is a river
that passes from Bohem, through Saxony, Misnia, and so to the towns of
Hamborough and Stoad, into the German Ocean. Tanais, a great river northward,
which parts Asia from Europe. Nilus a famous river that runs through Ethiopia
and Egypt, and because it never raines in Egypt, it is watered and made
fruitful once a year by the overflowing of Nilus. Ganges is a mighty river
that runs through and divides India, it is one of the four rivers of Paradise,
and is called by Moses Phison. Tigris one of the four named Hiddekell.
Euphrates passes by Babylon, and was also one of the rivers of Paradise named
by Moses Perah, and the Tyber a river that runs through Rome. Jordan a river
that runs betwixt Gallile and Judea, and falls into Mare mortuum or the dead
sea. Xanthus a river in Phrygia near Troy, of which it is said that if sheep
drank of the water, their fleeces became yellow. Indus a great and goodly
navigable river, that has its head from the mountain Taurus or Caucasus, it
incompasseth India on the west, and falls by Asia into the Lake called Paulus
Meotis, and part into the Indian sea. Asphaltites is the dead sea or Mare
mortuum, it is in Siria, and it is held to be the place where Sodom, Gomorah,
and the rest of the five Cities stood which were consumed with fire and
brimstone from heaven.

The meaning of the second Pageant being Time and Mercury.
2 TIme has seen 426 several days of Mayoralty, which is so many years
since the Cities government was changed (by King Richard the first) from
Portgraves, Provosts and Bailiffs, to the Honorable title and dignity of Lord
Mayor. Men that come rightly to places of Honor and dignity must make good use
of Time. Truth is the daughter of Time, who though falsehood may obscure her,
yet Time will bring her forth at last, where her bright virtue shall outshine
the Sun: there is nothing goes beyond Time but Eternity.

Upon the third Pageant which represented a City.
LOndon does express her duty and thankfulness, in acknowledging her happy
preservation and government, when many of the goodliest Cities in the world are
either ruind, and confounded, or else far short of her peaceful and plentiful
felicity. As first, Thebes was a great City in Egypt, it was built by King
Busiris, it had 100 gates about the walls, it was 40 miles in compass, the
walls were 30 stads high, and six stads in breadth; it is written that 200
watchmen watched at every gate: when it was destroyed by Allexander the Great,
there were found the Toombs of 77 Kings, (and good Kings they had bin) for the
law was amongst them that bad Kings should have no burial. Also there was
another Thebes in Boetia built by Cadmus, and a third Thebes in Cillicia, where
it is said Andromche the wife to the worthy Hector was borne. Numantia was in
Spain, and being besieged by the brave roman Scipio, rather than they would
yield their City, they burned it with their wives, children, goods and
families. Carthage was a goodly City in Africa, it was 40 English miles in
circuit, it was held against the Romans 44 years when Rome was in her greatest
greatness, it brought forth the valiant Captain Haniball, and was at last
destroyed by Scipio Affricanus 144 years before Christ's birth; the place and
country where it stood is now called Tunis, which is a harbor or Receptacle
for Pirates, sea-Rovers and misbeleeving Turks. Jerusalem the chief City of
Judea, where King Salomons Temple was, and where our Savior suffered his
passion, it is now a ruind piece under the subjection of the Turk. There are
two Babylons, one in Caldea, where Nimrods Tower was erected, and another
Babylon there was in Egypt, they being (as their names do signify) both in
confusion under the Turk. Constantinople was the metropolis and the head City
of the Grecian or Eastern Empire, it was won from the Christians the 29 of May
1453. by the Turkish Emperor Mahomet the second, which Mahomet did also win
the Empire of Trebizond, and took 12 Kingdoms and 200 Cities from the
Christians. Rome nor any City that holds Rome for chief, cannot declare any
such true Reality in their happiness and government, as London justly may do.

These few expressions I thought fit to set down here for the illustration of
such words and places as may seem hard and obscure to some mean Readers.

FINIS.

