A SERMON PREACHED AT WIMONDHAM, In Norfolk, at the Primary Visitation of the
Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God, MATTHEW, Lord Bishop of NORWICH,
on the third of June, Ann. Dom. 1636. By RICHARD TEDDER.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by Godfrey Emerson, and
are to be sold at his shop in little Britain. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MATTHEW,. Lord Bishop of Norwich, and
Deane of the Kings Majesty's Chapel Royal.
My LORD,
I Present this Sermon unto you with all humbleness, which was preached at
your Lordshps Visitation. The Time, the Place, the Occasion, yea My self bear
such a relation to you, that they move me to sue to your Lordship for the
patronage of it. God grant your Lordship increase of days, and honor, that
both God and the Church may receive an increase of honor by them both. This is
the daily prayer of him who is, and will be

Your Lordships in all humble duty, RICHARD TEDDER.

S. LUKE Chap. 19. Verse. 46. It is written, My house is the house of prayer:
but ye have made it a den of thieves.


THese words were a Sermon, the Text was taken out of Isay, the Sermon was
preached at a Visitation time: the Visitor himself preached it, and the place,
which he visited, was the Temple.

Iudicia a domo Dei: the fittest place for Judgment to begin at, is the House
of God: 1. Ep. S. Pet. c. 4. v. 17.
set but all right in the Temple, and all will go well enough with the
Commonwealth. The Commonwealth is sustained by Justice, but, Justice it self
is upheld by Religion, that Plato puts down for a maxim in his Alcib. If
Religion falter, then Justice cannot but swerve; and the swerving of Justice
cannot be without danger, if not without the downfall of a State:

Domus Dei, and Domus Regis, Gods House, and the Kings House stood together; so
Solomon built them: 1. Reg. c. 6, 7.
but first Solomon built Gods house, and then His own: for it is ^he Temple,
that does, and must ever establish the Throne.

The safety of the King and State, and the life of Justice are derived from
Religion: but Religion too will fall into pieces, if it be not continually
cemented and repaired by Discipline. Hence the Fathers in the Primitive times,
and since, have bestowed all their care, and directed all their endeavors to
this one end, that is Discipline. As good pull down the Church with the
Edomite, as cry down the Discipline of it with the Separatist. To keep this up,
the Apostles themselves labored, like wise workmen, ordaining in their Canons
two times in the year for Episcopal Assemblies Cap. 38.
; which Constitution was afterward quickened again by the General Councels:
for this was thought the way to correct the vitiousnesse of the Clergy, and to
preserve sanctity of life among them, in the Council at Chalcedon Cap. 19.
; to root out heresy, and maintain purity of Doctrine, in the Council at
Antioch Cap. 20.
; to hinder oppression of inferior Clergymen, and settle justice among the
Prelates, in the Nicene Council Cap. 5.
: to remove schism, and to plant unity and conspiration, in the Canons of the
Apostles Cap. 38.
.

It is the Prelates part to see to Discipline, and to actuate the Laws by
seeing them obeyed, which otherwise would come to no birth, but dye abortive.
They strike at the very foundation of the Church, that speak against the
Hierarchy of Bishops: for remove the Prelacy, and remove Discipline: and
discipline being thrust out, Religion falls flat upon the ground. Where there is
no King, a^ once it was in Israel, Jud. 21.25.
there every man did what seem good in his own eyes: where there is no
Prelate, as it is now in some Cities beyond the seas, there all sorts of
schismatics broach all sorts of doctrines, every man professin^ what Religion
he pleases. But with us if there be not good Clergy, it is the neglect of the
Prelate; and if there be not a religious and conformable people, it is the
fault of the Priest: for it the Priest would but do his duty, the people would,
or must do theirs.

Hence it is, that our Lord in this his Visitation, when he saw the City, the
Text says, Flevit super illam, Ver. 41.
He wept over it: but when he came into the Temple, Coepit ejicere, He began to
cast out them that were in it: Ver. 45.
He never acted the Magistrate till now in the Temple. There Reformation is to
begin: Cleanse but the Church of ignorant, erroneous, schismatic, and
vicious Priests, and then Religion will take more place among the people. No
marvel, that all Jerusalem was out of order, when Gods house was so too, when
Domus Dei was converted into spelunca latronum, when thieves had taken the
house of God in possession, and sacrilege was installed in the seat of prayer.
There our great Visitor begins, passing by the sins of the City, he only
wept over that, and pitied it; but punishing the sins of the Temple, for he
scourged and cast out them that profaned it, saying unto them: It is written,
S. Joh. 2.15.
My house is the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

Text, there is, 1. The Temples institution. 2. The profanation of it. In the
institution, 1. What it must be, Domus. 2. For whom, God, Domus Mea. 3. To what
end, Prayer, Domus mea, domus Orationis. 4. The unalterablenesse of that end,
it is not fuit, or erit, out est, Domus mea Est domus orationis. 5. The reason,
or ground, and that is, because God himself has institued it so, Scriptum
est, Domus mea est domus oratinis.

profanation of it is aggravated. 1. From what it was made, Spelunca. 2. From
the persons that were entertained in it, Thieves, spelunca Latronum. 3. From
the persons, that made it so, the Jews, yea, the Scribes and Pharisees, Vos
autem fecistis eam speluncam latronum. 4. From the continuance of time, it is
not Vos Facitis eam, but which is more, Vos Fecistis eam speluncam latronum.

David says, Domini est terra, and as Saint Paul says, Psalm. 24.1. 1. Tim.
2.8.
Volo viros orare in omni loco: though God be the immense inhabitant of the
whole earth, and every place in it may, and should be our Oratory; yet he has
ever confined his presence to some particular places to be adored in.

Mountain, or a neighboring Grove, places fit for silence and contemplation,
where there might be no avocation of the mind from God: there Abraham was a
solicitor of God by invocation. Genesis 21.


When Groves were abused by Gentile superstition, then God removed himself into
a Tabernacle, Exodus 25.
and became a fellow-traveller with Moses, and the children of Israel. Psalm.
132.
It was Introibimus in Tabernaculum ejus then, till Solomon's time, God was not
to be spoken with but in his Tabernacle.

But when he had given his people rest, then he would have a house built him, a
place to rest in too: (...), says Philo De via Mosis, li. 3.
. They were a traveling people, and God appointed them a traveling Temple; in
imitation whereof blessed Constantine in time of war had hi^ Ecclesia
portatilis Socr. lib. 1. cap. 14.
. The first Sanctuary God was worshipped in, was sine tecto: the second had
tectum, but no^ fundamentum: last of all, when God had brought them unto a
settled condition, and given them possessions, and houses, God would be allowed
a possession, and a house among them then; and then Solomon built him a House:
he was sine domo, he had no house till then.

Ever since God has been the owner of a house, though the fanaticall
schismatique would allow him none, he would make God at best but his Inmate,
and he should lodge in charity with him, Jud. 17. 2. Reg. 4.
like the poor Levite in Micahs house, or like the man of God in the
Shunamites little chamber. An house God will have of us, to whom we are
beholden for ours; not a chamber, or a parlour, a part of a house, but a whole
house, and that not common to others, but proper to himself, which we may call
his own, and say, Domus mea.

house, but he may thank the devotion of former times for it: for we are more
forward to pull down, then to set up, and think much of doing that we do, to
keep them up, much more of beautifying and adorning them. We have stripped
Faith naked to be scorned and laughed at by the adversary, good works are out
of fashion, and that Religion likes us best, that costs us least. The primitive
Christians thought it the best service they could do to God, to do something to
his House: that no sign of religion, to adorn their own houses with marble,
and Ivory, and cedar, and tapestry, and pictures, and see Gods house neglected,
and not provided for. See now, says David to Nathan, I dwell in an house of
cedar, 2. Sam. 72
but the Ark of God dwells within curtains. He thought it a dishonor to
God, that even the Kings palace should be more glorious than Gods house. This
made Antiquity to christen their Churches by the name of Basilicae, not only,
because the King of all people was there sacrificed to, as Isidorus Li. 15. c.
4.
; but for the gloriousness of their frame, as may be gathered out of
Ecclesiastical Histories. Eusebius can show you the magnificence of those
Temples, that Constantine erected Lib. 3.4.
; and Athanasius of that vast one, which his son Constantius built at
Alexandria In Apolog. ad Constant.
, who as he succeeded his Father in religion, so in the care of Gods house; for
they go together: Let Gods house fall, and Religion cannot but be smothered in
it, whatsoever pretense any schismatique can frame for the neglect of it.

Little love there is to God, where his house is not used like a house, no
beauty, nor ornament in it, nay, (...), to use the words of Saint Chrysostom
Hom. 36. in 1. Cor.
, in far worse condition then a house: when the Church is kept more like a
hogge-stie then a house, and is exceeded in beauty by an Hospital or an
Almes-house, and men come with as little devotion to it, as to a prison or a
pesthouse; the Chancell staring from the Church, as if they were fallen out
with one another; the windows glazed with lome and mortar in stead of painted
glass; the walls hung with cobwebs in stead of tapestry, and the roof
over-laid with dust in stead of gold. And this wretched heap of stones is
Domus Dei, fit enough for a house to worship God in.

house merits not the name of a house, if it be not beautified and adorned: but
that which beautifies a house most, is unity. For this cause the Temple is
styled not Curia, but Domus; not a Court, where emulation is bred, and faction
nourished, but a House, where there is all love and peace. Unity is hardly
preserved in a State, but may easily in a House: Psalm. 68.
Division in that is more dangerous, but in this more opprobrious, when men are
not of one mind in an House, but the father against the son, and the son
against the father. The Church should be Domus, for order and unity kept in it:
but not Domus divisa, a house divided against it self, where the Pastor is
against the people, and the people against the Pastor, and both against their
Prelate.

The devil was the first schismatique, whose labor it is, ever since he made
a division in heaven, to sow his seeds of division on earth; and though he
cannot be able to disquiet heaven any more, yet earth cannot be at peace for
him. He put Coreh, Dathan, Number. 16.
and Abiram upon a schism in the time of Moses; he bred the separation of the
Eustasians, that caused the Council at Gangra; and a little after kindled the
schismatic fire of the Donatists, which did great harm to the Church in the
time of Saint Augustine, until a Council was assembled at Africa to quench it.

These very schisms are revived in our times: for compare the schismatiques
that disquiet the Church at this day with them, and ye shall find them both
alike, save that ours have patched themselves a coat together with some shreds
of all the old heresies. God purge his Church, and make it a House at unity in
it self: to which I add with Saint Cyprian in his Book De unitate Ecclesiae,
Opto equidem, ut si fieri potest, nemo de fratribus pereat, and consentientis
populi corpus unum gremio suo gaudens matter includat. Which as it will be great
joy to the Church, so no less honor to God, whose House it is.

Church is Domus Dei, instituted for none but God, in which respect the Greek
Fathers call it (...) in in the Council at Laodicea, (...) Ca. 28.
; who condemned even the Feasts of charity made in the Church, as a
profanation of it, though they were otherwise good signs of Christian unity,
and strengthened by Apostolical custom, because it was (...), proper only to
God, Scriptum est, Domus Mea.

God calls it His, as if all the rest were ours, but that His, and in no case to
be made bold with, It is written, My house. Use our own houses we may, how we
will, but Gods house, as it has a special holiness, so it has a special
honor due to it, howsoever the unmannerly precisian denies it both. But no
marvel, that he that is so bold to wrest Gods chain in heaven out of his
hand, dare entrench here upon the sanctity of his house, and maintain that any
other place is as much his, and as much holy; if which be true, I know not how
our Lord could accuse them of sacrilege, that bought and sold in it, as he
does in the Text. It is written, My house is the house of prayer, but ye have
made it, etc.

Consecration and Dedication of Churches unto God, is no new thing, no nor yet
superstitious: who think it so, they cast dirt into the face of all holy
Antiquity, yea even of God himself, who has ever accepted, and honored them.
It is the Consecration, that makes them holy, and makes God esteem them so;
which though they be not capable of grace, yet receive by their Consecration a
spiritual power, whereby they are made fit for divine service D. Them. 3. q.
83.3.
. And being consecrated, there is no danger in ascribing a Holiness unto them,
if we may believe Saint Bernard. Quis parietes ejus sanctos dicere vereatur,
says he, quos manus sacratae pontificum tantis sanctificavere mysteriis? Ex
tunc quoque and deinceps sanctarum inibi lectionum resultare frequentia,
sanctarum onationum devota murmurare susurra, sanctarum reliquiarum honorari
beata praesentia, sanctorum spirituum indefessa noscitur custodia vigilare In
Dedic. Eccles. Ser. 4.
.

Whence comes such slovenly behavior in the Church that there is no difference
made between the Temple and the Theater, but from an heretical opinion, which
was condemned in the Eustasian and Messalian Heretics, that there is no more
holiness in the one, than the other? The profane usage of it, proceeds from
the profane opinion of it: and he that has a profane opinion of it, is an
Atheist, or an Heretic at least. For let us have but an honorable opinion of
God, and we must have an honorable opinion of Gods House too: honor him, and
honor his house.

When we come to Church, says a holy Father of the Devotion of those primitive
times, Corpora humi sternimus, mixtis cum sletu gaudiis supplicamus Salv. li.
7. de prove. Dei.
. They that showed the least devotion, that did not prostrate their bodies upon
the ground in Daniels posture, yet they bowed them in Solomon's posture, and
worshipped God toward the East, both Priest D. Chrysostom. in Liturg.
and people D. Basil. de Sp. S. ca. 27.
, as soon as they presented themselves in Gods House. All the time that they
were there, they behaved themselves with such modesty, silence, reverence, and
attention, that it looked like Gods house indeed, and they more like a quire of
Angels, than of men; all upon their knees at the Prayers, all upon their feet
at the Sermon, none presumed so much as to sit, as being too bold and lazy a
posture in Gods house, but only such, as for infirmity, Li. Hom. 50. Hom. 26.
or some other cause were dispensed with; as may be observed out of S.
Augustine.

There were some that did nudipedes incedere in templum Raynaud. Theol. not.
, in imitation of Moses, that would not have their shoes on their feet in the
Temple; a shame to them that have their hats on their heads in Gods House,
where He, and his Angels look upon them; (...), says S. Chrysostom. Hom. 36. in
1 Cor.
. It was the maine thing, that the Fathers labored among the people, to
maintain the Honor of Gods house; that they might put a difference between a
common meeting place in the market, and that which was the place of Angels and
Archangels, yea the very presence chamber of the King of heaven.

The Priest has no way to maintain his own honor, but by keeping up the
honor of the Temple: for if there be no reverence to the Temple, there will be
no reverence to the Priest; Domus Dei will soon be made Spelunca latronum;
there will be they that will rob both Temple and Priest too: as some have robbed
already even the Apostles themselves, giving more honor and title to a Master
of a Sect, than to a Disciple of Christ. But in memory of those blessed Saints,
we have Churches bear their Names, which is no diminution of Gods glory, but a
provocation of our zeal.

Domus Dei may be called justly enough Domus Sancti Petri, or Domus Sancti
Pauli; though our peevish adversaries cavil at it. For as S. Augustine says,
Nec tamen nos eisdem Martyribus Templa, sacerdotia, sacra, and sacrificia
constituimus; quoniam non ipsi, sed Deus eorum nobis est Deus De Civit. Dei. l.
8. c. ult.
. Churches are not erected to them, but to their and our God in memory of them;
and that for very good reasons, which you may read in Hooker Polit. Eccles.
li. 5.
. There is one memorable place in S. Augustine, Sanctorum corpora, and
praecipue beatorum Martyrum reliquias, tanquam Christi me^bra sincerissime
honoranda, and Basilicas eorum nominibus appellatas, velut loca sancta divino
cultui mancipata, affectu piissimo and devotione fidelissima adeundas credimus:
siquis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed Eunomianus, and
Vigilantianus creditur De Eccles. dogmat. c. 73.
. Where he denies him to be a Christian, and marks him for an Eunomian, or a
Vigilantian, that will not frequent Gods houses that are called by Saints
names. For by this means the Saints are honored; God honored the more, not
robbed; for the House is his, and Prayer is his, so that neither his House, nor
his Service is taken from him; though they that quarrel about this, have done
what they could to take from him both. God should neither say the former part
of the Text, Domus Mea, nor the latter part, Domus Orationis est, which is the
next part to be handled.

Prayer is the End, to which Gods house is erected, Domus mea, Domus Orationis
est. Though there be many other religious duties to be exercised in Gods House,
yet there is none other mentioned, but Prayer. God says, Domus Precationis,
not domus Praedicationis, not excluding preaching by commending Prayer, but
preferring Prayer before Preaching. Preaching is good, and so is Prayer; but of
these two, though both good, yet one is better than another. Prayer has the
only place with Christ: it has the first place with the Apostles, even in the
presence of Preaching. Nos autem Orationi, Act. 6.4.
and Ministerio verbi instantes erimus: first Prayer, then the Ministry of the
Word; and yet the ministry of the Word was never of so much use as then in the
times of the Apostles, when they were to plant the Gospel in all the world.
Preaching was at highest then; and yet then prayer took place of it. Oration was
before Ministerium verbi. Now there is not so much need of preaching, as there
was in the first times of the Church: but it is still needful as in other
regards, so for the weeding out of Schism and Heresy.

Preaching is the common way, that leads to Faith: but how the more preaching,
the less faith. Inopem me copia fecit. Never was there such a Sermon-age as
this is, and never was there such a leanness in Religion: We have turned all
our Members into Ears, and we are for nothing else but Hearing of Sermons, as
if in Religion we were to go no higher, then Aurium tenus, up to the ears.
Preaching is but the Means to bring us to Prayer: Romans 10.14.
Quomodo invocabunt, in quem non crediderunt? aut quomodo credent ei, quem non
audierunt? says S. Paul. Prayer is the End of preaching: and the means is not
to be magnified before the end.

The frequent Sermons of the Fathers can be no justification of some of our
Lectures: for their Sermons were not like those of these times, which were
measured not by their length, but their goodness; and their goodness lay not
in an indigested multitude of words, but in a pertinency and fitness of
speech; and then too Prayer lost nothing of her prerogative, for even in S.
Chrysostomes time, when preaching was most plentiful, no part of the Liturgy
was any day omitted; Preaching did not cut off Prayer with the Priest, yet, I
must tell you, it began to lessen the dignity of prayer with the people: which
he complained of in his third Homily, (...). But now prayer is grown to such a
slender respect, that we do what we can to have nothing else but preaching in
the Church, and no prayer at all. Witness the corrupt custom of ringing
Sermon-bels in some Churches, which could for no other end be brought in, but
to bring schism into the Church with it. For let a Sermon-bell ring, and then
people are tolled to the Church like a swarm of Bees together: but let a bell
toll only unto prayers, Nemo hercule, nemo, None comes then, none at all, as
if prayer were of no force, preaching did all; as if Christ would take it well
at their hands to correct his words, to put Praeier out of the Text, and to put
in preaching, My house is the house of preaching. Saint Chrysostom heard what
some such Idoll-sermonists did say; and it is even the same, which the
Schismatiques of our days have sucked from them, (...) (...).
. They could pray at home, but they could not meet with a Sermon, unless they
met at Church. He calls it (...), a cold apology; and yet it proceeded from a
hot zeal. (...). Pray at home we may, but we cannot pray at home as at
Church, where there is a reverend assembly of Fathers, an unanimous
supplication unto God, where there is amongst us all but one mind, and one
voice, and the bond of charity, and the prayers of the Priest; to which I add,
the Absolution and Blessing of the Priest.

This the cause of so little growth in Religion, that there is so little profit
made of so many Sermons, because there is a contempt of Church-prayer, that
should bless them. Prayer is not utterly justled out of the Church; the Devil
never labored to bring that to pass: but private prayer is brought in, that
was never warranted to have a room in public. How is it then, brethren?
says Saint Paul, when ye come together, 1. Cor. 14.26.
every one of you has a psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a
revelation, has an interpretation. Nay now, every one of you has a Prayer by
himself; so many Priests in the Pulpit, so many sundry prayers; and when the
public prayers of the Church are ended, every one begins a new, and places
more virtue (it may be) in an extemporall prayer of his own invention, then in
what the Church has in her mature judgment appointed; so that his comes to
conclude with, like the Lords prayer, as if it perfected all the rest.

It was forbidden in diverse Councills, Conc. Carth. 3. can. 23. Conc. Asiic.
cap. 70.
that any prayers should be rashly powered out unto God in the Church, but
only such as were before approoved in the Councills, or by the learned Fathers
of the Church, Ne forte aliquid contra fide^, vel per ignorantiam, vel per
minus studium sit compositum, as it is expressed in the Milevitan Council
under Innocent 1. Can. 12.
It is not left to every man to use what prayers he please, for they may smell
of ignorance, or idleness, and may serve to convey to the people schismatic
and heretical doctrines. Our Lord commanded his Apostles to use a form of
prayer; S. Mat. 6.7.
and the Church has appointed us one too; to prevent the profanation of his
House by tautologies, inconsequences, tediousness, rawnesse, and other
absurdities in extemporall prayer, which our Lord directs his speech against,
and calls it babbling, and not praying. Gods house is not to be made a house of
babbling, but a house of prayer: And the prayers that are authorized in the
Church are called Collects, but not private prayers, because they were
approoved in an Ecclesiastical Assembly; or a Collectione populi, as Alcuinus
de divinis offic. cap. de celebrat. Missae.
because we Assemble together to that end, which is, to pray.

It is Common prayer, that has obtained the name of the service of God, as if
that were the sum of all Religion. And indeed Religion never grew to such a
height, as when Common prayer was set by: and never was it brought into such a
consumption, as when raw and extemporary preaching came into the room of it;
for thence came factions, schisms, and perturbations of the Churches peace. If
we would have Religion live amongst us, Prayer must be seated in Gods house.
Domus mea, domus Orationis est.

Prayer must neve^r be turned out; for if the End, for which Gods house was
instituted, be altered, then the property is altered, and it is Gods house no
longer. God says, Domus mea, Est domus orationis, not Fuit, or Erit; Is the
house of prayer, to signify the perpetuation of the same End. It is here in
Saint Luke, Domus orationis est, but in Saint Matthew, S. Mat. 21.13
Domus orationis vocabitur, to make it more full. The House of God is the house
of prayer, both (...): it is both the name, and the nature of Gods house, The
house of prayer; either of them of authority sufficient to give prayer the
chiefest place in it.

prayer, yet God himself must; here is his Scriptum est, to take off all
cavil, preaching must give place to prayer in the Temple. God himself has
said it; and Christ has said it again, It is written, My house is the house
of prayer. Who fitter to order and impose Laws to a house, than the Master of
it? Let God be Master in his own House: let not man cross the end, that he
has destined it to; for that is, as Gamaliel said in the Council of the
Jews, Act. 5.39.
to rebel and fight against God. Cui dixit aliquar do angelorum, says Saint
Paul, Heb. 1.5.
Unto which of the Angels said God at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? So say I, In quo libro Scriptum est, in what place of
Scripture is it written, My house is the house of preaching? If they had such a
Text for preaching as we have for prayer, then they might the better desend
that preaching which shuts out prayers. Saint John inflicts a Curse upon all
them, S. I. h. 22.18.
that shall add to the Word of God, or take from it. It is not safe then to
wrest the Text, to take away prayer, and to put in preaching, for it is against
the scope of the Text. Gods house is recorded for a house of prayer by all
four Evangelists. As our savior told the Scribes and Pharisees, when they
tithed mint, and annise, and cummin, but neglected mercy, S. Mat 23.23.
judgment and faith, These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. So let preaching have a place in the Church, but let not Prayer be
neglected, that ought to have the chief place.

Doxolog^e is a part of prayer; but that the Angels do, and We shall ever do
in heaven, crying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath. The Temple is then
more like Heaven, and We more like the Angels of Heaven, when we are in the
act of prayer. God has commanded that his house on earth have as near a
resemblance as may be to his house in heaven, and that is the work of Prayer,
It is written, My house is the house of Prayer.

Heaven, nor like a House, when Christ visited it: God and Prayer were both
driven out by Thieves, and the House was turned into a Den. Vos autem
fecistis eam Speluncam.

Temple was not only profaned, but profaned in a high manner. Domus Dei was
not made Domus Hominum; nor Domus Orationis, Domus Negotiationis, as it is in
Saint John, Cap. 2. v. 16.
but (...) says Saint Chrysos^tome. In S. Ioh. 2.
The greatness of the Offense may be measured by the harshnesse of the term,
in that our Lord calls it not a House at all, but a Den.

House receives the Light into it, but a Den is a place of Darkness. Light
becomes him, who is the Father of Light: God is Light, says Saint John, and in
him is no darkness at all. Operalucis, his children Filii lucis, and his
habitation Domus lucis. To shut out any light, that may be useful in Gods
house, is with the Jews to make it a Den; as they would do, that would shut
out the Ceremonies out of the Church: for take away the Ceremonies out of the
Church, and take away the light that is in it. Sense is a guide to the
understanding; Romans 1.20.
and we are led to the invisible things by the visible. No Religion was ever
without Ceremonies; all nations, not only Jews, but Gentiles, used their
Rites and Ceremonies in the time of Worship, all meeting in this, as a natural
principle, that Divine worship cannot be rightly performed without an outward
solemnity. God did not forbid the Jews, but commanded them the use of
Ceremonies, though Heathen Idolaters abounded with them.

The Moral Law, and the Ceremonial Law were not given one without the other,
neither can they now be parted; nor is there any Ceremony so bare, that is not
clothed with some Morality. People are instructed as well by what they see, as
by what they hear; and to see the picture of a Saint in a glass window will
preach more Religion to them, then to see the picture of a Horse or an Ox in
Gods House; the one puts them in mind, that it is Gods House, the other does
but make it more like a Den.

What devotion can that raise in a man's thoughts, to behold in the Church Gods
Priest like a peasant, no habit to difference him from some sordid mechanique?
and to hear Gods Service slubberd over with as little Ceremony, as a Scrivener
reads a Bond or Indenture?

The word Ceremony carries light in it; for Ceremoniae tanquam Cerei, they are
as lights, that give a luster to Gods house, and his Service in it.

Church cannot but be dark, if the light of Ceremonies be wanting: but if the
light of knowledge be wanting too, that is required in the Priests of it; it
cannot but darken it much more. For the most part these two, the want of
knowledge, and the contempt of Ceremonies go together: for none is more apt to
stumble at a ceremony, than a blind Priest that cannot see through his gross
ignorance.

The Tradesmans stall comes not behind the Divinity School; for that has
brought forth many Divines too, that have left sowing of garments and made a
ront in the Church. And how many be there that have but slept a time in the
University, that have returned immediately inspired with the gift of Prophesy,
as he did with the gift of Poetry, that dreamt upon Parnassus. Pers. in prol.
When the Church is filled with such an ignorant Priesthood, it may truly be
called a Den.

The learning of the Clergy is the light of the Church; therefore was the
Primitive Church so careful to preserve it. None was to be admitted unto
Orders without a strict examination, that the Nicene Council cap. 9.
provided for. If any man was sufficient in respect of parts, yet if he were a
novice, he was not to be promoted to the Priesthood, that was looked after by
the Fathers in diverse Councills. Conc. Nic. cap. 2. Conc. Laod. cap. 3.
No Bishop was to appoint his Successor, for that he might do for some private
respect, but he was to be chosen by the judgment of a Synod; that was
determined in the Councills at Antioch, cap. 23.
and Laodicea. cap. 12.
The election of Priests was not permitted to the People in the same Council
at Laod cea; cap 13.
for they might be perhaps competent judges of their life, but not of their
learning. And then too, it was ordered, that there should be an ascent by
degrees to Ecclesiastical promotions, Cone Sardie. cap. 13.
that neither ignorance, nor indesert might usurp a seat in Gods house.

Ignorance out of the Temple, unless Vitiousnesse be shut out too; for the
Temple is made a Den both ways, not only by the ignorance, but by the
foulness of life in the Priesthood. Heresy and schism get ground in the
Church by Ignorance; but contempt of Religion comes in by the Priests
prophanenes. When they, that serve at the Altar, 1 Samuel 2.12.17.
are sons of Belial, like Elies sons, they make men to abhor the
sacrifice of the Lord, yea God himself to abhor his own sacrifice.

The Vrim and the Thummim were put in Aarons Breast Plate, Exodus 28.30.
that he might not only shine before the people in soundness of Doctrine, but
in perfection of life. He that has the Vrim and not the Thummim, whose Life
does not go together with his Doctrine, with Penelope he undoes all again, and
pulls down more with the one, than he builds up with the other. Debet
praeponderare vita sacerdotis, sicut praeponderat gratia. Nam qui alios
praeceptis suis ligat, debet ipse legitima praecepta in se custodire, says
Saint Ambrose. Epist. lib. 3. Vercellensi Ecclesiae epist. 25.
The people will be the more ready to keep the Law, if the Priest keeps it
himself; for they are guided more by a good example, then by a good Sermon.
Levit. 21.18.
God would not admit a man to his Altar that wanted an eye, or a hand, or a
foot, or had any blemish in his body; much less then in his soul, as Philo
observes, A (...) (...).


Holiness becomes Gods house; Vice pollutes it, and makes it a Den,
especially the vice of the Clergy: for that which is but a single sin in the
people, Chrysologus Sermon. 26.
counts sacrilege in the Priest; and so do the Schools, Vtg. de ^acr^.
in that regard He is a sacred person that commits it.

The Person does much aggravate the crime, when he is not an ordinary person,
but one of greater eminency. Vos autem fecistis eam speluncam, makes the
profanation of Gods house of a higher quality; It is written, My house is the
house of prayer, but Ye have made it a den of thieves.

The Jews should have maintained the honor of Gods house, howsoever any
profane Edomites might have laid sacrilegious hands upon it: but they did
worse then even the Edomites would have done: for they would have made it no
house at all, but these made it a Den of Thieves; they would have put it to
ruin, but these put it to infamy. Quid est, quod Dilectus meus in Domo mea
fecit scelera multa. Ier. 12.15.
God complains in Jeremy, that it was not only his own house, that was
profaned; but that they were his own people that profaned it; nay, they that
were his own Priests too: The nearer to God the offender is, the nearer the
offense goes to Gods heart. Christ is more offended at the Vos, then at the
Spelunca: And this would be thought on among us, whom God has invested in the
Priests office, that the sins of the Priests are not only more dangerous in
respect of the people, but also more beynous in respect of themselves.

Vos stands not idle in the Text; the Persons that made Gods house a Den,
made that sin the greater; but so much the greater, in that they made it not
only a Den, but a Den of Thieves. Christ says not, Vos fecistis illam
speluncam Belluarum, but speluncam Latronum, as if that were a degree higher,
and Thieves were worse than Beasts; for nature inforceth the one, but the will
mooveth the other to rapine. They are both for prey; but the Thief is the more
insatiable: the Beast follows his prey but for necessity.

Two thieves; S Mat. 27.38.
and he suffers between two kind of Thieves still to this day, between the
Secret, and the Open thief.

Heretic and the Schismatique convey themselves in a sneaking manner into
Gods house under the covert of holiness. Verse. 4.
These Saint Jude compares to Creepers, there are, says he, certain men crept
in unawares. 2 Timothy, 3.6.
So Saint Paul, These are they that creep into men's houses, leading captive
silly women: and from thence feeding upon Silly Souls, they have Crept into
Gods house too, eating the shewbread which none but the Priest should eat: for
men care not how they rob the parish priest of his patrimony, so they give a
benevolence to a crept in Sect-maker: Their Creeping discovers them to be
Worms; and where they come, they are as bad a plague as the Lice in Egypt,
for they gnaw upon Gods people, till at length they die the death of Herod,
Act. 12.
who was eaten of worms. There was a secret polity thought on, when schism
nourished a presumption of swaying in the Church; and the destiny of Gods house
was, to be made a Den of Thieves. There were secret persons assigned for
benefices, and secret orders made, and secret oaths taken, and secret
reservations with the doners. But this secret plot was brought to light; and
the plotters were reprooved, as Christ reprooved them in the Text, Vos autem
fecistis illam speluncam latronum.

Thief, that does not enter in by the door, S. Job. 10.1.
but climbes up another way by a private contract with a Simoniacall patron.
Such a Priest, and Patron are like Simeon and Levi, they conspired together to
slay the Sichemites; these contract together to slay the souls of a multitude.
They make Gods house between them a Farm, and it is sold to him that gives
most for it. Gods House is bought and sold by these two at a far dearer rate,
than our Lord himself was sold and bought by Judas and the Pharisees: but as
the Shepherd then; so now the Flock is bought and sold for money. By this
back-doore, insufficiency in the Priesthood, ignorance, impiety, oppression,
covetousness, neglect of the peoples souls, yea all kind of sin enters in.
Hence the people are fed with husks, unless a dish be stolen from another
table; and he that cannot make a Sermon, steals one, which is like a Tailors
suite made up of sundry remnants, that he has stolen from others; and he
himself is like the Crow in Horace, Epist. lib. 1.
that was plumed with other birds feathers. Hence comes not the feeding of the
flock, but the feeding of himself, of which God complains, Lac comedebatis,
and lanis operiebamini, Ezech. 34.2.
and quod crassum erat occidebatis: gregem autem meum non pascebatis. And no
marvel, that they look after nothing but gain, that have bought so dear.
Gods house is sold as Joseph was unto the Midianitish merchants, Genesis 37.
that made sale of him again; which was the very intention of Simon Magus, as
Saint Augustine speaks, In S. Ioh. 2.
Simon ideo volebat emere Spiritum sanctum, quia vendere volebat Spiritum
sanctum. But let them remember, that all this is pretium sanguinis, that they
put into their treasury, and that they do non tam patrimonium facultatum, quam
thesaurum criminum congregare, says Saint Ambrose. In S. Luc. 4.
All the Fathers comment upon these Thieves, that these are the Thieves that
are meant by the Ementes, and Vendentes in the Temple, the Buyers and Sellers
of Church Livings. The Apostles, Can. Apost. cap. 30.
and succeeding Councills Conc. Chat. ced. cap. 2.
provided against these by sharp sentence of deposition and excommunication;
therefore they are secret thieves.

open thieves too; the one undermine, the other offer violence to Gods house;
that the more dangerous, this the more bold sin.

Statute to stint the devotion of men, they brought so freely to Gods House:
but now there needs a Counter-statute, for that devotion was not in so short a
time raised, as it was pulled down; and men thought it no robbery to rob
God. God has all the best of his Houses and Lands impropriated, the meanest
and of smallest value fit enough for the Priesthood; and herein Saul is the
more righteous, for he spared the fattest of the flock for Sacrifice. God has
ordained, that He that serves at the Altar, should live on the Altar, says
Saint Paul; and they live on it now that have no right to eat of it. No mere
Layman ever was dispensed with to receive Gods Rents; that belonged to the
Priesthood. (...), says Philo. Lib. de praemiis Sacerd. and honorib.


The very name of Impropriation excluds a proper title to them: for the
Founders gave them to God never to be alienated from the Church, but to be His
during his Life: till God dies then, and bequeathes them away by Will, they
must be His. Their religious Founders fenced them with a Curse, that they might
not be easily entrenched upon; and wished that whosoever did take any thing
from the Church, he might receive the doom at the last day, which is due to
Sacrilege against God. Iuel. apol. pa. 439.


these rob God of his Lands and Endowments; So others rob him of his Tithes.
Hooker. lib. 5. Pol. Eccles.
God looks to have the Tithe of every thing in kind, no custom can prevail
against him. God takes the Priests part in Tithes and Offerings, because the
Priest is but his Deputy, or Collector. Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8.
yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes
and offerings. And there God avouches, that the reason he allowed them no rain
from heaven was, because they allowed him no tithes of the fruits, where with
he had blessed them on earth. Noluimus partiricum Deo Decimas, nunc autem
Totum tollitur Scrm. de Temp. 219.
. Saint Austine told his Auditors so in a time of dearth, ye would not give
God the tenth, and now God has given you none. Nine for one is fair: let God
have that at least.

God of his Tithes, so is it a sin to rob God of his Service. The Priest robs
the people by not affording them the Divine Service, as the people does the
Priest by not paying him the Tithes. Either the Church-prayers be not read at
all, or if they be read, they are shortened. Nay let God have all his Prayers,
as you would have all his Tithes. They that shorten God of his Prayers, would
shorten him of any thing else too.

Guardians of the Church, are the greatest Thieves of all, for the Church
trusts them to present abuses, and they present nothing at all; and hence it is
that the Church is made Spelunca latronum, a Den of thieves.

crime were but new, it might be the more easily reformed; but the growth of
time makes it the more difficult. It is not Vos facitis, as if it were begun
but now, but Vos fecistis, that implies a long continuance. The Church has
been made a Den of thieves, too long: God grant, that every man in his place
may endeavor the reformation of it, that it may be Domus orationis again, not
Spelunca latronum, the House of Prayer again, and no longer a Den of thieves.

FINIS.
Perlegi Concionem hanc cui titulus est (A Sermon preached at VVimondham, etc.)
eamque typis mandari permitto.

Feb. 6. 1636. Sa. Baker.


