FIVE SERMONS, PREACHED UPON SEVERAL TEXTS:

By that Learned and Worthy Divine, THOMAS WETHEREL, B. D. Sometimes Fellow of
Gonevile and CAIUS College in Cambridge, and Parson of Newton in Suffolk.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for SAMVEL MAN, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
Sign of the Swanne. 1635.

TO MY WORTHY PATRON, the truly Noble MAVRICE BARROVVE of Bermingham in
Suffolk, Esquire, Grace and Peace.
Worthy Sir,
THe Author of this work, in his last Will bequeathed his Papers unto me, (as
a Testimony of his love) wherein I much rejoiced, and do glory. You honored
him much in his life, and his remembrance is still precious with you. You were
the Patron of his Person and Parsonage, be pleased to be the Patron of this his
work, a part whereof was performed at your request. My purpose is not to
commend either you or him, lest I should be censured for seeking of my self;
yet this I must say of him, belived and dyed a true son of the true Church;
he was neither tare, nor broken blasted ear nor chafe, but good corn; a
good Catholic, according to Saint Augustines exposition and description, Lib
2. ^x Matthew.
Boni Catholici sunt qui et fidem integram sequuntur et bonos mores, Sound in
the faith, and unblameable in life. In the work of the Ministry he was
painful and faithful, to use the words of Erasmus, Ep. piole^eri praes. ep.
Aug.
Fraternae salutis quam suae gloriae sitientior, one who sought the heavenly
good of the peoples souls, more than the earthly goods of the body, not
minding his own, but the things which are Jesus Christ's; contrary to those
whom the Apostle brands. For the 1 These 2. 4 5, 6. Phil. 2. 2^.
Sermons now presented to the view of the Church, I say of them, as Hierom to
Augustine, of certain works writ by himself, Inter Aug, epist 1 1 ^
Si cui legere non placet, nemo compellit invitum, If any be pleased not to
read them, let them use their liberty, not abuse it. It is the Character of a
bragging boy, to seek his own credit by complaining of others. To your self
this impression will be no burden, but a benefit. Aug ep. ad Voluf.
Quod scriptum habetur, semper vacat ad legendum, cum vacat legenti: nec
onerosu^ fit praeseas, quod cum voles sumitur, cum voles ponitur. When you
read, then apply; so shall you receive profit in your reading. C. Plin. can. l.
3. ep.
Scio te stimulis non egere: me tamen tui charitas evocat, ut currentem quoque
instigem: Go on, make faith flourish by good works, perfect what is wanting:
Aug. ad Bonif. ep. 205.
Et ex iis quae habes gratias age Deo tanquam fonti bonitatis unde habes; atque
in omnibus bonis actibus tuis illi daclaritatem, tibi humilitatem; The more you
glorify God with the talents committed unto you, the more shall you be
commended by him, and glorified with him. Unto whose gracious direction in
Christ Jesus by the Spirit, I recommend your self, your virtuous wife my good
Lady, and her hopeful son, with all that belong unto your family for
future good. The Lord freely forgive what is amiss, and richly reward what
soever please.

Your Worps. deservedly at Command, FRA. QVARLES.
Newton, April 23, 1635.
The Texts of the five Sermons.
MATTHEW. 25. 21. Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou have bin
faithful in few things, I will make thee ruler over many things. NEHEM. 5. 15.
But so did not I, because of the fear of God. (...) If ye (...) seek the
things (...) above HOSEA 1. 4. I will avenge the bl^od of Iezreet upon the
house of Iehu. JOHN 4. 20. Our Father: worshipped in this Mountain. THE FIRST
SERMON, ON MATTHEW. 25. 21.
MATTHEW. 25. 21. Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.
OF all things which God has given us we must make an account at the day of
Judgment, and expect retribution according to our account. Now, D^na Dei, what
God gives us, are either interna, within; or, externae, without us. Those
within us are partly gratia gratum faciens such as are for our own good, (to
use the distinction of Aquinas) faith, hope, love, joy, and the like, numbered
by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 22. partly, gratia gratis data, such as are for the
benefit of others; as the gifts of teaching miracles, government and the like,
numbered by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Those without us are riches, whose use,
like Ianus, looks two ways; to our selves, to refresh us; to our neighbors,
to releeve them.

Our Savior in this Chapter shows us both our reckoning and doom, in regard
of all these: of inward blessings in two parables, the one of the foolish and
wise Virgins; the other of the Talents diversely distributed: of outward
blessings in the manifest description of the judgment of the last day.

My Text lets us see Gods approbation of the well employing such inward gifts
as men receive to vent for others benefit, which is set out in two things;
libera agnitione, a free acknowledgement; and larga promissione, frank promise
of greater endowment. The acknowledgement is expressed two ways: 1. By the
kind entertainment of the doer, Euge serve, well done thou servant: 2. By
commendation of his doing, fidelis fuisti, thou have been faithful. The
promise is of enlarging his. Charter, and extending his command, I will make
thee ruler over many things.

To begin then with the entertainment of the doer, Well done good and
faithful servant: In it are two particulars, 1. Laeta exultatio, Gods triumph
in him, Euge, well: 2. gratiosa compellatio, God's graceful entituling of him,
good and faithful servant.

1. God's triumph, Euge, well; I find this word used three ways: Sometime it
is vox adulantis, men flatter with it: When we do any thing that is right,
says Saint Austine, the people are ready to cry Euge, euge, well, well,
whereby to make us conceit too well of our selves, and grow proud. Sometime it
is vox irridentis, men scoff with it; Thou saidest against my Sanctuary, when
it was profaned, Euge, Ezekiel. 2^. 3. well, now it is as it should be. Sometime
it is vox exultantis, men rejoice with it: let them not say, Euge animae
nostrae, Psalm. 35. 25. our soul skips at this, so would we have it. The
first way it cannot be taken here; for God, who is most direct in all his
dealings, slattereth no man, fawneth upon no man. Much less the second way,
for though he mock the scorne^s, yet not those of his own household. But the
third way it well befits him, qui delectatur bono, as the Psalmist fings, Psalm.
35. 27. who delights in the prosperity of his servants, and is merry and glad
at their welfare. Luke 15. 32. Therefore seeing them give up their account with
credit, receives it at their hands with joy, Euge, well done.

This triumph of God's, has two grounds: 1. The relation wherein he stands to
them, and they to him: The father joys at the good of his son; the husband
at the good of his wife; one friend at the good of another: So God exults and
is much affected when his servants perform such duties as they ought that it
may go well with them, because he is theirs in all these relations; their
father, their husband, and their friend. 2. His own glory, which by his
servants good employment is much advanced. God indeed is in himself (...),
All-sufficient, and from all Eternity, delighted in himself without the
access of men or Angels; but when it pleased him to create man, and
communicate himself unto him, by giving him talents, he is well pleased with
that which his grace has wrought out of himself with the right ordering and
disposing of it, receiving the return of it to him again with a joyful Euge,
oh well is it done.

The duty that I would enforce from hence, is this, that every man in his
calling should (...), as Saint Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 1. 6. quicken the gift that
is in him, to stand either Church or Commonwealth in stead, even upon this
encouragement, that God rejoices in his worthy employment. I remember, Anselme
Ansan. 1 Cor. 6
reading those words of the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. 19. Your bodies are the Temples
of the holy Ghost, which you have of God, falls upon this discourse; You offend
grievously if you profane God's Temple, your own body; because, as you would
not have your house defiled, no more would God have his; Si vobis igitur non
parcitis propter vos ipsos, at parcite vobis propter Deum, quifecit vos Templum
suum: If the comfort which your selves shall thereby reap, cannot move you to
spare your bodies from pollution yet spare them at least wise on the behalf of
God who has made them his: So when I look upon my Text, and see God with such
hearty affection entertaining men's good endeavors, I cannot but infer thus
much, that surely we greatly sin, if we use not our stock aright which God
has given us to trade withal, since it is his will that his money should be
put to the bank, and bring in increase. If then the discharge of our duties
cannot work upon us to be industrious and painful in our places, yet let the
thought of pleasing God persuade us. For how expedient is it for us, that when
we come to reckoning, God should smile upon us with a cheerful countenance,
and embrace us with an Euge, rejoicing in our good; rather, than that he
should knit his brows, and cast us off with a vah of indignation.

The point concerns all men whom God has adorned with the least talent of
ability in any kind; it more nearly touches those who are furnished with
knowledge, dexterity, yea, and with authority, to do much good to many, and
thereby bring in a large crop into Gods barn at the day of harvest. Consider
with your selves, you that are rulers, and have the government on your
shoulders, what fruit God may have by yourusing your graces and places aright;
what benefit may redound unto his household which he takes care of: how he
joys in seeing his plough go by your ministry; honor him who has honored
you; he has lwone plentifully in his gifts to you, let him reap abundantly in
your increase to him; that when he comes into your fields, he may see them
stand full of corn; when into your Circuits, he may see the torrents and
streams of justice running down, and so may cheer you up with much
encouragement, and give you this for a largis euge, well have you done. This
for God's exultation. The compellation follows, Good and faithful servant:
Where are two things, Man's reference to God, servant: The qualities where with
a right servant is adorned, Good and faithful.

1. Man's reference to God, servant: It is proper to God to be a Master, he has
propriam and singularem conditionem Domini, says Aquinas, the true 2. 2. q.
81. res. ed 1.
ground of Lordship, therefore it is proper to man to be his servant: he has
propriam and singularem conditionem servitutis, the true ground of service. The
foundation of this relation is twosold: 1. God's making all things; so man is a
servant to him, secundum conditionem, says Saint Austine, in regard of his
very being; every work owes this to the maker, that it is to be subject unto,
and ordered by him: 2. God's principality over all things; every inferior is
servant to his superior; the Curator to the Proconsull, the Proconsull to the
Emperor, and all to God, who is primus, the first and chief, in and by whose
virtue and power all things move. This reference to God is so rooted and settled
in our nature, that his servants we are whether we will or no his servants, de
jure, he has command of us; I, and de necessitate too, he will have the rule
of us, making us by his ineffable disposition, that we can do nothing but
what he wills, or suffers to be done, though de fact^, we be rebels, and set
our selves andaciously to contemn his precepts.

His servants we all are by these bonds, but some men servants in a nearer
kind; those whom he has set on work to some notable employment, either in
the Church, thus Saint Paul says of himself, Romans 1. 1. a servant of Christ,
set apart to the Preaching of the Gospel: or in the Commonwealth; thus is
David marked out, Ps. 89. 20 I have found David my servant, with my holy oil
have I anointed him: these are not only God's subjects, over whom he rules
(...), by general command as a King; but men of his household, whom he
governes (...), by special power as a Master, and these are the servants here
spoken of. This service of God, it is bonos full of dignity, and onus full of
duty.

1. Full of dignity; for what more honorable than to serve so gracious and
great a Lord? The Princes and Rulers of the earth content not themselves with
their own excellencies, but it is their ambition to be entertained as
special servants to the King. Though a man would wonder that they who in some
distance from the Sun might shine bright themselves, should desire to be so
near about him, by whom their own splendor is much ecclipsed: but it seems
the light of a Kings countenance, and the breath of his nostrils shining
comfortably, and breathing sweetly, is more glorious to men, than all the
command over all the crouching, reverencing, and obeisance of mean persons.
And if it be an honor to serve a mortal man, how great soever; it is sweetly
transcendent honor to serve the immortal God; it is more then a weighty thing
to have Commission from him, and to be employed about his business.

See your calling, ye Rulers and Judges of the earth; Reverent you are, because
(...), sent of the King to punish, to protect: but this is not all, you also
are (...), Rev. 13. 4. God's Ministers, and ye judge not for man primarily, but
for the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 9. 6. And this is your greatest honor, triumph in this,
that God has put your work into your hands: you are not only the King's, but
God's Justices; in this glory ride on prosperously, and let your right hand
teach you valiant things: you are God's servants, this is your dignity.

2. Servus est nomen officii: God's servants have much duty required of them: a
servant is not (...) one that moves absolutely of himself, he is (...) and
(...), says Aristotle, the masters instrument; and (...), not only the
masters servant, but the masters wholly. Two things then befit a servant,
Consulere Dominum, and Obedire.

1. To receive instructions from his master in his actions: The eyes of
servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden unto
the hands of her Mistress, Psalm. 123. 2. What is this looking to their hands,
but waiting for their command by which they must be guided? It is a brave thing
when servants know their bounds, and presume not above their Masters pleasure:
things then go right when the hands take counsel of the head; servants go,
when their Masters say, go; come, when their Masters say, come; do, when
their Master says, do it. It is so in every household, it is so in the great
household of God: the Commonwealth, it then flourishes when they whom God has
set over it, look what he will have done, and address themselves to do that.
It is reported of Scipio Africanus, Gel. sit. 7. c. 1
that he was wont before day to go into the Capitol in Collam Iovis, and
there to stay a great while, quass consultans de Republic^ cum Jove,
discoursing with Jupiter concerning the administration of the Commonwealth:
whence it came to pass that his deeds were plaeraque admiranda, says the
Historian, very worthy and remarkable. The Heathen man did thus by the light
of nature, let grace teach the Christian Ruler the same course, that he enquire
at the Law of God for his direction. I am sure this was enjoined Joshua, when
he took upon him the Principality of Israel, Meditate in the book of the Law
day and night, so shall thy way be prosperous, Josh. 1. 8. This is one thing
concerns a servant, to be ordered by his Master.

2. He must obey instructions received; doing is the life of having; therefore
does he ask his Masters advice, that what his Master will have done, may be
effected. He is a bad servant that consulteth with his Master for fashion, but
will do what he list himself: and a bad Magistrate is he, who coming to the
Temple of God to hear what is the Word that comes from the Lord, resolves
for all that to let his heart run after covetousness, and practice injustice,
either for money or favor to pervert the ways of righteousness, which God,
who has given him his chief Commission, chalketh out unto him. Judges ought
to remember that they are the servants of God, and as they know his will
concerning their government, so they must take heed and do it, 2 Chronicles. 19. 7
this is man's reference unto God, servant.

The qualities of this servant follow, bone and fidelis, good and faithful:
the one whereof, that is, goodness, belongs to him qua homo, as a man; the
other, that is, fidelity, qua servus, as he is a servant. An excellent pair of
virtues where they are united, goodness gracing the person, and fidelity
adorning his employment; so that if you look upon him in his private course,
you shall see an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile; and if in his public
calling, a true dealer for his Lord and Master, (...), without turning aside
any way.

1. Good, well affected, well conditioned. An excellent thing it is when this
Attribute may be given to men in authority, that they are good men; it makes
the City rejoice, says Solomon, Prove. 11. 10. And so it well may, for it
follows, By the blessing of the upright a City is exalted. A good man will
do much good in his place, and make many glad hearts by partaking of his
goodness. Therefore Ietbro wishing Moses to set men over the people, would
have them timentes Dei, and veraces, Exodus 18. 2. servers of God, true-hearted
men: and the Lord himself appointing Ioshuah over the congregation, testifies
of him, that he was a man in whom was the Spirit, Numb. 27. 18. It is said of
Rulers, ye are gods, Psalm. 82. 6. It is true, they are gods by their power one
way; I, but doubly, age Pol 3. 13
if goodness dwell with their power. Aristotle puts them together: they that
are gods amongst men, (...), (...), excel both in virtue and power. And indeed
they had need have goodness, that are such eminent servants, and have many
Talents committed to them, they will never else bear their great burden of
being Pillars to uphold a State, Streams to refresh it, Pilors to guide it,
Havens to harbor it, Castles to shelter it, the good Magistrate will be all
this; when a wicked man will fall short, a cracked Pillar, a bitter stream, an
erring Pilot, a sandy havon, a broken Castle, in whom the ship of the
Commonwealth cannot put any confidence. I will conclude this point with David's
exhortation to the great ones of the world, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. It is not enough that ye be wise and
learned, that you know how to manage affairs, and order your business, though
this be an eminent quality; serve the Lord likewise, and be full of piety,
that your care of discharging your duty, may issue forth from the fountain of
an honest heart in you; for if it come not from hence, it will scarcely have
being: That servant who gained so much, was good and faith full but good in the
first place, faithfulness follows, the second quality.

A quality very pertinent to a servant: it is required in a steward that he be
faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. and it consists in this, us depositum ad voluntatem
disponentis disponatur, that what a man is betrusted with, he employ according
to the will of him that betrusted him. God gives diverse abilities to men, to
some more, to others less; he that shines according to ^he measure of his
light, that works according to the person of his strength, that helps
according to the quantity of his ^yle, he is faithful: This faithfulness is
commended in Christ in the days of his dispensation upon earth, who finished
the work which his father gave in to do: and in Moses, of hom it was
witnessed that he as faithful in all the house of God, Heb. 3. 2. This
faithfulness supposes Talents given; they were receivers first, who were now
called faithful; and it has these ingredients to make it perfect:

1. Industry; the Talent must be employed: the slothful servant is
unfaithful, because he frustrateth his Lord of the one of his gift; he gave
it the^ that from thee it should be derived to the help of others; thou keep
it to thy self, the d^ner is injured. Synefius speaks De Dion.
some, who having a treasure abilities in them, (...), (...) would as soon
part with the hearts, as their meditations: so there are many of all profe^ons,
who let their gifts, like Churles money, lie rusting them, by which means t^
become unfaithful; the ca^ of their great skill shall b^ witness against
them, and the treasuring up of learning, they treasure up to themselves guilt
and sorrow. Better it is by far to have a little knowledge and use it
rightly, than to have a vast brain, full of windings and turnings, wherein
much knowledge is with great perplexity tossed to and fro, but can never find
a door of utterance.

2. Prudence to discern what is to be distributed, for all men whom we deal
with are not alike if we will use our talents right, we must give to every man
that part which belongs unto him. As for Example: In the exercise of Justice,
some men's sins are open, and with a clamorous voice go before unto
judgment; these must have those kinds of punishments which the ancients Gel.
6. 14. (...)
all (...), exemplary and for terror: some are slips, and must have (...),
such instruments as serve for admonition, whereby the offender may be moved
better to look to himself afterward: he that punishes great transgressions
with whips and light with halters, cannot be faithful, in that he does not
proportion the sentence of Justice to the sault committed.

3. Frugality; non incassum expendere, says Chrysostom, Hom. 78. in Mas.
not to waste our talents without cause. It is too common a fault in the world,
that many who have quick wits, and ready tongues, spend them ofttimes to small
purpose, even where there is no probability they shall prevail, or if they
prevail it shall overthrow equity. Love of profit, and hope of gain
swalloweth up men faithfulness: they will take the defense of a bad cause, and
set a good face upon the foulest matter, with as much earnestness, as if they
contended for the truth of the Gospel, to which end I dare say they do not
think God either gave them their wit or tongues; but to stretch the one, and
shorten the other for the upholding of just and righteous cases. I know not how
they salve the matter, but I take the conclusion of the School for sound, That
it is unlawful for any to cooperate to the doing of mischief; and therefore
though they conceit they have done well quantum ad peritiam actus in showing
their skill, they surely offend grie vously quantum ad iniustitiam voluntatis,
in voluntary abusing their Art unto unrighteousness. But let us all learn
fidelity, my brethren, in our several ranks, because the time will come e're
long, when honest dealing shall more avail than house and land, full bags
and large possessions, when it shall be ten thousand fold better for us to
hear God calling us faithful servants, then now to have the world admire us
for our getting money, o^ fawn upon us because we are rich. So I have done
with the compellation, the last thing observable in Gods entertainment of the
doer.

I come to the commendation of his doing, fidelis fuistisuper pauca, thou have
been faithful over a few things; where we have both testimonium facti God's
witness of his deed Thou have been faithful; and latitudinem facti, the
object whereunto the deed extends, few things.

1. The Testimony: God before gave him a double Title of good and faithful,
yet now affirms of one only, his fidelity; not thereby excluding the other,
but re-iterating the immediate cause, that which i^ ncarest to the effect of
trading for good advantage; so that goodness may be repeated (...), thou have
been good and faithful. The words seem to occasion a question, how God, who
is veritas, truth it self, and cannot be deceived; who is verax, true in his
speeches, and cannot deceive, should here apprehend his servant as good and
faithful, and call him so, whereas weeread, Mat. 19. 17. There is none goed
but God, no not one, Psa 14 2. And, Quis est fidelis? Mat. 24. 46. Who is the
faithful servant? he rightly asks, as being well advised, that if the whole
earth be searched, a faithful servant cannot be found: if then none good, none
faithful, how this servant? I answer, there is a twofold goodness,
Original, in God alone; by participation, this in many; God gives us leave to
kindle our candles at his light, as all natural things have heat from the
Sun This derived goodness is either that which should be perfect and
without all admixtion of evil, so no man good: or imperfect in degree, though
sincere and sound, such as viatores, men in this life are capable of, this in
the Saints. The like we may say of fidelity; though there be no man who can
give an exact account pro omnibus articulis temporum, for the whole time of his
trading with his Talents; yet such an account as God in his mercy does accept
of, many do give, and so God calls them good and faithful: 1. propter
propositum boni, their full aim and endeavor is good, though they swarve
sometime, because David swore to keep Gods righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.
108. he was a man after Gods own heart, though foully overtaken: Saint Austin
faith, Nullus vivit sine peccato, nec cessat tamen bonus esse, quia affectu
tenet pietatem. 2. Comparative, they are good and faithful, compared with the
rabble of unfaithful men; as those which study are called learned in
comparison of such as know not their letters, though yet they be ignorant of
many things. Saint Paul says, Let us which are perfect, be so minded, Phil.
3. 15. Whereupon Ambrose, Comparatione eorum qui res Divinas negligunt perfecti
dicendi sunt, qui pietatis iter ambulant. 3. Denominatione facta a meliori
part, the regenerate man consists of flesh and spirit, has in him the Law of
the members, and the Law of the mind, Rom 7. 23. he is called good and
faithful from the better part, as man is said to be reasonable in respect of
his soul, though his body be unreasonable: and not snow alone is white, but
even linen also, which has upon it some aspersion. Certain it is, all men
ought to conform to the Image of God, wherein they were created, standing in
righteousness and true holiness; if God should enter into judgment with
them, they could not answer for one defect, but because our wants are supplied
in Christ, if the heart be honest, and we follow piety, we are reputed and
accounted good and faithful.

I observe this point the rather, because I know the difficulty of obtaining a
thing, terrifieth men most commonly from prosecuting it: because men cannot be
every way good, and exactly faithful as they should, but when they endeavor
the most, then fail in many things, they therefore set all at six and sevens,
and care not to be wicked and unfaithful: but let no man think so, Honestum
est ei qui in primis nequit, in secundis terliisve consistere, says the Orator
truly; Will thou not take Physic for thy fore eyes, because when they are
well thou can not see into the other world with Lynceus? Will thou not seek
a medicine for the stone or gout, because at the best thou can not be as
strong as Sampson? This were a madness: and so it is for any man to neglect
the care of goodnesle and fidelity, because when he has done what he can,
he comes short of what he should do. Est quiddam prodire tenus, si non
datur ultra; it is for good purpose for a man to strive unto perfection, both
because he shall by this means grow every day more and more perfect, though
he come not to the full (...), and pitch thereof, as also because good
endeavors are accepted of God for good employments, who looks upon what we do
with an honest heart, and covers the defects in Christ, that when in our own
eyes we seem to be unprofitable servants, he accounts us good and faithful.
The Church, Cant. 1. 4. complains that she is black and sunne-burnt, but
Christ her husband thinks not so; Thou art all fair, my love, and there is no
spot in thee, Cant. 4. 7. As therefore David spoke to his son Solomon
concerning that great task of building the house of God, 1 Chro. 22. 16. so
may I speak to all whose charge and work is great and full of difficulties,
Arise and be doing, and the Lord will be with you: He will be with you in
enabling you to his service: he will be with you in burying your infirmities,
not seeing what is black and deformed in your actions, but what white and
lovely, commending it, fidelis fuisti, thou have been faithful. You have
seen God's testimony of the fact, behold now the latitude of it, fidelis super
pauca, faithful in few things.

This servant had the largest portion given him as the eldest son of his
father, the greatest regiment committed to his trust, as the chiefest servant
of his Master, yet the census, the value of all these, of these five talents,
it is but pauca, a few things. So that there is no man in the world lord of
many things: The Kings of the earth indeed are like Nebuchadnezzars tree, Dan.
4. 20. their height reaches toheaven, their sight to all the earth, their
leaves are fair, their fruit is much, the God of heaven has given them power,
and strength, and glory, so that if they be compared with mean men, they seem
infinitely to differ from them, and to be gods in the shape of men: but take
them by themselves, and view them in all their greatness, what they have is
but an handful; that which their power extends to, is but a few things. For,
1 the earth, over which they command, is but punctum, a point of the world; and
can you look for many things in a point? it goes into a little corner; the
heart of Alexander could hold many earths, and can there be many things in a
little room? The Devil showed Christ all the kingdoms of the world, (...),
in an instant, and an instant will not afford space for the sight of many
things. 2. He that has the greatest territories, has but a part of this
point, a corner of the earth to exercise his authority in; and de paucis pauca,
what is taken from a few, cannot be but few: so that the greatest Monarch of
the world may here see Troy in a Nutsh^ll, all his Provinces in a little
compass, all his glory in a short sum; let him have all which the earth and
sea afford him, they are but pauca, a few things. Much less have they that
receive but two Talents, such as are sub graviore regno regnum, Commanders
under others, who have government in such a Circuit, such a Liberty, such a
City, such a Town; they are as those semper divisibilia, into which,
Mathematicians tell us, the least quantity may be resolved; what they have to
deal withal are not many things.

I speak not this to detract from either Sovereign or subordinate authority,
God forbid; they are as the Sun and Stars, which in their several kinds do
sustain the earth by their heats and influences; many privileges, much honor
belongs unto them, let them with all comfort enjoy them: Only this they must
know, that these things which appear so great and so many to men looking with
the spectacles of bodily eyes, to a soul fraught full of love, and respect to
an infinite God, are small, are few, are nothing, therefore ought not to puff
them up with pride and arrogance, to turn them from him who is the
incommutable good, but so must they use them as not possessing them, that
having them, they may also have God with them.

How little then remains to them who have but one Talent? It is, God wot, a
poor pittance, yet is there that self-love in many men, that they think
their molehill a mountain, their Kestrill an Eagle, their Goose a Swanne. It
is a strange thing to see that the very attoms of the Country, who are but at
the ut most borders of these few things, do yet set an high price upon their
mean wares. If a man get but a little money, some house and land, a small
command in a poor village, he presently thinks himself to be more than
some body, boasts of many things, contemnes his equals, oppresses his poor
neighbors, grows stubborn, obstinate and wilful, will do what he list, as
if he were lord of the world: Why? the lords of the world should not do so;
God here calls them rulers in a few things, that they may know, meekness,
humility, gentleness ought to dwell with them; much less should the thistles
of Lebanon advance themselves for a matter of nothing, and be so lusty.

Well it were that every man would well view the latitude of that station
wherein God has set him; consider the largeness of his gifts, that he might
be the prompter touse them well, because Crescunt dona, crescunt Greg. been. 9.
in Even.
et rations donorum, the more he has, the greater must be his account; and
the small number of them also, that pride may not steal into his heart to make
him forget God, and overtop his brethren. He that walks in this middle way
of the estimate of his gifts, riches, honors, authority, and such like, shall,
when he comes to make up his reckoning, have God acknowledge him for one of
his, and say, Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful
in few things: but this acknowledgment is not all, there follows a promise of
greater endowment, J will make thee ruler over many things.

Where are two things: Remuneratio, I will make thee; modus remunerationis,
ruler over many things:

1. The reward propounded; I will make thee, I will set thee in an happy state
and condition. No man ever served God in vain; when he sends men into his
Vineyard, he agrees with them for a penny, and a penny they shall be sure
of; howsoever the Atheist says, it is no profit to serve God; yet Saint Paul
saw benefit in his service; I press forward to the mark, Phil. 3. 13. And
faithful Moses looked to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. A great
encouragement it is to a man in all his labors, to know that they are not
fruitless, but that after wrestling he shall be crowned; after running, have
the prize; after sowing, reap; after painful employing of his Talents, be
advanced. Though without a promise a man might be idle, and have no heart unto
his work, yet hope should make him active to overcome all impediments; Virtus
ad praemium prompta vinci non potest, says Gregory, Virtue inflamed with sight
of reward, is invincible.

2. The manner of the reward, Ruler over many things: where two particulars
observable: 1. The nature of heavenly things opposed to earthly; they are few,
these many; the opposition is manifold, they light, these weighty, 2 Cor. 4. 1
^. they finite, these infinite, Psalm. 36. 8. those of narrow compass, these
incomprehensible, 1 Cor. 2. 9. they small, these great, Psalm. 31. 19. Rightly
Saint Hierome, Omnia quae in presentihabemus, lieet magna videantur,
comparatione tamen futurorum exigua sunt; Oh that ye could see how excellent
these many things are! they would provoke us to infinite love of them. Oh that
we could esteem them as we ought! it would make us sell all to purchase them.
Foolish Esau's they are, who for a mess of pottage part with their birthright;
like Glaucus in Homer, excha^ge (...), chooselight for heavy; finite, for
infinite; comprehensible, for incomprehensible; small, for great; few, for
many: Pray we with the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 17. that we may be able to
comprehend those many things in all their dimensions, breadth, length, depth,
height; that seeing the small current of these few things here, and the vast
sea of those many hereafter, we may to pass from these former, that we misle
not finally to attain the latter. 2. The Order wherein this faithful servant
is to these many things; he is super ^ulta, made ruler over them; ^is vessel
shall so be filled with those glorious qualities, that he shall with full
liberty use them to his perfection, the glory of God: there shall not then be
that strife between flesh and spirit; the spirit willing, the flesh weak; the
spirit lifting up the heart, the flesh depressing it but that body of sin,
which warreth against the mind, being wholly destroyed, we shall (...), love
God with all our hearts, our souls and strength delight in him as the chief
good, and have all our faculty pressed to sing with the Elders a praise and
glory to his holy name. This is the end of our Creation, for it were we made
and had we command of o^ selves now, we should do it in this veil of
mortality; but (...), the sin that compasses us, will not now permit it; the
devil who opposes us, makes us as slaves to follow his will; then, then
shall we perfectly serve our God, when we shall be full commanders of
ourselves; when the sting of sin being removed, and Satan trodden under our
feet, our hearts shall be W else of living waters; our eyes shall behold our
blessed Savior, our hands take hold of happinesle and felicity; and we wholly,
instead of toyling among the few things of this world, shall be rulers over
those many things which attend Eternity.

Thus have I briefly run through these words; in a word of Application I
conclude. You Right Honorable, and all that have to do in these affairs of
the Commonwealth) see your places, you are God's servants: your duties,
goodness and fidelity are required of you; God invites you to them by his
approbation, testimony, and reward; do you your parts, I dare say God will not
be wanting in his: When the great Assise of the world shall be kept, you shall
hear, Well done good an^ faithful servants, you have bee^ faithful in few
things, I wi^^ make you rulers over man^ things.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON, Assize Sermon. Momento m^i Pous.
ON NEHEM, 5. 15.
NEH. 5. 15. But so did not I, because of the fear of God.
THE whole duty of man has ever been reduced to two heads: by the Stoikes,
unto (...), and (...), abstaining, and sustaining: by Saint Paul, to (...), and
(...), Tit. 2. 12. denying ungodliness, living godly. And surely, all the law
of God being either negative prohibiting evil; or affirmative commanding good;
wh^ men's actions are correspodent to the laws, both forb^ ring to do what is
forbidden and doing that which is enio^ned, then are they due obse^vers of the
Law.

Nehemiah, whose spee^ my Text is, was both a go man, and a good Magistrat^ and
does in this Chapter decl^ his integrity in those two f^^mer respects: My Text
to you what he did not: So not I. The last verse she^ what he did, The good
the (...).
have done for the people. T^^^ was he square and every (...) complete:
complete in person, a godly man, and honest Governor; compl^^ in his actions,
not doing wr^ but doing right.

My Text suffers me not set the whole face of this worthy Patriot before you,
but a part of it: For if I consider his person, I am to speak of him only as
a Commander; this particle, I, points at him as he was Tirshatha, the Kings
Deputy. or Legate; and yet on the by, you may here see what he was as a man,
for Magistratus indicat virum, let the Politickes dispute the question, I take
the conclusion to be this, A good Citizen is a good Christian. Again, if I
consider his actions, I must speak of him only as abstaining from evil; my
Text is negative, sic non feci, I did not so: yet by concomitance also, as
doing rightly; for the whole book shows that his disposition was not like
Galba's Hist. l. 1. ^. 12.
in Tacitus; Ingenium magis extra vitia, quam cum virtuti^us, rather not evil
than good, ^ather harmless than virtuous; but so was innocence linked to true
justice in him, that he, who having power in his hand, would do no hurt; when
he had occasion, would furely do much good.

I may call my Text Nehemiah's profession; and a profession, by our Saviors
warrant, is like to an house, Matthew. 7. 25. as therefore an house may be
resolved into two parts; superstructum, the building that is apparent to the
view of the world; and substratum, the foundation which lies hid in the ground;
so are there two things in this profession: 1. (...), his behavior manifest,
So did not I: 2. (...), the hid man of the heart, upon which his behavior was
settled, the fear of God. The wise builder takes care that his house be right
set, and therefore works by line and level, but especially he looks to the
groundwork, for if this be not well laid, the frame is weak: So the good
magistrate will do no wrong and this is commendable; but if this stream of
Justice flow also from the fountain of Gods fear in him, which is (...) (...)
the head of wisdom, Prove. 1. 7^ then is it true and solid, denominating and
making him just; then is not his Justice shored up by popularity, gifts, or
other base respects, as it was said of the Sarmatians, Omnis Ta. l. 1 6. 10
Sarmatarum virtus extra ipsos; but resting upon this foundation of Gods fear,
stands by it own strength unshaken. Truly happy was Nehemiah, who had thus
conjoined equity and piety; and truly happy shall ever be those of Nehemiah's
rank, who are so tempered, that their actions proceed from the fear of God,
and the fear of God moderateth their actions, who can profess, as here
Nehemiah does, But so did not I, because of the fear of God.

I have thus taken in sunder this house, this profession, I must now set it up
again, and that (...), showing you first what was last in Nehemiah, his
dealing; so did not J: and last what was first in him, the fear of God: Det
Deus, ut Sermomeus adeo commodus sit, quam sit accommodus; I wish my Sermon as
profitable as it is seasonable.

First, his dealing; but so did not I: This particle, so, which is the maine
hingel upon which this whole sentence turns, i^ relative, pointing backward
to something that went before and this particle, but, which stands at the
entrance of my Text is adversative, differencing the consequent course from the
precedent; by it Nehemiah dis-joyneth his practis^ from the practice of others
his predecessors, they did so and so, but so did not I. The thing observable is
this, Nehemiah in his government followed not the examples of others that went
before him. This is the full sense of the words, in which are couched two
propositions: 1. Nehemiah made not examples his rule, no, though they were
worthy ones. So, may here be taken in the si, generally; others did as they
thought fit, but I did not so, not as they. 2. Nehemiah in his course went
cross to bad examples: So, may be taken in hypothesi, answerable to the matter
in hand; his Ancestors did naughtily, but he did not so; did not evil as they
did: The former of these declares his wisdom; the latter, his honesty.

1 Nehemiah made not worthy examples his rule and square to work by, and
therein did wisely in these 2 respects: Because it is not always lawful for
one to do that which another has done lawfully. 2. If it be lawful, yea if a
man be bound to do the same thing, yet not idco, not because another has
done it. In which regards it is a weak conclusion that rises from an example:
The great Logician could say, Arist prio l. 2. 6. 24.
(...), an Example is not demonstrative and convincing.

1. It is not always lawful for one to do what another has done lawfully:
In the following of good Presidents there be many circumstances, the
concurrence whereof is required, and the failing in any of them may change the
nature of the thing, so that one may err in doing that, which another did and
erred not: The Antitype in an example must be like Re^n, pro^. 18.
the Prototype in five things: The person doing, the thing done, the party to
whom, the time when, the end why; where there is not an agreement in all these,
every wise man must profess with Nehemiah, So did not J.

1. The person doing must be like; for all men stand not in the same reference
in regard of actions: He said well in the Comedy, Hoc licet impune facere huic,
illi non licet; non quia Ter. in adel.
dissimilis res sit, sed quod is qui facit; Be the things never so like, if the
person be unlike, there is an error. No man doubts but Elias did well in
commanding fire to come down from heaven to destroy the two Captains and
their fifties, for he was a messenger of Gods wrath to punish the Idolatrous
Israelites: but the Apostles might not do so. When James and John urged this
Example, Luke 9. 54. and would call for fire from heaven upon the Samaritans,
as Elias did; they are taken up short by their Master, Nescitis cuius spiritus
sitis vos, you are men of another mould then Elias was; he a Minister of
indignation, you of consolation; his actions fit not you, because your persons
are not like his. Though Phinehas be Canonized in all generations, for flaying
the persons taken in the act of Adultery, Number. 25. 8. yet neither private men,
nor Magistrate, upon this example must do so, put offenders to death without
due proceedings and course of Law; Zelaus zelo. typia^. Number. 25. 11
for Phinehas was filled with an heroike spirit, a Divine man, transported with
zeal for the Lord of Hoasts, to which height of heat ordinary men's tempers
Morel, 1, 7. c. 1.
are not raised; (...), says the Moralist; it is a rare thing for a man to be
thus Divine.

2. The things done must be like, else instead of fish a man may swallow a
stone; instead of an egg, a Serpent. David the sweet singer of Israel provided
Instruments of Music to sound out the praises of God, and therein did
worthily, as became a Psalmist; but when as drunkards and roaring boys
patronized their fiddlers and ribauld songs by this example, the Prophet
denounces a woe against them. Amos 6. 5. Woe to them that chaunt to the sound
of the violl, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music like David: His
Instruments were holy, theirs profane; his songs religious, theirs lascivious;
they had no reason to shroud themselves under his example; his Music and
theirs agreed like harp and harrow, as it is in the Proverb. Though Jacob
sent a present to Esau, that he might find favor in the sight of his lord, Gen
33. 8. yet is not the fact of those made good by this parallel, who give
bribes to such as are Judges in their causes; the actions are not suitable; Esau
was an enemy, and might be pacified with gifts, but it is unlawful by gifts
to blind the eyes of a Judge.

3. The party to whom, must be like: Those that have an evil eye at the
Churches possessions, her glebes and tithes; though they favor Saint Paul's
Doctrine never a whit, yet can propound his practice to us readily, that in
Preaching to the Corinthians, he made the Gospel of Christ, (...), without
charge, 1 Cor. 9 18. and would have us do so also; they cannot endure we
should reap where they have sown, but woldhave us Weaver it, Tailor it, Cobbler
it, they care not what work we did, so our hands might not be in their
Dairies and fields: but our answer is, we do not so, for neither did Saint
Paul so to all, he preached indeed gratis to the Corinthians, because of their
poverty, but took largely of other Churches, so that he is said to rob them,
2 Cor. 11. 8. and should we follow this instance of theirs, we should do
wrong at least to our rich parishioners, in giving way to their sacrilegious
humor, to let them devour that which is holy, contrary to Saint Paul's
precept, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that
teaches him, in all his goods.

4. The time must be like; for every thing has his season, and what profitech
now, may hurt anon. Some of old held Aug. ep. 5
this position, Semel recte factum, nulletenus esse mutandum, once well done,
and ever well done: but Saint Augustine denies it, affirming, that though they
say, what was right before, cannot be right if it be changed; yet indeed it
cannot be right except it be changed. He instanceth in Vindicianus, a learned
Physician, who prescribed a potion to a young patient, which he would not
after give him being old; Ego ills aetati hoc nunquam eram iussuries, Diverse
years require diverse kinds of Physic.

5. The ends must be like. David used direful imprecations against his
enemies, and cursed them with an heavy curse; yet we must not do so; his
example is no warrant for fell and bitter men to banne and execrate those which
anger them. The reason is, In reuna quam faciunt, non eadem est causa propter
quam faciunt, as ^o. 48. ad Vincent.
Saint Augustine speaks; they do the same thing to another end. His
maledictions were predictions; his optations, prophetations; what he uttered,
came a spiritu praevidentis, non voto optantis, rather from foresight of what
should be, than simple wishing that it might be: but these men are wholly
ignorant of the event, only their malice carries them to desire it may be
evil and unfortunate.

Since then there are so many ways of going amiss in imitation, that a man
may easily wander when he thinks he is right, Nehemiah did wisely in this
regard, that he followed not examples, but professes here, I did not so.

2. If the example be alike, and a man be to do the same. thing, yet not
ideo, he is not therefore to do it because another has done it; but there is
a common rule which both guides Sempronius in doing well, and directs Tit^us
in doing that which Sempronius did. The reason of the action must enforce
imitation, not the action. (...), Ar. Rhet. ad. Ac. c. 9
says the Philosopher; when we apprehend the reason of things, then we yield
to follow them. O imitatores servum pecus! they are beasts without
understanding, and have not the spirit of men, who magnify and stick unto
customs, as they are customs, without respect of right and honesty. Nehemiah,
when he looked upon others to see what they did, observed the rule whereby
they did it, making that his guide, not the Example. I did not so.

And this surely is the best way for all men to go to work, not to regard so
much what others have done, as what they ought to do, especially Nehemiah, and
men in authority, who are in the Commonwealth as Pilots in a ship, and
therefore wisdom is most of all required in them; they must have their
synosura, their stars to direct them in their judgoments, in the carriage of
their affairs; without which, in hoysing up sails to teach others, they may
split against the rocks, and be wracked. Among the rest, they must especially
take notice of three constellations: ius Divinum, ius humanum, (...); the law
of God; the kingdom; Equity.

1. The Law of God, that gives wisdom and understanding, and must therefore
be a light unto their feet. and a lantern to their paths: Liber Legis, a
Copy of the Law was to be with Josuah, Jos. 1. 8. and the Judges must determine
according to the sentence of the Law, Deuteronomy. 1 ^. 11. they are to judge, pro
Domino, says Ieheshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 9 6. for the Lord; and must therefore judge
secundum Dominum, as the Lord has enjoined. It is a great fault among men,
learned in other professions, too much to neglect Divine Writ. I think the
reason is, because as they exalt themselves above Divines, whom they justle
into the kennell; so they would advance their profession also above Divinity,
and turn Sarah into the Kitchen, the place of Hagar: But these Achitophels,
though wise in their own eyes, are but fools indeed: the Prophet has
concluded against them, Ier 8. 9. The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed
and taken; to, they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in
them? What? if there be any, it is lux vespertina, that dim light which
twinckleth in the night of nature; not lux matutina, Psa. 8. 20
the clear light shining in the day of grace. Nehemiah, who did not so as
others did, did so as the Law of God commanded; and therefore punished those
which transgressed against God, Neh. 13. ^7.

2. The Law of the Nation and kingdom wherein we live; for though the Law of
God be the spring from whence flows righteousness, yet the good and wholesome
laws of men be as rivers, which if a governor take along with him, they will
bring him to the Sea of Justice. (...), says Aristotle; Pol 3^ c. 26
he that is taught by the laws, judges rightly. A brave thing it is for a
Judge to be (...), a living and a speaking law; but to determine causes without
law, is too great liberty. The Law is to a ludge, as the banks to the Sea,
Huousque, hither must he go, and no further. Nehemiah, who did not so in
following examples, did so in looking to the Law; he told the builders the
Kings words which he had spoken to him, Neh. 2. 18.

2. (...), Moderation; a virtue commended by Saint Paul, Phil. 4. 5. (...), let
your equity be manifest: Mor, l, 5. c. 14.
and by the Philosopher, who gives the reason of it; Laws being made for
general, cannot fetch in all particulars, which are infinite; there may then a
cause come to hearing, which may in equity be right and yet against the Law;
here the good Judge does not urge the Law to the worse, but so pronounces, as
the Lawgiver himself would have said, if he had been present. But I stay not
upon this point, it may be I am out of mine Element. I once heard at a
Sessions, the Preacher in the Pulpit pleading for this quity, and he that
supplied the place of the Judge, con^^mning both him and it. I will go no
further in it than Beza does, and so far I dare say I 1 Timothy 1. 3
may go; Hoc accipe de eo iure de quo remittere aliquid possunus: where the
Judge may ^ake from the rigor of the Law ^n cafe of equity, there he ought to
loose the cords of it; or this is the end of laws and ^udges, that every man
may have his right, be maintained in a just cause; over thrown in a bad.

Thus have we seen in Nehemiah the first thing which he did not, not make
examples the ^ule of his actions; whereunto has been referred the affirma^ive,
what it is that he, and all in his place must be guided by.

2. Nehemiah went cross to So did not I. Those that were before him did not as
they ought to d^^ and had he imitated them, he might have done as ill as they
but he detested the wron^ which they offered, and professes, he did not so.
The ill dealing of his predecessors is specified in two particulars: 1. The
having abundance, oppresse^ and sucked the blood of the poor and needy people,
whom they should rather have relee^ved: had the people been rich, they might
well have required a floece for their maintenance; for what Shephear watches
over a flock, and does not sheare them? but they were Tonder^, not deglubere.
not to flea the sheep, because their wool was thin: So did others, but so
did not he. 2. Their servants domineered and bare rule over the people he
means not the Minister of Justice, and such as they put in office, for these
are to rule and men must submit themselves unto them, 1 Pet. 2. 13. ^ut their
under-servants, and very one which had dependence upon them, these would ^ee
Masters, and carry themselves as if they were more than some body. A common
^ault in great men's retinues, and ^n offices Spiritual and Lay, where every
hang-by will look loose upon a right good man, and a proud boy demean himself
malepertly to his betters. Nehemiah thought the Gover^ours to blame, who
suffered his in their Courts and Fami^ies; and therefore here pro^esseth, he
did not so.

The point that I observe from henee shall be general; Magistrates must not
follow the naughty courses of their Predecessors. There are certain vices
which Divine Learning has pointed out as rocks, which Governors ought to take
heed of, which vices are no^ idea's, and abstracted forms Esse in esse.
but have had their seat in me^ of authority; there is no evil in the world
which some man has not been guilty of; n^ sin belonging to a Magistrate but
some Magistrate has offended in. The godly Governor when he sees that other
have stooped to wickedness must resolve against it himself, that he may be
able to say with Nehemiah, But so did not I. The maine evils not to be done by
Magistrates, are these:

1. Injustice, judging contrary to right and equity, both in distributive and
emendative Justices: 1. In distributive, the good Judge must neither justify
the wicked, nor condemn the just, for both these are abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 17. 15. Not justify the wicked by suffering him to break through the
Laws, as great ^yes through cobwebs, when he ought to be holden of them; for
the power bears ^ot the sword for naught, Romans ^. 3. 4 but as God has, so
must ^ee have (...), a revenging eye over them that do wickedly. He must be a
Iosu^h to cleanse the land from the Josh 7 1 King. 2
theft of Achan: a Solomon, to take away the innocent blood, shed by Ioab, from
the kingdom: yea, in this a Saul, to 1 Samuel 28
cut off such as have familiar spirits and wizzards, from among the people. In
capital crimes the offender must dye by the sentence of the Judge: and in
sins which the Law has not said so heavy a punishment upon, as drunkenness,
swearing, whoring, the crying sins of our days though the committers of them
think them to be nothing, no more than Aetius the heretic accounted of
fornication, penna aurem scalper Epiph. bar. 76
to rub his care when it itche yet ought the honest Judge d^ the best he can
by all severi^ and even by that which o^ loose times call cruelty, to ta^ them
away; or if that be in possible, yet to chase the Birds of the night into t^
night again; and to restrain if not the being, yet the roari^ of them. It is
now no time spare, when the banks of in quity are full, and ready eve^ day to
run over to drown the world.

Again, he must not condemn the just; he that is n^ an offendour must be
protect^ not punished by the laws; G^ appointed Cities of refuge f^ such as
had transgressed again their wills, but a man's own innocence should be his
refug^ when he has not transgress at all. Will thou stay the right^ous with
the wicked? says A braham to God, that be far from thee? shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18. 25. And will thou condemn the
guiltless? may I say to an honest Judge, that be far from thee? shall not
he that sitt^th in the seat of the righteous God do right? It is surely
unjust, as I have said, to assoile a lewd person; but of the two, far better
it is to free a man as harmless, who has done mischief; than to condemn a
man as mischievous, who is harmless. David sung it of Solomon, Psalm. 72. 14.
and it becomes every man in place of Judicature, He shall redeem the innocent
from violence and deceit, and precious shall their blood be in his sight.

2. Emendative Justice; the (...), (...). Luke 12. 14
Judge must not do unjustly, but give to every man that which is his own; he
must be (...), a right divider between man and man; taking from the one what
he has got of another, and giving it to the other whose it is. The good
Magistrate cannot, as the Popes Parasites say he can, de qu^drato facere
rotundum, make something of nothing, and nothing again of something; as the
cause is, so must he judge it, that Iuel. p. 37^
every man may sit under his own Vine, and his own Figtree in peace. This is
the maine evil which a Magistrate mus^ not do, not do unjustice.

2. There are two things tending to this unjustice which h^ must not do: The
one as the way to it, the other as the cause of it: 1. The way to it, parti^^
all hearing; opening the ear^ to one party, shutting it to another. The
avoiding of this wa^ a great part of Moses charge Deu. 1. 16. I charged your
lu^ges at that time, saying, hear the causes between your brethren; y^ shall
not respect persons in judgment, but shall hear the small as well as the
great. If two Rivers be fed by the same Spring, and the passage to the one be
free, to the other dammed up, the one may well abound with water, the other be
dry: If two men be to claim their right before the Judge, and the one have
countenance and audience, the other frowns and snibbs, a man may soon conceive
which way the stream will run, though not in the right channel: Justice
must let the one skale have his due as well as the other, and then lift both up
fairly, that that may carry it which is heaviest.

2. The cause of unjustice, taking bribes: A gift does blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Some there are that
think it is but an act of kindnesle to give, and of courtesy to receive, and
what hurt in this? But, as one said, rain is good, and ground is good, yet ex
eorum conjunctione fit lutum, if they be mingled Stapl dom. 2 post pent.
they make dirt: So giving is kind, and taking is courteous, yet the mixing of
them makes the smooth paths of Justice foul and uneven. As sands and shoales
hinder the current of the water, so do gifts the course of Justice, which
should run down as a mighty river. Amos 6. 4. When the Emperor Zeno had
defloured a woman's daughter, she prayed, says the Legend, to the Virgin Mary
to be avenged; the Virgin appeared to her and said, Cred^ mihi mulier,
ultionem tuam sae erat sp. c. 175. Stapl. dom. 1. post pent.
pe facere volui, sed manus eiu prohibuit me, his han^ will not let me be
revenged of him she spoke it of his giving hand in that he was liberal to
the poor; but it is true also of the bribing hand, many a time a Cause might
have an end, and be rightly determined, but manus prohibet, a gift in the hand
puts a bar unto it. Samuel therefore when he purged himself, demands this
question of them whom he judged, Of whose hands have I received a bribe? 1 Samuel 1 2. 3. and the people answer, Thou have taken none. Every good Magistrate
must be able to say as much, and to profess, Whatsoever others do, yet so
do not l. This is the first thing in the Text, Nehemiah's dealing; the ground
of his dealing is the second thing. Why did he not do so? Because of the fear
of ^^od.

God is propounded in Scrioture, as one to be feared: Who would not fear thee,
O King of Nations! Ier. 10. 7. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? Ier. 5. 22.
Fear in it self is a natural passion; but fear with this object, God, the
fear of God, is die. 22. q. 19
donum, says the School, a gift of the Spirit; spiritus timoris Domini, Esa.
1 1. 2. the spirit of the fear of the Lord. This gift of fear respects God
two ways: 1. Mandantem, as he commands, and so it is filial fearem fear
of offending: 2. vindicantem, as he revengeth transgressors, so it is servile
fear, fear of being punished. It were to be wished that the hearts of all
men were filled with chaste fear, the fear of displeasing God; for this indeed
proceeds from love, and becomes children, who the more they love, the more
are afraid to offend. This fear shall abide in patria, when we come to heaven,
it endures for ever. Psalm. 19. 8. our charity being perfected, our fear shall
also; he that has this fear in him now, has in himself the kingdom of God
already. And how should we then hunger after this fear? but because man in
corruption is like an unbrideled horse, and will not be ridden unless he
have the bit, it is something for a man to attain to servile fear, to be
afraid of God in regard of his judgments, both because this fear will be a
restrainer, hold him back from iniquity; and also because it is seta, as Saint
(...) Epist (...), (...)
Austine speaks, the needle which draws after it the love of God as the
thread.

If any ask, which of these fears was in Nehemiah? I answer, Filial fear
surely was predominant in so excellent a servant of God, but it was not
altogether without fear of punishment; and therefore in Aquinas Secunda
sccundae, q. 19 art. 22
term it was a compound of them both, which he calls initiall, because it
is the beginning of much good. Nehemiah rendereth it as the reason why he did
not evil as others did, because of the fear of God: for where the fear of
God is, it is not idle, but active; honesty flows from it as from a fountain.
It is a Problem in Aristotle, why men are credited ^^. ^. Ar. probl. s 3. 9. 6.
more than other creatures? The answer is, (...) man alone reverenceth God,
therefore you may trust him. He that truly fears God, is like unto Cato, of
whom it is said, He never did well, that he might appear to do so, sed quia
aliter facere non potuit; he could not do otherwise: The fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111. 10. The beginning of wisdom, says one, not
as it is cognoseitiva, standing in speculation; but as it is directiva^vitae,
guiding the actions and life of man: faith is the beginning of wisdom,
according to the essence of it; and the fear of God according to the effects,
as it is operative. The foundation is the first in architecture, there the
workman sets on to build, and the fear of God, the first in a just course, it
is the maine wheel which sets all the rest on going: In which regard Saint
Augustine says, Timor primum Ser dom. i^ mont^^ ^ 9. p, 1104
locum tenet ascendendo, ultimum descendendo: If you look upon the order of
man Working, the fear of God is first, thence all the frame of the action
rises: if you look upon the work wrought, the fear of God is the last, into
it all is resolved.

It is so in general, the fear of God makes all men do honestly, and it is
so in the matter we have in hand; the fear of God makes a Magistrate upright,
and therefore this fear is especially required in him. Iethro's Justice must
be a man fearing God, Exodus 18. 21. And the first part of Iehoshaphat's charge
to his Judges aims at this, Let the fear of God be upon you, 2 Chronicles. 19. 7.
and there is great reason, that a Magistrate above others should be a man
fearing God,

1. In regard of the greatness of his place; authority, and power puff men
up, make them think they may do what they list; it is a hard thing in nature
for a man to be great and good; some who have done worthily while they have
been commanded, have forgot their goodness when they became commanders. The
Historian observes, that among all the Tac. hist. l. 1. c 13
Roman Emperors, solus Vespasianus in melius mutatus est, only Vespasian grew
the better for his dignity: And the common proverb is, Honores mutant mores,
Men are lightly worse after honors, than they were before. So prone are all
men through their corruption, when they are exalted, to be like the unjust
Judge, Luke 18. 1. who neither cared for God nor man. Thus it always fares
where men give way to their own unruly affections, but where the fear of God
is planted, there the greater men are, the better; their greatness gives them
hands to be able, and Gods fe are an heart to be willing to do much good.
There is nothing worse than a Magistrate without the fear of God, armed
injustice is the worst evil: and nothing better then a Magistrate fearing God,
armed Justice is most Sovereign.

2. In regard of the many provecations they are subject unto. He that is in
place of authority shall be beleagred by kindred, by friends, by servants, by
money, suit upon suit, reward upon reward, to turn his heart out of the way,
and his tongue from speaking right things: and a difficult thing it is,
considering our mould to resist so much importunity, to pass by so many
temptations unsnared: great need then has a Magistrate to set the fear of God
as a seal upon his senses, and upon his heart, that he may not be perverted.
I may well say to Governors, as Simeon the Prophetical Monk spoke to the
Pillars which he whipped before the Earthquake, Stand fast, for you shall be
shaken. Dr. Hall, in que v^dis, p. 97
Satan and ill-disposed men desire to winnow them, to sift their integrity,
their honesty, their Justice out of them; they had need keep themselves in the
fear of God, that their uprightness may not fail.

This fear of God is the best preservative against all ill motives. Shall
others tell a man in place, or himself conceive that he has the law in his
own hands, and that he may wrest it like a Lesbian rule which way he will? the
fear of God will suggest other thoughts to him; How shall J do this great
evil, and sin against God? If great means be used to violate, and many rubs
thrown into the way to turn aside Justice, the fear of God will constrain a
man to leap over them all, because he will thus reason; I who sit now upon
the Bench to give Judgment, must one day stand before the Bar of a greater
Judge my self, to give account of my judgment, which if I can give with joy
as I ought, happy I. I shall hear euge, well done good and faithful servant.
But if my account be perplexed and wrong, I tremble to think of punishment by
eternal separation from God, ito maledicte, away thou cursed. You see what
force the fear of God has to plead for right, to plead against wrong;
Nehemiah makes this the reason, and it is a strong reason, of his not doing
wickedly, So did not I, because of the fear of God.

I have now done with my Text, yet something by way of Application must be
added, that so my Text may be laid to the business in hand, and fitted to it.
Nehemiah's course may best be presented to you (Right Honorable, most Reverent
and Worthy) for he was a Deputy under King Artaxerxes to the Jews; so are you
under our gracious Sovereign to these parts; he in his Deputation disclaymeth
all unrighteous dealing, and you must do so in yours. The Oil therefore of my
Exhortation shall first be powered upon your head, and so drop down to the
skitts of your clothing, all that have any hand in this great Assize; for
though they all be not Nehemiah's, men in authority to judge, yet do they all
concur for the production of the sacred act of Justice, and in that respect,
for the time, are not private but public persons, and must take care so much
as concerns them, that Justice may run freely without stoppage.

1. Therefore (Right Honorable) I desire you to set this worthy pattern before
your eyes. I doubt not, but when you look into the glass of my Text, you see
your selves in it; for it is said, that you are Nehemiah's, men fearing God,
not doing unrighteousness; yet give me leave to hold the glass before you,
and show you not only Nehemiah, but even your selves to your selves, that you
may be the more incited, ^ihil Plut. lib. 5. not. quest.
indignum tanta virtu^e committere, as he said, to do nothing unbeseeming so
great worthiness. If you behold the examples of Judges in former times, you
shall find some to have declined and gone out of 1 Samuel 15. 9
the way. Saul sparing Agag, who was the son of death; the Nobles of Iezreel
stoning 1 King. 21. 13.
Naboth, a man most innocent; Est 3. 13
Ahashuerus giving the Jews goods for a prey to the rest of the Provinces;
Festus hearing Acts 25. 9
grievous complaints against Paul, but cutting him off when he answered for
himself; Samuels 1 Samuel 8. 3
sons turning aside after lucre, taking bribes, and perverting Judgment. Oh
let your eyes be upon these bypaths, but be upon them to decline them! oh
keep your selves from the accursed thing! that though many hurried by the
evil spirit, care not how they demean themselves, yet you may not do so,
because of the fear of God; that by your happy means, righteousness and
peace may still kiss each other in these Eastern Angles.

2. Let me speak unto the Lawyers who have a great stroke in matters of
emendative Justice, and Pleas between man and man. For my self, nemo vestrum
mihi iniuria cognitus, I know no hurt by any of your profession, none of them
ever wronged me; and I know a great deal of good by some of you; grave you
are, honest true dealing men: but the common fame is, that there is much
iniquity in your rank; Dr Hal, quo vadis, p 1 1.
and no marvel, for where many pots are boiling, there cannot but be much
skumme; where much practice and tempering with men's estates, much dishonesty
and false play. Two things I have heard condemned among you: 1. That many stir
up men to strife and contention, that so they may have employment: Some are
said to be like the Sea-crab, who desirous to eat the flesh of the Oyster,
which he cannot come by, because of his two-leaved shel, Bas. ht^em. bom. 7
watches when he opens these doors against the Sun, and casts a stone
into them, that they cannot shut, then he thrusts in his claw and devoures
him: So the cunning Lawyer, greedy of a rich man's money, and seeing him
peaceably disposed, unwilling to wrangle, seeks all occasion to see his
Evidences, and in them puts such rubs, that the good man cannot but think his
neighbor has done him wrong, and ears not what he spends to recovera feigned
right. Some like the Polypus, take the color of any Rock they cleave to;
frame themselves to the humor of the Client, make him believe his Cause is
good, though it be stark naught, that they may have a prey. 2. Many make no
conscience of an honest business undertaken, but use such delays, commit such
errors, follow the Cause so negligently, play so on both hands, that as
Charondas was wont to say of going to Sea, Se non mirari Stapl. mor. do. 2.
post pent.
quisemel mare ingressus sit, sed qui iterum; so we may say of going to Law; A
man is not to be wondered at for suing once, but he that sues the second time,
after he has seen the dangers and difficulties of it. The common voice is,
that these things are so with some Lawyers, but do not you so, because of the
fear of God. Consider well the saying of the Wiseman, Prove. 20. 17. Bread of
deceit is sweet, but afterward the mouth shall be filled with gravall.

3. My speech shall be directed to the Jurors, upon whole integlity both the
lives and goods of men are cast. Though many neither fear the oath o^ God, nor
regard right and wrong, but desire so to give their verdict as their own
sacrilegious and unjust actions may for time to come receive no prejudice; yet
do not you so, because of the fear of God Yea, if there chance to be but one
good man of the twelve, who seeing the combination of the rest in iniquity,
resolves against the same, let me encourage him to hold fast, and not to be
drawn from his honest purpose because of the many opposites; but as Liberius,
Bishop of Rome, once answered the Arrian Emperor Constantius, when he asked
him, What so great part of the world he was, that he believed contrary Theod.
hist. lib. 1. c. 7
to others? (...) the faith is never the worse because I alone profess it: So
if it be Remanded how thou dare withstand the opinion of eleven, tell them,
Justice is never the worse, though I alone practice it. Set the fear of God
before thine eyes, it will make thee bold as a Lion, not to do ^o as they,
periuriously.

4. To accusers in criminal Causes, to Plaintiffes in Nisi prius. To Accusers:
Some there are who upon malice and envy have hunted after the lives of men, and
brought them to the bar, trotting about Town and Country to find faults,
where they knew none, suborning false witnesses, and knights of the post to
swear untruly, not caring what course they took, so those whom they hated
might be brought to ruin: but do not you so, because of the fear of God.
Evldence of wicked facts, desire to have ungodly persons taken away, lest the
whole Country smart for them. Zeal for the glory of God, these should move a
man to prosecute an offender, not anger, notspleene, not defire of revenge; God
forbid these should be found in Jacob; if the fear of God be in you, you
will not do so. To Plaintiffes; many give themselves to undermine the state of
others, seek out quiddities and nice tricks to spoil their brethren; who
will have an Action for another man's Goose grazing in their ground; enemies to
peace and all tranquillity^ wranglers, contentious, oppressors, who think with
their purse to beggar a poor neighbor, if he will not part with his
Inheritance, or stoop to them at their pleafure. A kind of men these are, of
whom we may say as the Historian of Mathematicians, Tal^^ 6. 7
Genus hominum quod in nostra Republica, et vetabitur sensper, et retinebitur,
always they are cried against, and still they grow, the Country swarms with
them; but do not you so, because of the fear of God. If there be any
question in the Titles of land, it is honest to have them tried: If wrong be
done you, the Law is open, and there are Judges, implead one another fairly and
peaceably; but well it were if they were cut off that trouble the Country, and
chased away from the Iudgement-seats, which they abuse not only to the
satisfying of their own wrangling spirit, but to the detriment of such as
dwell nigh unto them.

5. To Witnesses: In all ages there have been some, who for fear of their
great Masters, for money or favor would give any testimony; not regarding the
opening of the Truth, but clearing or condemning of such as they would set at
liberty, or destroy. Our Savior had then often against him; and David i^ his
time, Psalm. 35. 11. but do not you so, because of the fear of God. Art thou
called to as Oath? swear in truth, in judgment, in righteousness, Ier. 4

2. Let not thy tongue speak contrary to that thy heart knows, for it is an
abomination t^ God who took order, Deuteronomy 19. 19. that the false witness should
be punished, lege tali^nis; thou shall do to him, ^ he thought to have done
unt^ his brother.

6. And lastly, to us all: We are not ignorant of the cryin sins which reign
inthis land prodigious drunkenness, who ring, swearing, killing, thee ving,
pride, aspersion, which are come to that height tha^ they know no bounds; so
which God has a controversi with the land, and has alread smitten us for
them. May we not say of England, as he once of Rome? Nunquam mag is Ta hist.
l. c.
justice iudici is approbatu^^ est, non esse curae Deo securitatem nostram, esse
vindictam! God has manifestly declared, that as he has hitherto watched over
us for good, so now he watches over us for vengeance: And yet what sin pulls
in his horns? Men are as brief in all kind of lewdness as ever. But oh,
beloved, let not us do so, because of the fear of God. If before we have
been guilty, let us now repent and do so no more; if we have been free from
these enormities, let us go on in a right course still. The fear of God calls
upon us for it; the fear of God commanding, that we be not rebels against him:
the fear of God revenging, lest he come in fury and destroy us. We never had
greater cause to fear Gods anger than now; I wish our care to please him may
be answerable, that we may truly say with Nehemiah, Though the whole world
lies in wickedness, yet so do not we, because of the fear of God.

Deo gratias, qui aperuit nob is ostium Sermon is.

These two Sermons were preached at the Assizes in Bury, Maurice Barrow,
Esquire, then high Sheriff of Suffolk.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMOEN, ON COLOS. 3. 1.
COL. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above.
IN Repentance are two things; Aversio a malo; Conversio ad bonum; the loathing
of what is evil, by sorrow for it; the pursuit of that which is good, by
longing after it: Or, to speak the same thing in other words; Mortification,
whereby the world is crucified to the penitent, and he unto the world; and
Vivification, whereby his dead and be^ummed limbs are warmed in righteousnesle,
to live the life of God, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit; the former
comes unto him by virtue of Christ's death, we are buried with him into his
death, that the body of sin might be destroyed: the second by virtue of
Christ's Resurrection; we are ingrafted with him into the similitude of his
resurrection, that like as Christ was raised from death by the glory of the
father, so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 4.

This present Chapter presents unto our view both these; Vivification in this
first verfe, If ye be risew with Christ: Mortification in the 3. and 5 verse^
You are dead, mortify therefore your members. In the words read, (of which
alone I am to entreat) we have a double vivification, one substantial, the o
there accidental; one of Christ's body, his resurrection from the grave wherein
he lay three days; the other of our whole man, his resurrection from the
grave of sin wherein nature has buried us all Here is Christ's rising, and
here is our rising, both in their causality: Christ's rising is the cause that
we rise, ye are risen with Christ: our rising is the cause of our seeking
heavenly things, If ye be rison, seek the things that are above. A Text,
which beside the general doctrine of rising from sin, and seeking heaven,
matter necessary to be taught at all times, is fitted likewise to the season:
one part pointing at Easter, a feast not long since past, (...) you are risen
with Christ: another part pointing at the Ascension, the feast we now
solemnize, (...), things above, among which, Christ is the chief; who having
conversed with his Disciples, by the space of forty days, as on this day was
taken up on high, and exalted with great glory into his kingdom in heaven.

In the words, I purpose to speak of three things: 1. That glorious work
performed by our Savior his resurrection; this the Text neceslarily implies,
The Elect are risen with Christ, therefore Christ is risen: 2. The virtue of
his resurrection in his members, they are risen with him: 3. The effect or
fruit of their rising, they seek the things that are above; for this
conditional conjunction (if) makes this seeking a note of rising; if you be
risen you will seek things above; if you seek not things above, it is a
plain argument that you are not risen.

And first of Christ's Resurrection: of which while we speak, it is necessary
that we cast back our eyes a little to that which was done but as two days
before, namely, his burial and intombing in the earth: Quis enim ascendit?
idem qui descendit, faith the Apostle, Ephesians 4. 9. Resurrection presupposes
falling; and it is Tertullians Lib. de resur. car.
note, Cum audio Resurrectionem homini imminere, quaeram necesse est quid eius
cadere sorti^um sit: None can know that Christ has rose to life, but he that
knows he once fell by death. See then, after he had breathed forth his so
blessed soul, and committed it into the hands of his father, how careful just
Joseph was to interre his body, wrapping it decently in linen clothes with
sweet odours, as the Jews used to bury; thinking, good soul, that as he now
was dead, so he was to go in statum mortuorum, and that the same condition
should befall him as did other men: See now the amazed hearts of all his
Disciples cast down; and doubting what was become of the hope of Israel; they
looked indeed that he should have been a Savior, but now because he would not,
they thought he could not save himself: they looked that he should have
restored the kingdom to Israel, but behold they now they wot well all hope of
a kingdom to be clean gone from him, having lost both kingdom and life, and
being conquered of the all-devouring grave: Which of them all had not now his
heart resolved into tears? and his eyes full fountains to send them forth?
Which of them now hanged not down his head for shame, and thought himself
mocked in following him? But stay a while, O ye afflicted souls, expect but
the dawning of the third day, and your eyes shall well perceive that he, whom
you thought to have been among the dead, is among the living; your selves
shall witness, that he was not holden long of the sorrows of death, but has
loosed them, breaking, like a victorious Conqueror, the gates of brasle and
smiting the bars of Iron a sunder: untying the bands of darkness and of
death, and carrying them away with him, as Sampson, his type, did the gates and
bars of the City Azzah, wherein he was enclosed: the first day of the week is
come, et ecce non est hic, look for him no longer among the graves, for he is
risen.

He is risen? the Jews count this a fable; for so it is noysed among them to
this day, That all his rising was but his Apostles theft, their stealing away
his body while the Watchmen slept; and the Gentiles think it a mere
imposture: Habak^k so foretold, Hab. 1. 5. and the event shows how truly,
Acts 1. 3. 41. that God wrought a work in these latter days, a work which
men would not believe, no, (...), let them be told it never so plainly. But let
Jew and Gentile be as incredulous as they will, the Scriptures testify, and we
must believe that Christ is risen: What though all the world beside make this
sign of Christ's Divinity, his Resurrection, as a thing worthy to be spoken
against, yet amplectatur et gandeat Christianus, the Christian must embrace it
with joy, and joyfully acknowledge that Christ is risen. But not to stand upon
this point, which I would have but an Introduction to that which follows,
observe in it only three things briefly: Suscitatum, suscitans, suscitati
statum; the thing raised, the virtue raising it, the estate of it being risen.

1. The thing raised was his body, which alone catched the fall, and was laid
low in the dust; yet do we refer this resurrection to the whole person when
we say, Christ is risen; because the soul was returned tothe body, whose
mansion, hard entreaties e're-while made itleave; and the Deity, (though in
abstracto, in it self incapable of either falling or rising, yet in concreto,
in his person, because of that unspeakable union with the manhood and
communication of properties) having rising truly attributed unto it. Christ
then rose, but secundum humanam naturam, in his Humanity, and his Humanity
properly, (...), in the body; which being to stand up from the dead, was met by
that glorious soul which for a time had departed from it. Christ, he was not
(as once his Disciples swallowed up with fear mistook him, and other since
blasphemously have said in earnest) (...), a spirit, a shadow, a man of Air;
but he had a real, substantial, humane body like unto ours; which as he
walked with all his life time, and carried up with him to the Cross at his
death, and left it after death to be buried by his loving Disciples, so brought
he the same again from the depth of the grave, not changed in kind, but the
very same; behold me, for it is I, even I myself, Luke 24. 39. Christ
demonstrated his body to be the same by certain degrees, one proof being
more strong than another: 1. In that it had veram corporis effigiem, a bodies
shape and proportion, therefore he bid death his Apostles behold and see him;
but so, spectra, spirits, as they call them, appear in humane form. 2. In
that it was solidum, a fast solid body, not thin and subtle, therefore he
bids his Disciples handle him; but this, though it prove a body, yet not the
same. 3. Therefore, to take away al doubt, and to show indeed it was the same,
he calls for Thomas, who now might see his hands, and touch his side; his
hands bored with the nails, his side pierced with the Soldiers Spear; and
then (as faithless as he was before) he became faithful with the assurance of
faith, and cried, My Lord, and my God. Here then we have to consider of these
three things: 1. The verity of Christ's humane nature, that the same body which
he brought from the womb of the Virgin at his first being upon the earth, the
same he brought again from the womb of the earth, when he opened it the
second time, to tread upon it; a maine pillar of our comfort, that Christ took
our flesh; for, (...), if he took not our flesh, we are not saved by him. 2.
Here is the truth of his Resurrection, the eleven incredulous Apostles, the two
Travelers to Emaus, Mary Magdalen, five hundred brethren at once, a thick
cloud of witnesses; all these saw, all these testify (and we know their
testimony is true) that the same body which was hanged upon the tree, the same
did God raise up the third day, having loosed the sorrows of death. 3. Here
we see with what bodies we shall arise at the day of Judgment, with these we
have about us, as Christ rose with his: So Job speaks, Job 19. 26. Though
after my skin worms destroy my body, yet shall J see God in my flesh; whom I
my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me. And this
is the thing raised.

But what great matter, will the Atheist say, is this, that Christ rose again?
Have not others risen, which have been longer dead than he? It is true, they
have; but mark the virtue Raising, and you shall find novum super terram, a
thing never heard of upon earth before; they were raised, Christ raised
himself. Lazarus must have the loud call of Christ, Joh. 11. 43. or else had
he slept his long sleep: Elizeus with the touch of his bones set a man upon
his feet, who was cast dead into his Sepulcher, 2 King. 13. 21. yet long and
long may Elizeus lie in the grave himself, waiting to be raised by another,
because he cannot raise himself. Hence came Saint Bernards distinction,
Aliorum resurrectiones, vel suscitationes potius; they had external force
raising them, Christ alone internal; as he says of himself, I have power to
lay down my life, and I have power to take it again, Joh. 16. 18. But what
then meant Peter to say, God raised up Jesus, Acts 2. 32. and Paul, Christ was
raised from death by the glory of the Father, Rom 6. 3. The answer is plain,
that Christ may be considered two ways: 1. Ratione unitae Deitatis, as he was
God as well as man; and so we may say, his body resumed the soul which before
it lost; and the soul came again to the body which before it left; the
Divinity of Christ (which never left the Humanity, but was united unto it,
(...),) working this wonderful conjunction. 2. Ratione natura create, he may
be considered in his passible humane nature which was raised; and this had not
that great power in it self, but was raised by the Godhead both of the Father
and himself; for opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa; in these outward
actions, the persons of the Trinity concur jointly, so that when God the
Father raises, the Son rayseth also; and therefore might truly say of the
Temple of his body, In three days I will raise it up again, Ioh. 2. 19. and
herein did Christ plainly show himself to be God, (...), mightily, says the
Apostle, Romans 1. 4. for, super as evadere ad auras hic labor, hoe opus est, It
passes the bounds of all humane strength to unwind it self out of the snares
of death. Let then the accursed Arrian call into question the Godhead of our
Savior; let him imagine this rising to proceed from the assistance of the
Deity present with him, not from the verity thereof in him; but let us,
following the rule and light of Scripture, acknowledge the bright beams of his
Divinity, amidst the most dusky clouds of his Humanity; confessing him to be
God, one with the Father, and co-equall: as upon other grounds, so among the
rest upon this, That once he was dead, but is now alive; once he was buried,
but the third day risen. This is the second thing, the power whereby Christ was
raised.

The third is his state being risen, and this was a state of immortality; he
had privilege from future death; he dyed indeed, but it was but once; Being
raised from the dead, he dies no more; death has no more power over him, Rom
6. 9 Others being raised, must pass the second time the streights of death,
the anxiety whereof being once acquainted with, it must surely be great horror
to think that once again they must go through them; but Christ having once
made spoil of that All-ruling Tyrant, has so over-mastered him, that he durst
never since set upon him. Therefore is it the Motto of the Son of man, I am
alive, and I live for evermore, Rev. 1. 18. Others rising was in this
imperfect, that being actually freed from death, and ransomed from his
captivity, yet are they subject every hour to become his thralls, and to be
catched in his ginnes: but Christ's rising was perfect, in that he was freed,
non a morte solum, sed a necessitate et possibilitate moriendi; not alone from
the actuality of death (from which many others) but from the power of ever
being again a prisoner to him. And thus it is a comfort to the afflicated
soul rent asunder, and torn grievously with the pangs and girds of sin, a
comfort, I say, it is to know that his Redeemer lives that he wants not a
friend in the Court of heaven to behold the face of the great God of glory, and
earnestly to solicit him suit daily before him. It is the Apostles conclusion,
Heb. 7. 2^ He is able perfectly to save them that come to God through him
seeing that he ever lives to make intercession for them Many men we see do
floarish and lift up their horns on high while they have their Patrons in great
men's houses, who may be ready at every turn to see means of their preferment
marry, this a little cutteth their comb, that they have not ^ lease of their
patrons life; a thousand ways there are o^ bringing him to his end, and then
their horns may shrink as far as they spread before; but we who rely upon
Christ risen from the dead for our salvation, are quit of this fear; so that
we cast our hope, the Anchor of our soul, both firm and steadfast, because
Jesus is entered into heaven, Sacerdes in aeternum, never again to see death,
an High Priest for ever: Thus has Christ led captivity captive, and quit
himself of death, not so much for himself, though herein he showed the
greatness of his power, as for us whose chiefest good was to be procured
thereby, as Justification, Resurre^it propter iustificationem nostram, Rom 4 3.
he by rising ratified the payment formerly made for our sins; and
Sanctification, the thing which in the second place this Text gives us to
consider; Consurrexist is cum ille, You are risen with him.

A threefold Resurrection we read of in Scripture, which does depend upon
Christ's rising: The one, of those holy Saints of Jury, which came out of the
graves after his Resurrection, and went into Jerusalem, Matthew. 27. 53. and thus
it was peculiar to those few men: the second, of all the Saints in the world
rising out of the death of sin to the life of righteousness; and this is
especial to that kind of men which are regenerate: The third (if not general
of all, both Saints and wicked, which some affirm^ out of those words, Christu^
primitiae dormientium, Cor. 1^ 20. Christ as man, is the fir^^ fruits of the
lump of them that sleep, yet) shall not be accomplished in the Saints till
the en^ of the world, the day of judgment. So that when we hear^ that we are
risen with Christ we must not be like Hymenae^ and Philetus, to dream tha^
there is no more resurrection to come, but that all is past already, 2 Timothy 2.
17. but we must learn to distinguish between the first and second
resurrection; the one to come at the end of all things, the other to be every
day by us practiced; for blessed is he that has his part in the first
Resurrection, Rev. 20. 6. The one is a morte simpliciter, ad vitam sim liciter,
from death to life; the other, a morte quadam, ad vitam quandam, as Austine
speaks; from the death of infidelity, to he life of faith. from the death of
error, to the life of truth: from the death of iniquity, to ^he life of
righteousness; so that this is a metaphorical kind of rising from the dead;
and of this latter it is, that the Apostle here speaks of, you are risen with
Christ.

Of which rising of ours, we may speak two ways; either in causa, as it is
referred to Christ, the Author of it: or in se, as it may be considered in it
self with the parts and members thereof; the first included in these words,
with Christ; the second in the other words, you are risen.

For the first, Christ is the cause of our rising, two ways; exemplariter, and
efficienter both by way of pattern and example; as we have our rising from
sin mystically figured in his rising from the grave; as also by way of power
and communication, as by his rising we receive grace, and strength to rise: In
the one, he is to u^^ as the Copy to the child that writes, which gives him
n^ ability to write, but only shows him in what sort he should frame and
make his letters: In the other, he is like the expert Scrivener who guides the
child's hand, and makes him write according to the Copy. Christ his rising
propounds unto us, both (...), that we must rise, and (...), how we should
rise; but this is like the Law, a yoke that we could not bear: therefore also
he gives us virtue which makes us rise, and helps us up again if we once
be down.

1. Christ is the cause of our rising by way of example, in his Resurrection
showing us two things for our imitation: 1. what must be the end and scope of
our whole conversation; namely, that we may attain the glory of the life to
come: and of this, Gregory speaks in his Morals; There are, says he, two
ways of all men in the body; one before death, the other after the
resurrection; in the former all men walked, wholly ignorant of the latter, till
Christ came in the flesh, and by entering one himself, pointed unto us the
other: by dying, he led the life we enjoy; by rising again, opened the way
which we are to seek; teaching us by his example, that this life is not to be
loved for it self, but to be tolerated for a better. 2. By what means we
must attain this end; that is by holiness of life, and pious carriage; and
this pattern Saint Augustine tells us of, Resurrectione Domini configuratur
vita quae hic geritur, Christ's rising fashions the whole course of the life we
live here; and therefore said the Apostle, we are ingrafted into the similitude
of Christ's resurrection that like as he was raised from death by the glory of
the Father, so we also should walk^ in newness of life, Romans 6. 4. Thus is
Christ as a Beacon se^ upon the top of an hill, his actions are our
instructions, he having given us an ensample that we should follow his steps:
Now his actions they were of two sorts: some morales, which respected the
fulfilling of the Law, such as were his humanity, meekness, innocence,
obedience to parents, magistrates, and the like: Others mediatoriae, such as
respected his office of Mediatorship, as yielding himself to death, rising
again from the dead; in both these is he a pattern unto us, though not after
the same manner: In the former we are to imitate him in the same kind, doing
what he did, though we cannot do it in the same degree; therefore he the
great Master, calls to all his Scholars to learn of him, that he is humble
and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. And Saint Peter wills us, when we are reviled, not
to revile again; when we suffer, not to threaten, because Christ himself also
did so, 1 Pet. 2. 23. In the latter we are to imitate him by similitude;
translating that unto our spiritual life, which he did as Mediator; thus his
dying teaches us not to die the death of the body, but of sin; to crucify
the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof: and his rising again
teaches us, not to come out of the graves when we are buried (alas, it passes
the strength of all humanity) but to arise from sin, the death of the soul.
Behold then, apish man, who art ready to follow every fashion, a pattern
worthy the looking upon, an example worthy the following, even thy Savior
rising! Oh be thou a Saint, and rise with him! Dye he might, but could not be
overcome of death, and therefore loosed the sorrows of it: So, howsoever thou
have sinned, yet be not overruled by sin, suffer it not to reign in thy
mortal body. Voluntarily went he once into the dark bowels of the earth, and
there remained three days; necessarily through the corruption of thy nature,
and voluntarily also through the depravation of thy will, have thou fallen into
the depths of sin, and there have laid three days; the day of thy
conception, for thou were shapen in wickedness: the day of thy birth, for thou
were polluted in thine own blood: the day of thy life hitherto, for thou have
been a stranger from the womb, from the womb have thou erred: as therefore
thy death of sin has been like unto Christ's being in the grave, so let thy
rising from sin be comformed to the similitude of his Resurrection: now the
third day break forth into the light, throw away thy grave-clothes, the works
of darkness, and put on the apparel of a man, the armor of light. It was
that, they say, which made Alexanders soldiers so willing to attempt desperate
matters, that what he would have them do, himself first began; and
therefore was wont to say, Eamus, faciamus; what you see me do, do you the
same likewise. We have here the same encouragement which they had, Christ our
head is risen before us to lead the way, and show us how we should rise; Et
nos ideo surgamus de tumulo terrae, says Saint Ambrose; having so good a
President for our direction, let us also rise.

2. Christ is the cause of our rising, by way of efficacy; for by virtue of his
Resurrection has he derived grace and strength to us all. Mr. Calvin's note is
good upon this place, That we are not here invited only by the example of
Christ risen, to follow newness of life, sed eius fieri virtute docemur ut
regeneremur in iustitiam; this Text teaches us that our regeneration is from
the virtue of his Resurrection: To small purpose had it been for Christ to
have gone before us in that which we could not do, unless he had enabled us
also that we might do it. To teach a cripple how to go, or a dumb man how to
speak, is a fruitless thing; but to strengthen the feet and ankle-bones of
the one, to untye the strings of the others tongue, this is the way to make
them go and speak: So fares it with us all (my beloved) we were like that
man possessed with Devils, who abode among the graves; sin had so wounded us,
that we were cut off from the land of the living, being dead in trespasses,
Ephe. 2. 1. what could it then have benefited us, if one whose life was within
him should walk and stir? that Christ who was quickened by the Spirit, could
come out of the grave? surely nothing, unless he that raised up Christ from
the dead, had also quickened our benumbed souls then and not otherwise could
we arise: it was therefore requisite that to his example set before us, Christ
should add the communication of virtue to us, that we might rise with him. And
this is that which the Apostle Paul speaks, Ephesians 2. 5. (...), God has
quickened us together with Christ; giving him the Spirit of life, whereby he was
raised from the dead, and withal, to us the life of the Spirit, that we might
rise from sin: And this is that medicinalis convenientia of Saint Austins,
whereby the Example of Christ's rising is made effectual; namely, the applying
of medicines to out infirmities, purging out all humors whereby we might be
stayed in our corruptions; and strengthening the vital faculties for the
exercise of spiritual things; for as Christ dyed to take away from sin the
guilt, the punishment, and dominion which it got over man, so that man might be
said to be dead to sin, because he no longer lived therein; so did he rise
again to furnish man with all gifts and graces necessary for his souls
salvation: and every faithful man is partaker, as of Mortification by virtue
of Christ's death, so of Vivification by virtue of his Resurrection. For fuller
perceiving whereof, we must know, that Christ is as the head, his Saints the
members; Christ the root, his Saints the branches; as therefore the motion of
the members, and governing them in their actions proceeds from the head,
where is the motive faculty in greatest vigor; so do the members of Christ
his mystical body derive from him the influence of grace, whereby they are
enabled to perform their functions, de plenitudine eius, Ioh. 1. 16. from him
we draw, of him we receive. Now Christ is the head of his Church as Mediator,
and by his works of Mediation most of all diffuseth life and motion, and that
sweetly in an analogy to the work; so his death gives a motion to corruption,
the corrupting of the old man; and his Resurrection, a motion to quickening,
the quickening of the new man; these two, like maine channels, convey whole
streams of graces from him into the Church: neither does the disproportion of
soul and body hinder this conveyance at all, Christ rising in his body only,
the soul of man being the proper subject of grace; for, it is not the virtue
of the body raised that makes this diffusion, but the Divine virtue, raising
the body, scatters abroad his graces per actionem, (...), by this wonderful
act of God-man his resurrection: and thus as Augustine Ser. 181. de temp.
observes, Resurrectio simplex format resurrectionem duplicem, Christ's rising
in his body causes in his Saints a double resurrection, the one of their
bodies at the last day, because his flesh is of the same mass with theirs; the
other of their souls continually, because he is the head of the whole man.
Behold then the virtue of Christ's resurrection, as Saint Paul calls it, Phil.
3. 10. the raising virtue; giving to him that was down through infidelity,
says to believe and stand up aright: to him that was fettered in malice, and
could not stir, charity to walk in good works; because Christ lives,
therefore shall his live also: because he is risen, they shall rise together
with him.

And are they risen together with him? Then is here a lesson of humility for
every Christian: If thou find life in thy self, that thou art not benumbed,
nor the spirit of drowsinesse is upon thee, but that as a living member of
Christ's body thou art laden with fruit, and do those works which become one
that is alive, see here the root upon which thou growest, the fountain from
whence all this goodness of thine proceeds, even Christ; by virtue of whose
resurrection from the grave, thou which before were dead, art now alive; thou
which before had sinned mortally, art now raised eternally: Sacrifice not
therefore with proud Pelagius to thine own net, nor burn incense to thine
own yarne, as if by them thy portion were fat, and thy meat plenteous; think
not these good works of thine to come from thine own strength, thine own
free will rightly used by thee, but go a little higher than thy self, and
know thy will to be but a lower sphere, quae non nisi mota movet, which
cannot of it self do anything, but in him, who by his resurrection has
quickened and raised thee up into the estate of grace. Do thou believe that
thou art risen with Christ? Thou must so believe, if thou beleevest the
Scriptures: I demand then, Who separated thee? And what have thou, that thou
have not received? And if thou have received it, why boastest thou as if thou
had not received it? 1. Cor. 4. 7. Boast not then thy self, either against
thy fellowbranches, for that thou art better than they; or against the root, as
if thou grewest of thy self, but know that the root bears thee, Romans 11. 18.
and therefore confess, both in humility and verity, thy self to be an
unprofitable servant; and say with David, Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me,
Psalm. 115. 1. not unto me for my rising, not unto me for the fruits of my
rising, but to thy Name be the praise. And thus much of our rising in causa,
as it proceeds from Christ's Resurrection, which was the first thing: The
second is our rising in it self, what it is; for upon Christ his rising, we
are also risen, and what then is our rising?

Surely our rising has great similitude and likeness with Christ's rising: Now
in Christ's rising we may especially observe three things: 1. Corporis expulvere
resuscitationem, the bringing up of his body from the dust of death. 2. Vnionem
animae corpori resuscitato, the uniting of the soul with the body risen. 3.
Vnitorum inseparabilem colligationem, the impossibility of ever having his
soul and body, thus united, to be served: So must there be in our spiritual
resurrection, this rising with Christ, these three things: 1. The raising of
the soul from sin, which is the very dust and death thereof. 2. The uniting
of it to God, who is anima animae, the very life and soul of the soul, in
whom it lives, moves, and has it being, not in nature only, but also in
grace. 3. The knitting of these two, God and the soul together in the perfect
bands of love, which may not be upon every little jarre broken, but remain
inviolably for ever firm and sure. 1. We must rise out of the grave of sin;
sin, it is as death: Saint Gregory elegantly shows us the Greg in Psalm. 142.
estate of the dead sinner, in sepulchro conscientia tumulatum, etc. he is
buried in the sepulcher of his conscience, is bound with the napkins of
concupiscence, is cast out from the sight of God, is covered with hardness of
heart, is shut in with the stone of iniquity, a miserable death! As then God
said to Elias in the Cave, What do thou here Elias? Come out and stand in the
Munt before the Lord, 1. King. 19. 9. So let me sound this speech in the ear
of the sinner covered over with the moulds of sin, What make thou there,
thou sinner? Come out of this Sepulcher of sin, if thou will appear before
the Lord in the land of the living. To this the Scripture calls, when it
bids us awake, and stand up from the dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. To mortify our
members which are upon the earth, Col. 3. 5. To crucify the old man, that the
body of sin in us may be destroyed, Romans 6. 6. This is done by repentance,
sorrow for sin, breaking off sin, leaving sin, which is the first degree of
our rising, the first step to life. 2. Having risen from sin, we must also
unite our selves unto God, for he is our life, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Therefore must we
cleave to him if we mean to live; else are we as a body without a soul, a
filthy carcass. It was to no purpose that the dry bones came together bone to
his bone, that the sinews and flesh grew upon them, that they were covered
with skin, unless (...) winds had breathed upon them also, and they had
lived; for what difference between a dry bone, and a senseless body? And to
as small end are we roused from the grave of sin, unless there be a spirit
within that quickens; for what excellency has a carcass unburied, above
that which is buried? a man not righteous, above him that is a sinner? Life
then is yet further required to our rising, which because we are members of a
body, is not to be had but in the body; get faith therefore, which ingrafteth
into the mystical body of Christ; being ingrafted, we shall be partakers of
the Spirit, which diffusing it self through every member, knitteth us to God,
to whom to be joined is life. Of this speaks our Savior, Ioh. ^5. 3. Abide
in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the
Vine, no more can you, except ye abide in me. 3. Being united unto God, and
living this new life of raised persons, we must continue in this life, even as
Christ having risen from death, now dies no more; this is the true conformity
to his resurrection, whereas those that live to dye again, were rather risen
in show than truth; moved artificially by some Engine to make them stir, than
naturally by a vital power of their own: and of this continuance excellently
sings the Prophet, Psalm. 92. 12. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm
tree, and spread abroad like a Cedar in Lebanon: such as be planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God; they
shall still bring forth fruit in their age, and shall be fat and well liking.

To conclude then this point, Let all of us who profess our selves Christians,
and triumph in our Saviors resurrection, let all of us, I say, rise with him;
as well he that has been dead but an hour or two, he that has fallen
lately, as he that like Lazarus has been in the grave four days, and
through his continuance in sin begins to stink in the nostrils of the
Lord. Let not the young man lie still, and think another day will come, and
then it will be time enough for him to rise; but as Christ rose early in the
morning, so let him rise in the prime and morning of his youth; if he find the
grave now open, and his soul to be in him, let him take heed lest the grave
shut her mouth again upon him, lest his soul being taken again out of that
drowsy mansion, he have no more such opportunity to rise: Again, let not the
old man lie still and not arise, because he fears he has laid too long,
and there is no hope for him to recover life for sweet and comfortable is that
saying of Saint Austine, V^ radius oculi nostri, etc. As our eye does not
sooner see things that are near it, and the^ the things that are further off,
but with a like swiftness does behold them both: so the virtue of Christ's
rising comes not first to them who are new dead in sin, and scarcely to
those that are of long continuance in it, sed ei tam facile est, ut quaeque
recentia, diuturno tempori dilapsa cadavera suscitare; it can as easily raise
those which have longest, as those which have had smallest time therein. Let us
then all, both old and young, rouse up our selves, for the Master is up, and
shall it not shame the servants to be behind? Christ is risen, and draws us
also with the cords of love, oh let us run after him in the sweet savor of
his ointments, and ascend after him in our hearts to heaven; whither he has
already ascended, which is the third thing propounded in the Text, the fruit of
our rising with Christ, Seek the things that are above.

Where two things offer themselves to be considered; the Object, things above;
the Act, seek; which Act is proportioned to the Object and is diverse,
according to the diversity of it. Now things above may be taken two ways 1.
For Christ the truth, opposed to Jewish ceremonies; and this interpretation is
made good by comparing this verse with the latter part of the second chapter,
where the Apostle reasons in this manner, They which wrongly conceive o^
Christ, live still to the Ordinances of the world, and burden themselves with
traditions, touch not, taste not, handle not; but such as believing a right in
his resurrection, are freed from these beggarly rudiments, look after things
o^ ^n higher nature, Christ himself, who is the body and substance of all
those shadows, and is now to be apprehended ^n himself, without the
inter^osition of those former observances, and then seeking is taken for right
understanding and conceiving of the state of Religion; as if the Apostle had
said, You that are Christians, must know that the Ceremonial Law is abolished,
which good in distinction of meats, ^ayes, apparel; things, though at first
appointed by God, yet ^ut for a season, and therefore ^ave perished in their
use, and ^ow are become commandments and doctrines of men: You must know, that
the true worshippers must worship the father in spirit and in truth, ^omming to
him by Christ, who above in heaven at his right hand; believing in his death
and resurrection, letting go the sacrifices of the Law, a^ Mosaicall
injunctions, which though they had a show of wisdom in them, yet were ordained
to endure but till the tru^ came. We see how the Apostle opposes Christ to the
earthly ceremonies, and diss^^deth Christians, who were (...) lay hold on him,
from any further dealing with them, and that for two reasons: 1. Because he was
come whom the prefigured, and therefore the^ were to cease in him. 2. F^^ that
he was now again ascended into heaven, and therefore looked for the heart and
the affections, not bodily observances: Now these earthly ceremonies are not
such only were legal, belonging to Moses Law, but even those which draw the
heart from heaven unto the earth, placing Religion in outward shows and wi^^
worship, such as the Christian within the Papacy has been miserably pestered
with. Saint Austine in his time complained Epist. 119. c. 19.
of these servile burdens, which though they could not be proved to be
directly against the faith, yet made the Church of the Christians in worse case
than the Church of the Jews, the one being in bondage to a ^egall yoke, the
other to men's presumptions, such as are the ^et number of Paternosters, Creeds,
and Ave-maries to be ^aily said over; the adoring of Christ, in the Rood,
Windows, etc. their Pilgrimages, Whip^ing themselves, and a world more such as
these, which make indeed a great show of Devotion in the eyes of men, and ^old
the beguiled senses in admiration, yet are not of any value but for the
satisfying of the flesh, man's carnal desires; who for the sin of his soul,
would give any thing rather than his soul; or do any thing rather than the
works of the soul. Well are we who have shaked off this bondage, and are free
to come to Christ, as himself has appointed, with hearty repentance, earnest
faith, willing affections, so to seek the things that are above.

2. By things above may be meant heavenly things, the happiness which
abounds in heaven, and which we are by God ordained unto; and then seeking
signifies two things: 1. A desire of this happiness: 2. The using of the
means to attain this happiness. 1. They which are risen, desire things
above; not with a lazy wish, oh that some would give me to drink of the
waters of life! but with ardor and fervency, such as was in David, Psalm. 42. 1.
Like as the Heart pants after the water brooks, so longs my soul after
thee O God: my soul is athirst for God, yea even for the living God: oh when
shall I come and appear in the presence of God? 2. They use the means of
attaining it; no way so straight that they will not walk in, if it lead to
heaven; no labor so hard which they will not endure, if it end in happiness;
fire, water, swords, stones, they will pass through them all to this wealthy
place: Thus do the Saints, Ascensiones disponere in cord, think of nothing
but ascending upward: they dig not down to hell, to fetch from thence wicked
plots and devices; they spend not themselves upon the earth to get riches,
honors, and preferments, but sursum corda, all their delight is above these
transitory things, their souls are heaven-walking spirits, ravished with the
joy they know to be there, and therefore attend ever to partake of it. Christ,
who is their head, ascending, has invited them that are his members, as Saint
Austine speaks, to a region of Angels, to the friendship of the Father and
the holy Ghost, to an everlasting supper, to communion with him, to himself;
this makes them to confess with the Patriarchs, Heb. 11. 13. that they are
strangers and pilgrims upon the earth, looking still toward heaven, as if they
sought a Country; hic generatio quaerentium quae sunt supra: thus do they,
who seek the things which are at ove; and let every man ask himself, Are we
such? What means then the high-climbing ambition of haughty spirits to places
of promotion and dignity? What means the hoording up of treasures by the
covetous; the swimming in lascivious pleasures by the voluptutuous? Do we not
hereby testify that we are worldly; and if worldly, how heavenly? Assuredly,
our love of earth cannot stand with the love of heaven; our seeking of things
below, with seeking things above. If then we would have comfort in our own
souls, that we are risen with Christ, let us aseend with him, from licking the
base dust with the cursed creatures, to feed of celestial Manna; that though
our bodies tread upon the earth yet our conversation maybe in heaven, from
whence we look for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ to come; who at his
coming, as he has raised our souls already to the life of grace, will raise
our bodies to the life of glory, and make them like his own most glorious body.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOURTH SERMON, ON HOS. 1. 4.
HOSEA 1. 4. I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu.
MAn sins, and vengeance sleeps; sentence against an evil work is not
speedily executed: So the Preacher, Eccles. 8. 11. When thou did these
things, I kept silence. So God himself, Psalm. 50 21. The sleeping of vengeance
causes the overflow of sin; because sentence is not executed, the hearts of
men are set to do mischief; because God keeps silence, the sinner thinks
he is hail fellow with him. And the overflow of sin, causes the awaking of
vengeance: The sinner shall not prolong his days, though without control he
does evil an hundred times, the same Preacher tells us: I will reprove thee,
and set thy sins in order, the same God speaks it. So that in few words I have
pointed out to you four things: Man's sin: Gods connivence upon his sin:
Man's blodnesse upon his connivence: Gods punishment upon man's boldness.

Will you see all these verefied by an example? You need go no further than
Iehu, whom my Text names; look his history, 2 King. 9, 10, chap. and compare
it with these words, you shall find them all plainly laid before you. 1. He
kills his Master, leboram, the King, chap. 9. verse. 24. there is his sin; how
far he sinned in this action, you shall hear afterward. 2. There neither
comes thunderbolt from heaven to strike him, neither does the earth open her
mouth to devour him, nor any other plague seize upon him for it; there is Gods
connivence. 3. Hereupon he proceeds to dash lezabel, the Queen, against the
walls, to behead the kings children, to cut off from Ahab all that remained,
chap 10. there is his boldness. Hitherto all sorts well with him, the world
goes on his side still: but you look for a fourth part, what God prepared for
him all this while; my Text will tell you that, which is nothing else, but the
denouncing of vengeance against Iehu's house for this bloody cruelty. Hear the
words, and you shall understand his punishment; I will avenge the blood of
Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. You have the scope and the sum.

The parts are three: Paena, Crimen, Reus: A punishment denounced, I will
avenge: A fault to be punished, The blood of Iezreel: A part to sustain the
punishment, The house of Iehu Each part subdivideth it self into two branches.
In the punishment you have two things: 1. The foreshewing of an evil to come:
The tense affoordeth this consideration (...) in the future signification, I
will avenge. 2. The nature of the evil foreshowne, this the Verb tells us,
it is avenging. In the crime you have likewise two things: 1. The fault in
general to be punished, that is, murder; set down here under the name of
blood. 2. The restriction of this fault in respect of the persons murdered, in
the word Iezreel, the blood of Iezreel. Finally, in the party sustaining, you
have two things; the root and the branches, the fountain and the rivers, Iehu
and his posterity. the house of Iehu. So that these words do give us to
consider of fix things: 1. Gods prediction of evil to come: 2. Gods punishing
of evil men: 3. His punishing of murder: 4. His punishing the murder done in
Iezreel: 5. His avenging it upon Iehu: 6. His avenging it upon his house. Of
these briefly.

I will avenge,) this is the war: God commanded it to the Israelites, Deuteronomy
20. 10. and the law of nature, as it seems, dispersed it to all Nations: The
manner thereof among the Romans is described by Gellius; Gell. l. 16. c. 4.
The Herald threw his weapon upon the enemies ground, with this speech, Ego
populu que Romanus hominibus Hermundulis bellum dico facioque. In like manner,
God being justly offended with the sins of men, opens not by and by the
treasures of his wrath, but sends out his Ambassadors to see if satisfaction
may be made, and so the course of his revenge stayed. This the very Gentiles
observed in their false gods, (...) said Herodotus; Musa^. l. 6.
The gods take pleasure in premenitions: And we find it every where verefied of
the Lord of Hosts, the God of Battles, that he smites not before he has given
warning; sends not the executioners of his Justice, till he has fore-sent the
messengers of his mercy: Thus had the old world before the flood, Noah to teach
them, (...), 2 Pet. 2. 5. the Trumpet of Gods righteousness, and the Arc in
building by the space of 120 years, to be a visible sign unto them of their
succeeding misery: Thus Moses and Aaron foretold Pharaoh of those plagues
Joseph. de hello Iud. l. 6. c. 3.
which lighted upon him and his people: Thus the blazing Star, the battles
seen in the Air, the voice heard in the Temple, the constant cry of Jesus the
son of Anani in the streets, were to the Jews forerunners of their ensuing
destruction. Not to heap up examples; the sins of Israel were now grown
ripe, and the posterity of Iehu fitted for the sword, which made God stir up
the spirit of the Prophet Hosea, to let them understand that their end drew
nigh, and that the kingdom should cease from the house of Israel; for by then
a year and an half were expired, the race of Iehu Zanch. in hu^^ lo^^m
was expired likewise; Shallum the usurper having slain Zachariah, the fourth
from Iehu, and so that line ceased.

Now the end of these predictions are twofold: 1. To move the warned to labor
reconciliation with God. 2. To assure them of vengeance if they be not
reconciled.

For the first: It is directly Amos, chap. 4. 12. Thus will I do unto thee, O
Israel; and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel The comminations of God in Scripture, do not shut up the way to
repentance but rather open it, inviting the sinner to send up his humility, his
penitence, his prayers, to stand in the gappe, and to keep off the wrath of
God, that it come not forth to consume him. If I speak, says God, against a
Nation to pluck it up and destroy it, if that Nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil way, I will repent of the evil which I
thought to do unto them, Ier. 18. 7. A manifest example whereof we have in that
threatening denounced against Ninivie; a threatening, than which, in Scripture,
none more absolute, none more peremptory, yet forty days and Ninivie shall be
destroyed; yet was this sentence reversed by God upon the Ninivits conversion,
though hereby men might conceive of him that he was as a man to repent; and of
Jonas his messenger, that he was a false prophet. And I doubt not but I may
safely say, If the house of Iehu had by the message of Hosea learned to walk
in the ways of God, this revenge here denounced might have been removed, or
at leastwise deferred till succeeding generations.

Let men, who find the curses due by the Law dogging them for their
transgressions, not hereupon grow desperate, as if there were no way of
evasion, but they must dye for it; Daniels counsel was otherwise to
Nebuchadnezzar, even after the decree of the Watchman, and the word of the
holy One, O King, break off thy sins by righteousness, if it may be a
lengthening of thy tranquillity, Dan 4. 27. Prolata est sententia ut non fiat,
says Chrysostom upon these words; God threatens Judgment, that he may not
execute it; tells men of evils to come, not only that they may know, but
especially that they may avoid them.

For the second; these predictions assure the impenitent of vengeance, they are
the earnest of that price which shall hereafter be paid them to the utmost
farthing: for shall God speak the word, and shall it not be done? has he said,
and shall he not make it good? assuredly his word shall stand, and his
threatening not return to him in vain, every jot and tittle thereof shall be
fulfilled in his season: He foretold of a flood to come upon the old world, the
world remained impenitent, the flood came and swept them all away: He foretold
plagues to light upon Egypt, Egypt remained impenitent, and the plagues with
multiplication laid hold upon them In a word, he foretold to Iehu's house the
departing of their glory, Jehu's house remained impenitent, and in a small while
their glory departed from them?

This point the Apostle Paul has laid down in plain terms, Romans 9. 6. It is
impossible the word of God should fall, and yet many stumble at this stone,
calling into question both the justice and truth of God, when as contrary to
the prophetical threats, impenitent sinners enjoy earthly good things, the Law
having denounced many temporal judgments against them, all which
notwithstanding, they live many times in great delight and prosperity, as if
they were the sons of blessing, and had nothing to do with cursing. To
clear therefore this point in a word or two, I affirm, that not to exccute
vengeance threatened against impenitent sinners, is neither against the Justice
nor the Truth of God.

1. Not against his Justice; for the rule whereby God squareth his Justice, is
not always retributio pro meritis, that he do to the sinner according to his
desert, but sometime condecentia bonitatis suae, that he do to the sinner what
becomes his own goodness, as Aquinas Prima q. 2. primo 3.
speaks: though evil men in themselves deserve most righteously all the
punishments denounced in the Law, yet the goodness of God requires that he
empty not the treasure of his wrath upon every occasion, but sometime spare
when he might strike; whether therefore he strikes, he is just; or whether he
holds his hands he is still just; Cum punis malos iustus es, quia illorum
meritis eonvenit, cum parcis iustus quiae bonitatituae condicit, said Anselmus
Ansel. ci^. Aq. loco pred. cto.
truly; In the former just, because man's sins deserve it; in the latter just,
because it is consonant to his own goodness.

2. Not against his Truth: If the sinner go unpunished in Zanch in 2. praecep.
p. 374.
one sort or other, even of temporal punishments, then say God is untrue; but
never think a thought against his truth, because the sinner is not punished in
this kind or that: for howsoever God has annexed these and these judgments to
the violation of his Precepts, to the intent that the wicked may know what is
their due guerdon, and what they may expect De not. Dei l. 4. 6. 5. q 2.
from him, yet is he I^dex liber, not Iuratus. as Zanchy says well: He is not
bound at all times to inflict them, or upon all sinners, but in his wise
dispensation so to order them, as may make most for the manifestation of his
own Justice, for the conviction of the wicked, for the good of his Saints, and
for the terror of all men. His special threatenings against particular, either
Nations or men, lay fast hold, and miss not; the burden of Jerusalem, of
Ahab, of Jehu, of infinite more we see have fallen heavy upon them: but his
general threatenings against general sinners, are then made good, not when
they al light upon every sinner, but when some of them light upon all; and so
it may be truly averred, God never said he would avenge, but he has avenged
to the full, and the transgressor has found it to his smart.

To conclude this point; we which are the Heralds of the Lord of Hosts, are
bound to denounce destruction against his enemies; not so, that we can surely
tell them as the Prophets did, If they offend in this kind, they shall be
punished in this sort, we have no such visions now adays, and we may be too
bold in speaking beyond our Commission; but this we may, yea and must say, that
even the temporal evils of this life are the portion of sinners, (as Zophar
has excellently described it through the whole twentieth Chapter of Job) and
they may justly fear to be overtaken by them; cursings in the City, cursings
in the field, cursings in their body, cursings in their seed, cursings in their
souls, cursings in their estate, all these wait for them; and were it not for
the curbing fence of Gods mercy, would suddenly, as the old worlds water, make
away with them. Repent therefore, this is the end of all, that you may be free
from the curse, sons of promise, not of threatening; to whom God may say, I will
do good; and not as he did here to Iehu, I will avenge. And so I proceed from
Gods woollen feet, to his iron hands; from his mercy in threatening, to his
severity in executing, which appears in the nature of the evil here
denounced, which is avenging.

Avenge.] The Original word 2. (...)
signifies to visit, and visiting is in Scripture taken two ways; there is
visitatio misericordiae, a visiting in pure mercy; our Savior speaks of
that, Luk 19. 44. Oh that thou had known the day of thy visitation! and
there is visitatio vindictae, a visiting in wrath and indignation, called
sometime the visitation of evil, Exodus 20. 4. sometime the visitation for
evil, Esaias 13. 11. Our Prophet Hosea, chap. 9. 7. speaking of (...) days of
visitation, pre^ently ^ddeth, (...), days of ^etribution; declaring this unto
us, that Gods visiting, it is his punishing, his repaying unto evil doers the
stipend of their ^mpieties; this visiting here of ^ehu's house is certainly of
the atter kind of visitation; the ^easing of Israe Is kingdom, the breaking of
his bow, were effects of it, and these, without doubt, were the works of Gods
displeasure. Tremellius therefore reads the word animadvertam, I will punish;
and our last English translation significantly, I will avenge: which word
sets forth God unto us as a Judge, proceeding to take vengeance upon such as
have broke his Law, and to punis^ them.

1. God as a Judge; for we are not to imagine that we have a God to deal
withal, who i^ all mercy, all meekness, al^ compassion; he has in hi^
Justice also, he has severity he has anger, not only in preparing against
that general day of slaughter at the end of time but even now working in this
present world. David's Ditty when he sung unto God, wa^ composed of Discords,
then was judgment as well as me^^ cy, Psalm. 101. 1. and it is the style of his
Royal Title proclaimed by himself, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord merciful and
gracious, who will not clear the guilty, but visit iniquity unto the third and
fourth generation.

2. This word Avenge, shows us, that from Gods Justice it comes to pass,
that wicked men are truly and properly punished in this life, as Iehu's house
here was; I say, properly, for among those three things which the Schoolmen
make Aq. quae. disp. de malo in com. q. 1, ar. 4.
of the essence of punishment, this is one, that it have respect unto, and
follow upon a fault: Dicitur enim proprie aliquis is puniri, quando patitur
malum pro aliquo quod commisit; He is truly punished who suffers some evil
for some fact: when therefore God for the sins of men sends temporal evils
upon them, then does he properly punish them: And this he does oftentimes;
for although it cannot be denied but that some of the evils which God
inflicteth upon men, are (...), gentle chastisements of a loving father, as
warningpieces to deter them from sin: and some (...), trials of their
faith, patience, their obedience; yet are there also (...), revenging
judgments, whereby God he weth down the tree for unfruitfulnesse, and casts
it, irrecoverably, into the fire; as we see in the sudden destruction of Corab,
Dathan, and Abiram; in the present death of Anania^ and Sapphira, manifest
examples, and beyond all gainsaying, of Gods revenging judgments upon
transgressors.

This punishing of sinners here with temporal punishments is necessary in a
three fold respect 1. It declares the Justice ^^ God: 2. It makes way for the
goodness of God: 3. It conserveth the order of the world; in all which
respects, supplicia, they are bona, and Deo digna, as Terdullian speaks,
befitting Lib. 2. cont. Mar. c. 11.
God, Zeph. 1. 12. Psalm. 58. 11, 12.

1. They declare his Justice, so says Saint Paul, 2 These. 1. 6. it is
righteous with God to crush those in pieces who torment you, (...), to pay them
their due hire: Had not God this power, or did he not execute it, the sons
of men would soon in their impudency make a skarecrow of him, and set as light
by his precepts, as a rebellious multitude does by the laws of their King,
when they think themselves sure enough for his punishing them. Tertullian
Ibid. c. 10.
expresses it well, when he says, Si Deus non Iudex, certe perversus ac
vanus disciplinae non vindicandae constitutor: It were a preposterous course,
and to no no purpose for God to make laws, if he were not a Judge to revenge
the breach of them. But it will be said, he deferreth this vengeance till the
day of Judgment? But alas, did he defer it till then, iniquity would so
abound, and the swelling waves of sin so prevail, that the societies of
mankind would be destroyed, and no room left for honesty upon the earth: The
Judge of the earth well aware of this, keeps his petty Sessions now, letting
the law pass upon some few, reserving the rest till the grand day of Assizes,
when all shall appear before his Tribunal.

2. Punishments make way for the goodness of God: yea, Te^t l. 1. cit. c. 13.
they do maintain it, says the Father; Ordo Dei Judicis protect or est
Catholicae, et summae illius bonitatis: they do protect it two ways; in it
self, and as it is communicable to man: 1. In it self, by stopping the
mouths of those filthy dogs who are ever barking against heaven; and were it
not that these plagues are as a gag unto them, would not cease blasphemously to
speak of God himself: if they have not their own mind, they would straight
begin to rail at God, but that they fear some fire from heaven, some gaping
from the earth, some stifling from the waters, or some such other mischief to
seize upon them for it; punishment is a good curb for such hell hounds, so
restraining them, as that they dare not violate that goodness which yet they
care not for. 2. As it is communicable to man; for wicked wretches labor what
they can to keep the good from either spiritual or temporal blessings; like
the Philistims, Genesis 26. 15. they stop the wells of water, and are as flaming
sword standing in the way of the tree of life, that none can pass by them; but
Judgments meet with these Caitiffs, and pluck them from their standings, that
so the rivers of Gods goodness may flow out freely, and those that have a mind
may drink their fill thereof.

3. Punishments conserve the order of the world by keeping every thing in his
due place: they are, it may be, things evil in themselves, and to those that
feel them, yet have they a twofold good, whereby they are a very beneficial:
1. In that they expel the evil of sin, which has put the world out of frame,
and marred all; malum Esa 26. 9
supplicii, malo delicti inimicum. 2. In that they guard and fence in a great
deal of good, which else would be scattered and brought to nothing; supplicia
sunt bonorum defensoria. Genesis 31. 29
In these three regards it is, that God, howsoever mercy pleases him, is yet
compelled to be severe, and to make those who will not know how loving he is,
to know how just he is; that although he be all good, secundum naturam, in his
nature, yet is he also a punisher, secundum causam, upon occasion of man's
rebellion. Take this in Cap. 10.
Tertullians words, who handles it heavenly, in his second book against
Marcion; Prior bonitas Dei, severitas posterior: illa ingenita, haec accidens:
illa propria, haec accommodata: illa edita, haec adhibitae.

But why go I about to speak so much for Gods punishments? I hope Marcion's
spirit lives in no man now, to think God cannot be both good, and a Judge;
and yet I know there are many, who think the mercy of God swalloweth up his
Justice: Hence springs that erroneous conceit, which, they say, once possessed
Origin, that after some time of punishment all men shall be saved. Hence that
opinion also, that all crosses in this life are to no sorts of men punishments,
but only (...), admonitions to reclaim them. Hence also that conceit of many,
that though they live wickedly, I, and evils befall them, yet they are in the
favor of God. But what has formerly been said, shows the contrary: To
leave them therefore, and to conclude this point, Gods revenging hand, which we
have heard to be agreeable to his goodness, and see here in the Text sore upon
Iehu's house, may let us see how odious sin is, which compels the
merciful God to be an avenger; he who is goodness it self, to prepare evil
judgments for evil offenses, and therefore to get out of the borders of
sin, if we will escape fearful vengeance: Say not thou, says Saint
Augustine, In Ps. 101.
Semper parcit Deus; ecce feci heri, et pepercit Deus; facio et hodie, et
parcit Deus; faciam et cras quia parcit Deus; attendis ad misericordia^, non
times Iudicium: We are all too forward to lay hold of Gods mercy; good it is
sometime to remember his Justice; not to say, I have sinned yesterday, and God
has spared me; I finne to day, and God spares me; therefore I will sin to
morrow, for he will spare me: no, the Wiseman says truly, Eccles. 5. 6.
Both mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation descends upon
sinners. God avengeth, and he avengeth none but the sinner; it is for murder
that he punishes Iehu in the Text, which is a species of sin, and the third
thing now to be considered.

The blood,] that is, the murder: Aq 1. 2: q 102. a. 3. 8.
speaks, Maxim necessarius ad vitam, ratione cuius anima dicitur esse in
sanguine, so necessary to life, that the soul is said to be in it; so that the
shedding of the blood, is the letting out of the soul, the murdering of a
man: This blood of man cruelly drawn out of his veins, God always detested;
and thereby declares that great difference between him, and the gods of the
heathen; they must have sacrificiorum immanitates, as Mat. Co. p. 65.
one calls them, (...), horrible sacrifices; no savor so sweet in their
nostrill, as that of man's blood; melancholy Saturn was adored, says
Plutarch, with this more than wicked superstition; the Carthaginians offered to
Plut lib. de superstit.
him their children, and while they were most cruelly massacred at the bloody
altar, all rang again with Drums and Pipes, that the cries of the poor
slaughterd infants might not be heard. But the God of heaven loatheth hands
imbrued with blood, and therefore neither requires the sacrifice of humane
blood himself, nor will have his delight in blood.

1. He requires none such himself, nay, he forbids the Israelites to
imitate this devellish custom of the heathen, Deuteronomy. 12. 31. Once indeed he
commanded Abraham to offer up his son Isaac for an whole burnt sacrifice, but
it was only (...), to try his obedience; and while Abraham was about the
business, God sent a countermand, Ne extendas manum super puerum, for a world
let not me cause thee to butcher thy son. Iephthai is the only man, whom
some Divines conceive to have sacrificed his daughter according to his vow; but
that fact of his, if he did it, has no approbation from God, the Scripture
leaves it uncensured; and Saint Augustine, C^p. 49.
though in his questions upon the Judges, he go about to excuse him what he
may; yet in his questions upon the old Testament (if they at least be his) he
is bold to call Iephthat's devotion foolish, his faith foolish, and himself
facinorosum et improvidum, C^p 43.
a Iewd and rash man in that enterprise: finally, so far does this kind of
bloody oblation displease God, that when the Israelits had so strictly besieged
the Moabites, that the King thereof to pacify his gods, offered his eldest
son for an whole burnt offering, the Text says, Fervor erat magnus contra
Israelitas, Gods indignation grew hot against Israel, 2 King. 3. 27.

2. God will not have his people given to blood-sucking, this mind of his he
has declared diverse ways: 1. By his command, Thou shall not kill; we see in
the decalogue, that next after his own worship, and the duty to be done to
parents, whom he has given unto us as gods in his stead, in the first place he
gives this precept against blood, as being most dishonorable unto him in
defacing his Image, wherein he made man, Genesis 9. 8. and most injurious to man,
whose greatest good is thereby destroyed.

2. By renewing this Commandment visibly in the beasts which were daily slain
for sacrifice; for whereas some part of them was allotted to the Priests use,
some part to the use of the people, God expressly commanded, that neither
Priest nor people should have share in the blood, but it should be sprinkled
upon the ground as water, Ad informationem humanae Aq 1. 2. q. 102. a. 3. 8.
vitae, ut horrerent humani sanguinis effusionem, says Aquinas; to teach man
to abstain from shedding the blood of man. 3. In making the Law of blood for
blood, whereby the murderer was to be punished with death: Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. 6. All that take the sword,
shall perish by the sword, Matthew. 26. 52. 4. By taking the revenge of
murderers into his own hands, when as either they were concealed from the
Magistrate, or were so great, that they had no superiors to execute Law upon
them: This he does two ways: 1. By strangely revealing murders done never so
closely: 2. By sharply punishing the murderer.

1. By strangely revealing murders: How often have we heard, that the foul of
the heaven has carried the voice, and that which has wings has declared the
matter? Men conscious of blood, have imagined, that the birds in their chirping
did bewray them, and in articulate voices tell them of their cruelty; yea, the
stone has cried it out of the wall, and the beam of the Timber has answered
it; every noise has affrighted them, and made their guilty consciences never
to be at rest, till they have opened themselves to the world, and have had
judgment answerable to their bloody crime; surely this is the finger of God,
not suffering the earth to hide in her bowels the blood of him that has dyed
innocently, and to be unpunished.

2. If all fail, by sharply revenging blood himself. Cain was a murderer,
and he had a punishment (as himself complained) greater than he could bear:
God made him a runnagate, and branded him with such a mark in his soul, as
that he was infallibly known to be a reprobate. Joab was a murderer, and that
made him he could not go down to the grave in peace; the blood of Abner, and
of Amasa, did return upon the head of Ioab, and upon the head of his seed for
ever* To conclude, Iehu was a murderer, and behold, God here threatens, that
he will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon Iehu, and upon his house.

Now what should all these things teach us (beloved) but only this? that we
be wary never to have hand in this loudspeaking, and high-crying sin of
murder, which is (as we have heard) against the Commandment of God, against
which, God has armed the hand of the Magistrate with a sword; and which, if
all men pass by, God will be sure not to let go unrevenged. Alas, the life of
man, which is a thing so precious in the sight of God, is now adays smally
regarded. Blessed be our Solomon, who is careful to keep the blood of his
subjects within their bodies: But what shall we say to those wretched
Circumcellions which visit us ever and anon under the name of Soldiers, who,
as they pretend, have been so fleshed with blood, that they hunger and thirst
after it daily; yea, cannot tell otherwise how to set themselves on work, but
by the slaughter of men. I doubt not of the lawfulness of killing enemies in
war, but this I doubt of, nay I condemn the blood-thristinesse of men, who
pant with eager desire after the doing of that which they should not do
without a kind of unwilling willingness. Iehu did at Iezroel what he might
do, but the bloody mind spoiled all, as you shall hear by and by.

What shall we say unto our too too proud and insolent gallants? who think so
well of themselves, that the least word of disgrace offered them, cannot be
appeased without blood; the field must be appointed, and the life of the
offender sacrificed to the fury of his adversary: I may well liken them to
Thrasonical Lamech, Genesis 4. 23. who brags, that he will slay a man in his
wound, and a young man in his hurt; and goes on to outdare God himself, If
Cain be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy sevenfold: As who should
say, If God will take vengeance on those that contemn him, why may not I of
those which contemn me? nay, though God will forgive evils against him, yet
will not I evils against me. I Will have the Iu. in lot.
odds of him, seventy to seven. Thus far, if not in words, at least in deeds
proceed our resolute Champions, boasting in how many bowels their swords have
been sheathed, how many souls they have sent out of their bodies, to hell,
for ought they know: but let them hear how David reads their destiny, and be
more moved at it, than at a reproachful word, Bloody neen shall not live out
half their days, thou O God, shall bring them down into the pit of
destruction, Psalm. 55. 23. And so I leave to speak of murder in general, and
come to the restriction of it by that murder which is here specified in the
Text, The blood of Iezreel. Of Iezreel,) that is, the blood which was spilt in
Iezreel; this Iezreel and Samaria were the two mother Cities of the ten tribes
who were called Israel, there the Kings had their palaces, and in them were all
of the blood Royal at the time of Iehu's conspiracy; Ioram and Iesabel, at
Iezreel; the Kings children at Sameria: to Iezreel comes Iehu, and there
puts to the sword, the King, and the Queen mother; and thence directs his
letters to have the same effected upon their children at Samaria: hence comes
it to pass, that here in the Text this murder is called (...), the bloods of
Iezreel, intimating both the multitude of those that were slaughtered, and the
place wherein that murder was committed.

And here that question comes fitly to be demanded and discussed, how God
threatens in this place to avenge upon Iehu the blood of Iezreel, when as he
shed it by the command of God himself, for so we have it laid down in
express terms 2 King. 9. 7. the Prophet says to Iehu in the word of the Lord,
Thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy Master, that I may avenge the blood of
my servants the Prophets. Bellarmine, looking only, as it seems, upon the
history, either not knowing, or forgetting this Scripture, goes about wholly
to commend Iehu's fact, as altogether laudable; Quis credat Deum De am. quae.
l. 2. c. 23
laudaturum factum Iehu, a^ dicturum eum studiose fecisse quod rectum erat, si
Iehu ex ambitione rebellasset, et injuste dominum suum occidisset? And other
Interpreters miserably torture themselves, in reconciling Gods command with
this punishment: But not to spend time in rehearsing their opinions, I am of
their mind, who think Iehu sinned foully in this slaughter of his, and
therefore has vengeance denounced against him by God in this place for it.
Which sin of his that I may open, I will show two things: 1. I will lay this
down in thesi, as a ground, that a man may do a thing according to the
command of God, which is good ratione (...), in regard of the act done and
event, when as notwithstanding it is evil to him ratione modi, in regard of
his manner of doing it, and deserves punishment. 2. I will in hypothesi show
this to have been the fault of Iehu.

For the first: the truth of the ground will appear to us if we consider two
things; the rule of man's doing, and the principle of his doing, which two have
maine sway in making all his actions good or bad: if man have both a good rule
to direct him what is to be done, and a good principle from whence he sends
forth his actions, certainly the thing done must needs be good; but if he be
defective in either of these, his work is evil: to do a good thing not well,
that is naught; and to do with a good intention an evil thing, that is naught
likewise. Now then here is in the ground laid down, the command of God, a good
rule; he that does that, cannot miss of the right; but where is principium
operandi, the principle out of which man works? Surely, that is oft-times
two-faced with Ianus, conformable to the command, in doing the thing commanded,
but Aq. 2. 2. q. 104. a. 2. 3.
yet has aliquid de suo, some proprium volitum of his own, never commanded,
whereby it becomes disobedient: Man does oftentimes what God commands him,
not because he commands it, but for the satisfying of his own humor and
so, though therein be the Instrument of Gods will, yet is he also the cause of
his own punishment; because many things are good quatenus, and quousque Deus
vult, as far forth as God wills them, which when men take in hand to do,
severed from, and without respect of his will, are evil, and deserving
judgment.

Now man severeth Gods command from his will, two ways: 1. In his disposition
to the action. when he stands not so affected in doing Gods command, as God
would have him do. 2. In his disposition to the end of the action, when God
aymeth at one thing, he at another.

1. In his disposition to the Action: Some men being made the executioners of
Gods commands, become proud thereof, and forgetting that they are set on work,
as the saw in the hand of the mover, the Axe in the hand of the hewer, make
themselves the principal agents, and independent. This was the fault of the
King of Assyria, recorded most excellently by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 10. 5.
God made him the rod of his wrath and the staff in the hand of his
indignation, giving him a charge against Jerusalem: But he thought not so,
neither did his heart esteem it so; but be fell to dreaming of destroying and
cutting off Nations, saying, Are not my Princes altogether Kings? Is not Calno
as Carchemis^? Is not Hamath like Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus? Like as
mine hand has found the kingdoms of the Idols, seeing their Idols were above
Jerusalem and Samaria, shall not I, as I have done to Samaria, and the Idols
thereof, do also to Jerusalem, and the Idols thereof? Behold a right
Pyrgopolynices, when he was set a work by God, exalting himself both above
God and man: It follows therefore in the 12. verse, that although God
accomplished his work upon Sion and Jerusalem by Ashurs means, yet when he
had done that, he threatens to visit the proud heart of the King of Assyria,
his glorious and proud looks. Pride made the fulfilling of Gods command a snare
to Ashur, wherein he was intrapped. Some again in the execution of Gods
Commands become cruel; so we see in Shimei, 2 Samuel, 16. 10. God bids him
let David know those foul faults for which now he smarted: Shimei prepares to
do it, but he brings an heart fraught with bitterness against his
Sovereign then distressed, which made him curse, and curse again, throw
stones and curse, cast dust and curse; Come forth, come forth thou murderer,
and man of Belial. David remembered this horrible curse, and gave a charge to
Solomon, that he should not be guiltless for it, 1 King. 2. 9. This dogged
quality made the fulfilling of Gods Command a snare to Shimei, wherein he was
intrapped. I might be infinite in this kind, but these examples may show, that
men doing what God bids them, fail sometime in their disposition to the
action, and are therefore punished.

2. They fail sometime in their disposition to the end of their a^^ion; Thus
was Jeroboam commanded by God to take ten pieces of the rent garment, the
government of the ten Tribes of Israel upon him, that so the Idolatry of
Solomon might be punished: the people hereupon cleave to Jeroboam, but not
because God would have it so; their end was to vex Rehoboam who had given them
rough speeches, and so they made themselves right Traitors; God had no hand in
their revolt, as himself professed, Hosea 8. 4. They have se^ up a King, but
not by me, therefore shall they be destroyed. If any man ask how God was just
in commanding the translation of the kingdom, and yet the people unjust in
translating it? I answer him as Saint Augustine answered one who demanded how
God could be pious in delivering up Christ to be crucified, and Judas impious
in betraying him? In re una quam fecerunt, causa non una est ob quam Aug^sl ad
Vin ep. 48.
fecerunt: Both intended the same action, but they had diverse ends in that
action; the fact was good with Gods end, but bad with the peoples end; they did
what God would, but would not what God would; therefore did God condemn what
they did, it being his manner to respect non quid fecerint homines, Ibid.
sed quid voluerint; the will, not the deed, as the same Father speaks. You
see then the ground demonstrated to you, that a man may do the Command of God,
and yet by his defect in working, charge himself with guilt in the effecting
of it.

For the second; that this was the fault of Jehu, it will appear if we weigh
aright the carriage of the business by him, which God commanded. It is true,
he did to the house of Ahab all that was in the heart of God, and for that
received praise, and the transitory reward of a temporal kingdom, but yet his
heart it was not right, either in regard of the action or the end thereof.

1. Not in regard of the Action: Two things there are which declare his
aberration in this kind, his cruelty, and his hypocrisy. 1. His cruelty, that
appears in two things: 1. In rejoicing at the fall of these great personages
whom he had slain: When Iezabel, though a wretch, yet a Queen, was thrown
out of a window, and lay weltering in her blood, he was so far from pity,
that he sat him down to eat, drink, and to be merry, contrary to the tender
heart of Titus, who seeing Ios.
the misery of Jerusalem by his conquest, wept, and protested, himself not to
have wished those great evils. 2. In extending his slaughter beyond his
Commission: he had authority given him over none but the house of Ahab, and yet
must he needs stretch it to Ahaziab, King of Judah, smite him also, a King. 9.
27. 2. His Hypocrisy; he covered his thirsty desire of reigning, with the
cloak of zeal which he had for the Lord: it was indeed a fair pretense,
that the Prophet set him on work, but Saint Augustine calls his forwardness,
Aug lib. cont. mendas. ad consent.
Nonnullam obedientiam qua eupiditatem suae dominationis exhibuit, A spark of
Obedience proceeding from an hot fire of ambition within him.

2. Not in regard of the end of the Action: Gods intend was, Vt sublatis
idolatricis Zanch. in loc.
tolleretur idololatria, that Idolators, and Idolatry might have been rooted
out together. Iebu was well enough pleased to take away the Idolators, that he
might seize upon the spoil; but for Idolatry, he was as fond of the Calfe, as
Ahab had been of Baal, both derogatory to Gods glory: Qui fuit vindex
pietatis, contentus fuit praeda: He that should have established Gods worship,
set upon the prey; that is all he looked after. Calv. in log.


To conclude this point, you see how Gods just revenge upon the house of Ahab,
in the hands of Iehu, was by Iehu's corruption turned to a sin which lay
heavy upon his own house; to teach us all, beloved, that good wherein our
souls must rest; not so much the doing of an outward act, as the honest
disposition of the heart to do it well; not for our own ends, but for the
maine end of all, the glory of God: we may do good, as here Iehu did, and
neither hallow Gods Name, nor do his Will, but only honor our selves, and
establish our own purposes; but let us take heed, lest while his Name be not
glorified by us in the devotion of our hearts, truly bent to his service, he
be glorified of us in our destruction, as he was here of Jehu; to whom, for
not rightly doing what was commanded him, vengeance is denounced in the Text,
which is the fifth thing in these words, Gods revenge upon Iehu.

Upon Jehu.) The Text speaks not of this, Jehu having Jehu was no sooner
established in his kingdom but it is said, in those days God began to cut
Israel short, and Hazael the Syrian smote them, 2 King. 10. 32. Observe, how
blood followed Jehu at the heels; he that entered into his reign by murder
to punish others, was all the time of his reign prosecuted with the murder of
his subjects, that himself might be punished: it is the wise dispensation of
God to punish sinners in the same kind wherein they have offended: This Law
himself enacted among the Israelites, life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for stripe, Exodus 21. 23 which law was (...) answerable to his own
course he takes many times with men; thus did he direct the Israelites to cut
off the thumbes and great toes of the lord of Bezek when they had taken him;
whereupon he confefled, Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbs and great
toes cut off, gathered their meat under my Table; as I have done, so God has
requited me, Judge. 1. 7. here was a just remuneration which did ad amissum
aequipperare, G^l l. 20. c. 1
and in librili perpendere, as Favorinus speaks: the skales were even, his
cruelty in the one, his reward in the other. The Egyptians sought to root out
the Israelites by causing them to drown their male children; a plague lighted
upon them in proportion, themselves were drowned in the red Sea; whereby the
Wiseman, Wisd. 11. 7. for a manifest reproof of that commandment whereby the
Infants were slain, Thou gave unto them abundance of water, by a means
which they hoped not for. Ahab caused Naboth to be put to death, and for it had
this doom of retaliation, In the place where the dogs licked the blood of
Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood also, 1 King. 21. 19.

This course God observes in punishing for these two ends; 1. To declare his
own goodness, who might judge of the fact according to the infinite object
against whom it is committed, and so inflict infinite mischiefs upon the
offender; but he takes a milder course, in paying him in his own kind, Cont.
Faust. Man l. 9. c. 25
lex talionis, nonfomes, sed limes furoris, says Saint Augustine; this
allayeth his displeasure, rather than kindles it. 2. To convince the wicked
man, that himself shall have no exceptions against Gods judgments, but
confess them to be just, Quae enim, obsecrote, ista acerbitas (...)
est, si idem fiat in te, quod tute in alio feceris? says he in Gellius: This
David shows, Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is known by the judgment that he
executes, when the ungodly is suared in the works of his own hands. I say no
more of this point, but only this for application, Let no man say when he
finds Gods hand heavy upon him, why does God thus unto me? but let him
rather acknowledge, God is just, and I am wicked; if his punishments be so
fitted as by some likeness they put thee in mind of thy sin, thou have what
to confess; if they be of another strain, yet know assuredly, he strikes
not unprovoked: ransacke thy heart, where judgment is at the door, sin is
certainly in the house: if God avenge himself upon Iehu, Iehu has offended
God. And so I come to the last thing in my Text, Gods revenging Iehu's murder
upon his house, The house of Iehu.

That is, the posterity of Iehu, Iehu by taking away the kingdom of Israel
from it, and giving it unto a stranger: His promise to Iehu was, that for his
service done, his children should to the fourth generation fit upon his Throne.
This promise God made good, but would not enlarge it any further: Within a
short time after this Prophecy, the fourth man of his seed, being King, was
slain by a Traitor, who usurped the kingdom into his own hands; this was the
end of Iehu's house, the cause of which end is here in the Text attributed to
the blood of Iezreel: As Iehu had a reward for his work done, that four of
his sons should reign; so had he also a punishment for the bad doing of it,
that his children should no longer sway the Scepter: thus does God visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, as himself speaks, Exodus 20. 4.
and pays home the sins of the predecessors, into the bosom of their
successors, Ier. 32 18. The blood of Iezreel shed by Iehu, came with a full
course upon Zachariah his grandchilds grandchild.

A strange thing, a man would think, and scarce to be believed, in Gods just
administration of all things, that a man should Grynist. hist. 307 p.
after many years be punished for that sin which was committed, it may be,
before the birth of his great grandfather. It was counted a cruel trick in
the great Cham of Tartary, that when he condemned any of his subjects to
death, the punishment extended to all his issue male; but how much more cruel
may this seem here in the Text, that the offenders escape unpunished, and he
that is not yet in rerum natura, to have the least participation of the
offense, should after the fourth generation abide the penalty of it? But stop
thy mouth whosoever intendest to dispute with God, his judgments are often
secret, but always just; if he have done it, that is warrant enough for thee
to free it from injustice: And yet because flesh and blood loves to be prying
into the Arc, to find out the ways of God, and the reason of his doings, he
has vouchsafed in Scripture to open his Justice, and to clear himself from
fond men's imputations. For the understanding then of this course of Gods
judgments, we are to know these two things: 1. That God punishes no man who
is simply innocent, and deserves not punishment. 2. That it is in his power to
punish the nocent in what kind he himself pleases, or to spare him.

1. He punishes none who is simply innocent, and therefore justly finds
fault with that proverb taken up in Israel, Ezekiel 18. 2. The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; whereby the Israelites
complained, that whereas they were all holy, and no spot in them, yet did they
bear the transgressions of their fathers: that whole Chapter has God
affirming, that he which sins not, shall surely live. It is true that God
visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, but they are filii
qui oderunt, such as partake in their fathers sins; for otherwise the son
shall not bear the iniquity of the father, God will absolve him from the
punishment of sin, if he be no way party in it: When therefore the Par. any.
in Bell. de amiss. quae. l. 4. c. 8
Jews did bear the burden of their fathers faults, it was an evident sign
that they were themselves a rebellious seed, such as stood up in their fathers
stead; as heirs of their land, so of their wickedness. Thus it fared with
Iehu's house, of whom we may read in the book of Kings, that they continued not
his blood alone, but his Idolatry also, Every one of them did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and walked in the sins of Jeroboam who made Israel to
sin; as their father Iehu had done, so did they. This punishment was
therefore just in respect of them, they well deserved it.

2. God may punish the nocent as he pleases, or spare him; for he is the Lord
of all, and has the reins of all things in his hands; who shall control him
in exercifing either his Justice or his Mercy according to his own mind? So
that when the father commits a fault, and God has threatened vengeance
against him for it, he may, if he will, let the father pass, and take the
son who has share in guilt as well as the father had, and no man say to him,
why do thou so? There are many reasons why God passes over the father, and
there is one reason why he punishes the children.

The reasons why he passes over the father as I have observed them, are four:

1. Sometime the fear of punishment has humbled him, and moved him to
repentance; this effect the speech of Elias had with Ahab, which was the cause
that God brought not evil upon his house in his days, 1. King. 21. 29.

2. Sometime the father has some good things, in regard whereof, God will
forbear to lay heavy temporal judgments upon him; thus did Ieroboams son
come to the grave in peace, because there was found some good in him toward the
God of Israel, 1 King. 14 13.

3. Sometime God will gratify the faithfulness of his deceased servant, by
sparing his son after him; so dealt he with Solomon, Thou shall be Prince
all the days of thy life, for my servant David's sake, 1 King. 11. 33.

4. Sometime God has promised temporal prosperity to a man, in regard of some
good service done by him: so God suffered Iehu to hold the kingdom for his
time, to make good his promise wherewith formerly he had bound himself unto
him: for these causes God oft-times freeth the father that sins, from
vengeance.

The reason why he punishes Aq. q. disp. de po^u. pec. Ori. q. 5. a. 4.
the children, is, for that they are aliquid patris, a part, as it were, of
their fathers; and therefore it is not inconvenient that they be punished for
their father, no more then it is for the back to be scourged for the pilfering
of the hand, especially themselves being guilty likewise. But why is it then
said, God punishes the sin of the fathers upon the children, and not the
sins of the children in themselves? In my opinion, if ever Bellarmine spoke
rightly, he does it in this point; Children, says he, are punished for their
fathers, not because their own sins do not deserve punishment, but because
Nisi praecessissent peccata parentum, Lib de aemiss qua. 4. 6. 8
Deus eos fortasse non puniret in hoc mundo; God makes the fathers sin an
occasion of inflicting that judgment upon the child, which else peradventure
he would not have laid upon him: These things being considered, it will
appear, hat God is just in punishing the blood of Iezreel upon the house of
Iehu.

To conclude all, the consideration of this point may teach us two things: 1.
It justifies Lit. Aug.
our ^iturgy in that prayer, Remember not, Lord, the offenses of our
forefathers; which, though some mislike, I know not upon what grounds, yet
seems to me a fit prayer for every Christian: for if God has threatened that
he will avenge the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and has
frequently done so, why may we not pray against such an evil?

2. It teaches parents to have a care not to displease God, if not for their
own sakes, yet for their dear childrens cause, whom they may, by their
disobedience, bring into the same sea of misery into which they fall
themselves: Thou think it thy duty to provide for their maintenance, and lay
up for them; but take heed that thou fillest not the treasures of Gods wrath,
which though they miss thy head, will fall upon the hairy scalpe of thy
posterity: and shall not then thy children have cause to curse their father
that begat them, their mother that bare them, the time wherein they were
conceived, when they see themselves inherit the wickedness of their Parents.
Labor to be of the number of those that love God and keep his Commandments,
that he may show mercy unto thousands of thy children, that thy seed may stand
fast in the Covenant, that blessing may be upon thee and thine for ever. And so
I end. God, for his mercy sake, grant that those few words which we have heard
at this time with our outward ears, may take deep rooting in our hearts, and
bring forth in us the fruit of good living, to the glory of his Name, and the
amendment of our sinful lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed
Savior; To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
God, be ascribed all honor and glory, praise, power, and dominion, from this
time forth for evermore. Amen.

(...).

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON, ON JOHN 4. 20.
IOH. 4. 20. Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain.
THese words are a part of that Discourse which passed between our Savior and
a woman of Samaria: In which discourse three things are observable; The party
with whom Christ talks, The occasion of the talk, and the discourse it
self. The Party, it is a Woman; it so falling out by the Providence of God,
that she should be the first among the Samaritans that heard the sound of the
Gospel, and become an Apostle, as it were, to all her neighbors, in showing
them the Messiah; that so the privilege of all sexes in Christ might appear;
and that as Saint Gregory has well observed, Quia Ho. 25. in Evang.
mulier viro prapinavit mortem, mulier viris annuntiaret salutem; because a
woman at the first began to man in the cup of death, a woman here should
begin to men in the cup of life. The occasion of the talk was, this woman's
denying to give Christ water, because he was a Jew; whereupon he, who was
ready to take the least opportunity of doing any spiritual good, takes upon
him to instruct her in that she never heard before. The discourse that passed
between them, was especially of two things, (for other things are inserted by
the way) and they are, The Water of Life, and The true worship of God. The
former begins, verse. 10. continued to 16. The other begins verse. 20.
continued to the 27.

The words of the Text belong to the latter part of the Discourse which
concerned the Worship of God, and they are spoken by the woman, who does in
them three things at once: 1. She finds fault with Christ for magnifying
Jerusalem, as the only place where God would be worshipped: 2. She extolleth
her fathers worship in that mountain, which was near unto the City: 3. She
tacitly utters her own resolution, that she would continue to worship
after the manner of her forefathers; for the words are to be considered two
ways, either as (...), a simple proposition, containing in them a narration of
things done, Her fathers had worshipped in that mountain: Or as (...) a
Praemisse or Antecedent to a Conclusion, which this woman meant to infer
there from; for she has a further reach in them than a bare affirmation;
namely, hence to approve her own, and her peoples worship, that they also
might lawfully worship in that Mountain, as well as their fathers had done.

So that this speech of the woman is like Jacobs sheep, varicolor, speckled,
partly white, partly black; has something good in it, something bad That which
was good in it is twofold: 1. The matter of her speech, it relates a truth,
her fathers worshipping in the Mountain: 2. Her uttering it declares that she
had an eye to the service of God practiced in former times. To her fathers
worship: That which was bad is this, That she was too much addicted to her
fathers Religion; and resolved, upon that ground, because her fathers had done
so, to live and dye in so worshipping, whether she did right or wrong. I will
speak of this speech both these ways; that what is good in it, we may be
provoked to follow; what ill in it, we may be moved to avoid.

And first of what was good in it, and there in of the matter, her fathers
worship in the mountain. This Mountain it was Gerazim, situated near unto
the City of Sichem, Judge 9. 7. There the Patriarch Jacob, at his return from
Labans house, built an Altar, Genesis 33. 20. Of this worship of Jacob is this
speech mainely meant, Her father worshipped; for as the Jews boasted of
Abraham their father, so boasted the Samaritans of Jacob their father, as you
may see, verse. 12 Now the thing here related, Jacobs worship in the mountain,
may give us to observe this point, The worship of God was of old wont to be
performed on mountains, he appointed them especially to be the places of his
Service; as if that were true of God, which the servants of Benhadad said, 1
Kin 20. 23 Dii eorum Dii montium, the God of Israel is the God of the
mountains. Thus was Abraham commanded to offer up Isaac to God upon a
mountain. Genesis 22. 2. It was Gods charge to Moses, that he should come up into
the mountain, Exodus, 19 20. The Prophets charge to David, Ascend in aream, Go
up unto the threshing floor of A raunah, 2 Samuel 24. 18. When Solomon built
that glorious Temple, he set it upon the mountain of Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1.
Yea, our Savior himself when he prayed went into a mountain, Luke 6. 12. By
this serving God in the mountain, God taught the Jews, who had all things in
types and figures, and us likewise to whom the moral appertains, that when
we come to worship God, we must lift our souls to heavenly cogitations: So
the Apostle, Heb. 10. 22. Draw near to God with a pure heart: And David of
himself, Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. For as if a
man be in the bottom of a deep pit, he may call loud to them that walk
above, and not be heard; so if our hearts be drowned in worldly things, we may
cry often enough, Lord, Lord, to God that is in heaven above, and not be
regarded. The old use of the Primitive Church is still well retained among us,
that the people at the Communion should be admonished by the Pastor, sursum
corda, lift up your hearts; and they again should answer, as well apprehending
his speech, Sursum habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up unto the Lord.

For Application of the point; It justly condemns those that come to Church
as if they came to Market, and talk with God as with a Chapman, never thinking
of any preparation or reverence in regard of the glory of God; never thinking
of any exaltation of the mind, by heavenly meditation, because we are on
earth, and God in heaven; but we come besmeared with the dregs of filthiness,
and worldly affairs so hanging on, and prossing us down, that we cannot go
into the mountain to meet God, but lie grovelling in the valleys, that if God
will come to us, so it is, we are resolved not to go up to him: but let us
know (beloved) that God in this sense may be truly said, not to be the God of
the Valleys; he loves not to dwell with this earthy and muddy generation,
which flutter allow the ground, creep or walk upon it, but cannot take the
wings of Devotion, and send up their souls, as a Bird, to the hills, the hills
whence comes all their help: he loves to dwell with those Divine souls
who have their conversation in heaven, and are ravished out of themselves, and
choking cares, when they come to worship him. I conclude this speech with that
of James, chap. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: How
shall we draw nigh to him? Purge your hearts, you sinners, and cleanse your
hands, you double minded men; come out of the dirt of corruption, into the
mountain of holiness, as your fathers worshipped in the Mountain. Thus much
of the matter of the words: I come to the second thing, good in this speech,
this woman's looking back to the Religion practiced by her fathers, Our fathers
worshipped.

Wherein she declares, that she conceived two truths: 1. That the Service of
God is ancient; began, not in her days, but had its Original from the
Fathers: 2. That antiquity of Religion is to be respected of those that seek
out the truth thereof.

For the first: The service of God is ancient; the Angels, who were first made,
first began it. Job 38. 7. The Stars of the morning praised me together,
and all the children of God rejoiced: Men followed in their order; Abel offered
Sacrifice; Euoch walked with God; Noah builded an Altar; in Seths time men
began to call on the Name of the Lord: the histories of ancient times
declare, that they before the flood erected brazen and marble Pillars, wherein
they left unto their posterity the memory of God, and of his providence; and
that Religion was from the beginning of the world, may be demonstrated diverse
ways: 1. The Image of God, wherein man was made, consisted in holiness, as
one part thereof, Ephesians. 4. 24. Now holiness in man, respects the service of
God; and when this Image was decayed by the fall of Adam, yet so much of it
remained, as carried men to some worship of God* which being directed by
addition of light from heaven, carried them to the worship of the true God. 2.
God always had his Church in the world; some who were sheep of his pasture,
and children of his love, and these did worship him; for worship is the bond
that binds man to God; without which, man cannot be said to be the servant of
God, nor God said to be the God of man. 3. God at the very first gave precepts
of his worship. So Adam in Paradise had a command to abstain from the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil; this abstinence was his worship of God: and
why did Able bring his sacrifice? The Apostle says, it was by faith; faith
respecting the promise of God in his precept, that by offering sacrifice he
should show his expectation of that seed which was foretold to come into the
world.

So that here every true worshipper of God at this day has a good warrant for
his doings, that he follows the footsteps of all his fathers, the children of
God who went before him; and it may be a singular comfort to him in his
holiness, that howsoever men of his own time wherein he lives, be cross
unto him, and every man would have his neighbor a Bird of the same feather
that himself is, yet that he is like to the old Fathers, who were zealous
toward God, and stood in awe of his pre^ence; that he does converse with Seth,
Enoch, Ahraham, Isaac, Jacob, the holy Prophets, yea, Christ himself, and his
Apostles, who though they lived among Lions, yet did of old sustain and uphold
the service of God in spite of all opposition: This is it which conjoyneth all
the members of the Church together, though living at several times, that they
are united in the worship of God, as many lines in the same center. This
comforted the Apostle Paul in the midst of his bands, that after the way which
the Jews called heresy, he worshipped the God of his fathers, Acts 24. 14.
He calls God, the God of his Fathers, thereby to strengthen himself in his
holy course against the Jews, who cried out of him for an heretic; and so
ought all true Christians, who endeavoring with an upright heart to fear God,
and keep themselves unspotted of the world, not stained with the iniquity of
the times wherein they live, are like to be branded with the title of
Novelists; they ought to look upon the ways of the holy Fathers who lived in
times past, and seeing themselves walk in their steps, and to be heirs of
their righteous living, hence to take courage that they go not in by-pathes
where none went before them, but in the Kings highway, wherein all the Saints
of God walked to heaven; thus the Fathers worshipped God, and thus they worship
him. This is the first thing this woman conceived, the Service of God is
ancient.

The second thing was, that the Antiquity of Religion is to be respected, and
so indeed it is. Deuteronomy. 32. 7. Remember the days of old, and the years of many
generations; ask thy father, and he will tell thee; thine elders, and they will
instruct thee: We are but of yesterday, and are ignorant, therefore must we
search of our fathers. Job 8. 8. If a man were to stand upon the ways to take
his choice, he could choose none better than the old way, wherein walking, he
should find rest unto his soul. Ier. 6. 16. For whereas through the ages of
the world there have been different forms of his Service appointed by God
himself; the one at man's Creation; a second at the Institution of the Church
of the Jews, when the Ceremonial Law was ordained; a third at the founding of
the Church of the Christians, when the Doctrine of the Gospel was set forth;
they in these several times did right, who kept themselves to the old form of
worshipping. Before the Law, they served God aright, who took pattern from
Abel, Seth, Noah, the first fathers of that Church Under the Law, they served
God aright, who imitated Moses, Aaron, and Iosuah the first fathers of that
dispensation. Since the Law, they serve God aright, who follow the steps of the
blessed Apostles, and purer times of the dispensation of the Gospel. So that
howsoever we make not Antiquity the rule of our faith, yet is it a good note
of true Religion to agree with the first Fathers of the Primitive time: for
certainly, that of Tertullian is most sound, Quod antiquissimum, illud
verissimum, that is the most true that is most ancient. And the ground of this
assertion is demonstrative, for the Truth is first laid, before Heresy comes
in; good, it is subjectum mali, the subject whereto evil cleaves, and must
therefore needs be before it. Satan was first an Angel of Light before a
Prince of Darkness: Adam was made upright, and then became crooked and
corrupted through sin: The Law of Moses first was truly taught, before it was
depraved with the wicked glasses of the Scribes and Pharisees; and the Doctrine
of the Gospel was at the beginning taught in the truth thereof, howsoever
presently the mystery of iniquity began to work, and it was infected with
Arrianisme, Nestorianisme; and this Antiquity of the truth in regard of
Heresy, is taught by our Savior, Matthew. 13. 24. where he shows, that the
Husbandman first sows good seed in his field, then comes the evil one and
sows tares; whereupon he is termed superseminator, not simply a sower, but a
s^wer upon, or among the wheat.

For Application: we may hencefor our comfort conclude (beloved) the worship
of God maintained and practiced in our Church to be true worship, because it
is the same with the worship of the prime and immediate Witnesses and
Publishers of the Gospel, the Apostles, and such as held Communion with them.
The Papists are always objecting to us, that we are new upstarts, but may
truly say with Paul, Acts 24. 14. After the way they call heresy, we worship
God, believing those things which are written in the Gospel; and this is a
testimony to us of our Antiquity. Saint Paul, when he came to preach at
Athens, set forth no other God to them, but him whom the whole City worshipped,
and yet was taken to be (...), a setter forth of new gods, Acts 17. 18. So we,
when we preach the Faith of our first Fathers, and teach what the Gospel
manifestly approves, are by Papists condemned as innovators, and brochers of a
new Gospel: But if we look into the point well, we shall find that true of
them which Tertullian in his Apologetique speaks of the old Romans, Laudatis
semper antiquitatem, et nove de die vivitis; they cry out of the old Religion
as the truest and safest, and yet practice themselves a Religion, which though
it has filled the world for a great time, and found many subtle wits to
defend it, is yet risen up since the time of the Gospels first publishing; and
so though they hold the Doctrine believed by their fathers, grandfathers, and
great grandfathers, yet we truly maintain the truth delivered by the first
preachers of the Gospel. For example: We teach that Prayer is to be made to
God alone; this Doctrine is ancient, the Soripture every where shows it, and
Bellarmine confesses Decult. sa. c. 9
it; for having objected against Vows made to Saints, that in the Scriptures
the word (Vow) is taken for a Promise made to God, he answers it thus, Cum
scriberentur Scripturae sanctae, nondum ceperat usus vovendi sanctis, when the
Scriptures were written, the custom of vowing to Saints was not begun, so
that Saint-worship is new worship, not coming from the first Fathers. Again,
we administer the Communion in both kinds to the people, not by halfes, as the
Papists do; and our reason is, It is most ancient. Christ at the first
Institution so ordained it; the Apostle Paul so expounds it; and Cassander
affirms, that for a thousand years after Christ, all men communicated in
both kinds, so that the mangling of the Sacrament is new worship. Again, we
say that Kings are chief Governors of all causes in the Church, and this
Doctrine is ancient; such were the Kings of Israel and Judah: and Paul bids,
that every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. This so held till
the times of Hildebrand, 175 years after Christ, who exalted himself aboveall
that is called (...), or (...), the sacred name of King or Emperor; so that
power in the Pope of deposing Kings, is not of the first Fathers. The same may
be said of the adoration of Images, which took authority from the second
Council of Nice, 789 years after Christ; and of transubstantiation not heard
of till the Lateran Council, 400 years since, and of other their Doctrines,
if we had time to examine them. Let them cease therefore to object unto us the
beginning of our Religion from Wickliffe, Husse, Luther, Calvin, and those
worthy Reformers, who fetched truth out of the pit, wherein a long time she
had been hidden, and caused us to worship after the manner of our first
Fathers, and let them rather look upon their own hatching of new inventions,
and thrusting them upon the Church, whereby the truth once given to the Saints,
was so much obscured, that it could not be known scarcely what the Fathers
worshipped: and for our selves, let it stablish us in the truth of our
Religion, that we have the authority of Christ, his Apostles, and the purer
times, to confirm the Doctrines taught among us, we reject not, but admit
Antiquity, and have an eye to what our Fathers worshipped.

Thus you have what is good in this speech of the Samaritan, let us now see
what is bad in it, for that something is bad in it, is manifest from that reply
of our Savior, verse. 22. You worship you know not what. And it was this, she
resolves to follow her Fathers worship whatsoever it were, right or wrong, and
therefore she alleges it as an argument to defend her own, and her peoples
worship in the Mountain, which was not warrantable. The viciousness of which
reasoning, that you may perceive, I must briefly lay before you the history of
the Samaritans worshipping in this mountain.

You heard before how that Jacob returning from his uncle Laban, in this
Mountain built an Altar and there offered Sacrifice; from which fact of his,
in succeeding ages, this Mountain became a solemn place of worshipping, as
Josephus reports, by means of one Sanballat, a noted enemy of the Church of
God, so often recorded in the book of Nehemiah, who being a stranger to
Israel; and so Manasses of the posterity of the high Priest, marrying his
daughter against the Law, built a stately Temple in this Mountain, by the
leave of Alexander the great, and consecrated the said Manasses, his son in
law, high Priest there; because in the time of the reformation of that great
abuse of joining with Aliants, he was either to part with his wife, or his
Priesthood in Jerusalem. Here arose a great Schism between the Samaritans
and the Ierosolymitans; the one grounding upon Gods command, that Jerusalem was
the place of the Service of God, the other patronizing this mountain from the
authority of Iaecobs worshipping; which contention being after brought before
Ptolomaeus Philometor, Sabaeus, and Theodosius, pleading for Samaria, and
Andronious for Jerusalem, he proving out of the Law of God the right his
Temple had, and they from Tradition the right of theirs, it was determined for
Jerusalem: yet so did Schism prevail with the Samaritans, that still they
held their argument, Our fathers worshipped in this Mountaeine, therefore we
may worship there also. Thus reasons this woman amiss from a good example.
Jacob, a devout and holy man worshipped God in every place where he came
(because there was then no set place appointed for Divine Worship) and so in
the Mountain before Sichem; but the Samaritans absurdly allege his example for
the continuance of their worship there, because God himself after that
commanded, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. that they should seek the place which the Lord should
choose to put his Name in, thither should they bring their burntofferings;
which place at first was Shiloh, whither Elkanah went to sacrifice to the Lord,
1 Samuel 1. 3. and afterward Jerusalem, where Solomon built the Temple; which
places being designed, it was unlawful to sacrifice any where else, and
therefore it was left as a blot to many the good Kings of Judah, that though
they did many things well, yet the high places were not removed, but the people
sacrificed in the high places.

This being the history, we may from hence observe how dangerous and
uncertain a thing it is for a man to be led in any Religious Action only by
the Example of others, without further weighing the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of the Act it self, and that in two regards: For, 1. If a man
have done evil, to imitate his example must needs be naught; this woman's
forefathers, for some generations, did ill in worshipping upon Mount Gerazim,
and she does ill in following them. 2. If a man have done well, yet may
another do evil in following him, for want of duly considering some
circumstance which may mar the imitation; thus Jacob did well to worship in
this mountain, but the Samaritans, and this woman erred in worshipping there,
because the prohibition of God came between, which was not in force in Jacobs
days, but afterward.

1. It is dangerous following Examples, if they be ill; for, alas, a man may
be easily thus mistaken; he may give himself to imitate one who may pretend
much, and make great shows, and yet bring forth but an evil effect in the
end: It was a doubtful speech in it self which Ruth spoke to Na^mi, Ruth 1.
16 though no doubt good, in respect of her experience she had of her, Whither
thou go, I w^ll go; where thou dwell, I will dwell; thy people shall be
my people; thy God, my God: He that will give unto any man this power of him,
to be at his beck, may soon be drawn into a thousand inconveniences, into
haeresies, into schism, into profaneness, and all kind of loose living:
Into heresies; thus comes many a poor soul to be seduced, when as resigning
up himself into the power of his Priest, he will worship an Image because his
Priest does so; he will pray to Saints, because his Priest does so; will plot
the life of his Sovereign, because his Priest does so; will be hood-winked,
and willingly suffer his right eye to be pulled out by his sinful obedience,
and conforming himself, without any ground of knowledge, to the will of his
Superior. It is Saint John's counsel to try the spirits whom we follow,
because false spirits are gone into the world, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Into Schism; thus
many fall daily into Brownisme and separation, because they see some whom they
account holy men, to do so; not observing what pride of spirit, what conceited
discontent has put them out of their right Bias; and so, like silly sheep, if
one go, the rest will after, though it be to the slaughterhouse: Into
wickedness; thus when Ieho shaphat would be like Ahab, he did what God was
displeased with, 1 King. 22. 4. and we see it by woeful experience daily in
many, especially young Gentlemen, that they give themselves up to the fashions
of roaring boys, and the great masters of iniquity, till, if the Mercy of God
be not the greater, they fall into hell e're they be aware. Beloved, let us
learn to follow men, as they follow Christ, and no further; choose out for
patterns men of wisdom, men of virtue, those you may trust the more; yet
always hold this conclusion, not to imitate them in that, whereof you cannot
see a reason that it is good, lest under the cover of sugar you swallow a
bitter Pill; under pretense of piety, be drawn into wickedness.

2. It is dangerous and uncertain to give too much to examples, though they be
good, for there are many observable circumstances which may make a man err in
doing that, which another man did, and erred not; The Philosopher tells us,
that examples must be (...) both in the same kind, or else they warrant
nothing; in the same kind, I say, in regard of many circumstances: I will name
these five; the person doing, the thing done, the person to whom, the time
when, the end why; if these concur not, a man shall be wonderfully deceived
in his imitation of another.

1. Examples must be the same in regard of the person doing, for all men stand
not in like reference in respect of actions: he said well in the Comedy, Hoc
licet impune facere huic, illi non licet; non quia dissimili^ res sit, sed quod
is qui facit; Be the thing never so like, be the person unlike, there is an
error. When the King of Israel sent two Captains with their fifties, to bring
the Prophet Elias unto him, he commanded fire to come down from heaven to
destroy them; this was an action warrantable in Elias, who was a minister of
Gods wrath to punish the Idolatrous Israelites: but when the Apostles, James,
and John, moved by his Example, would have done so to the Samaritans, as Elias
did, they are sharply reproved by their Master, Nes^itis cuius spiritus siti^
vos, Luk 9. 55. You know not of what spirit you are; you are men of another
mould than Elias was; he a minister of indignation, you of consolation; he
came in the spirit of severity, you in the spirit of lenity; his actions fit
you, because your persons are not like his.

2. Examples must be of the same kind in regard of the thing that is done,
else instead of a fish, a man may take a stone; instead of an egg, a serpent,
and so manifestly deceive himself in that which he does upon so unsound a
warrant: It was an excellent work of David to provide instruments of Music,
Harpes, Cymbals, and such like, to be used in sounding out the praises of God;
but when Drunkards furnished themselves with lascivious and wanton Music, and
patronaged it by the example of David, the Prophet denounces a woe against
them, Amos 6. 5. Woe to those that invent to themselves Instruments of Music,
like David: His Instruments were holy, theirs unholy; his songs Divine, theirs
profane; they had no reason to shroud themselves under the example of David,
the thing done, agreed like Harp and Harrow, as it is in the proverb.

3. Examples must be of the same kind, in regard of the person to whom a thing
is done; for often times a thing is well done in regard of one, which would be
ill done in regard of another: he were a strange Physician, and such they say,
are many Empyricks, who seeing a man of rare skill giving a Potion to a sick
Patient, whose disease and state of body he knows full well, would give the
same to another, who, peradventure, has not the same disease; or if he have,
is not of the same constitution to bear the Physic: If, because Peter spoke
sharply to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 24. telling him that he was in the gall of
bitterness and bonds of iniquity, and that he had no part or portion in the
Gospel, we should therefore say the same to every sinner, we might soon
break the bruised reed, soon quench the smoking flax, and curse where God
has not cursed.

4. Examples must be of the same kind, in regard of the time; for every thing
has his season, and what profits now, may hurt anon: There was a manner of
Gods Worship instituted in old time, which must not now be used; and the reason
is, Tempora mutantur, times are not now the same they were then. Saint
Augustine in one of his Epistles shows this by a very pregnant example: There
was (says he) in my time, one Vindicianus a Physician of great note, who
applied to his Patients grief what he thought fitting for him, and it cured
him: some years after, this Patient falling sick of his old malady, would
needs be his own Physician, and give the same physic to himself; adhibitum
vertit in peius, he took it, and was the worse for it: hereupon he runs to
Vindicianus, and tells him the matter; he answered, This was fallen to him,
because he bade him not do it. The man thought he was some Conjurer, who
could work better by his words than by his art, till he told him at length in
earnest, Ego illi aetati hoc nunquam eram iussurus; I would never have bidden
you take that medicine at those years. You see by this the great force of
time, a necessary circumstance to be observed in all examples.

5. Examples must be of the same kind in regard of the end of the action, or
else herein also they will fail grossly: The Prophet David did well, and
moves by the Spirit of God, when as he so often curses his enemies, and
uses direful imprecations against them, because he was ravished with a
vehement desire of the glory of God, and sought that therein, without any
desire of private revenge, yet Saint Paul bids us bless our enemies, Bless
and curse not; because we are not so extraordinary filled with true zeal, but
curse our enemies, out of anger, passion, and thirsting to have vengeance taken
on them. Thus you see the five Circumstances which must be observed in our
imitation, which may suffice to show what I intended by them, how uncertain a
thing it is for any man to guide his course merely by example; where, be the
thing never so good that is followed, there are notwithstanding so many ways
to go amiss from it.

Pitiful therefore was the estate of this woman, and of her fellow Citizens,
who had no better than this Lesbian rule to square their worship by, looking at
their fathers who had passed so many years ago; since when, the state of
Religion had been changed, and Mount Gerazim now become profane, which was
unto Jacob holy ground; but well was it with the Jews who worshipped what they
knew, being informed out of the Law of God, that Jerusalem was the place where
men ought to worship; it was indeed the best hold they could have, and
therefore Andronicus, pleading their cause, though he alleged the succession
of Priests, and the many gifts conferred by the Asian Kings, yet (...), says
Josephus, made the Law of God the rock and ground, where upon he built the
rest; he began his proof with it.

Let us, beloved, though look into our Fathers Worship, yet not so dote upon
it, as we had rather err with them, than do rightly, according as the grace
of God, the Word of salvation shining forth, instructs us: Be it that they
did many things excellently, yet they were men, and in many things did amiss:
we have, God be thanked, as the Jews had, (...), the Scriptures of God, a
more sure rule than example: howsoever therefore we do not contemn examples,
and the practice of former times, but approve it in the kind, as I said before,
yet let us always (...), make the Law of God, the maine pillar whereon we
rest, and never go cross to it, though sometime we go cross to that our
Fathers practiced: it is the best counsel we can take, which is given unto us
by the Prophet, Esaias 8. 20. Say not a confederacy to them, to whom this people
say a confederacy; from the living to the dead; to the Law, and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. We vilify the glorious Gospel of Christ, when as we dare
prefer before the instructions thereof, either quid dicit Ecclesia, or quid
fecerunt patres; The Traditions of the Church, or the doings of our Fathers:
That just censure may be laid upon us in that ease, which our Savior gives
of this woman and the Samaritans. Adoratis quod nescitis, You worship you know
not what.

FINIS.

