A TRVE REPORT OF THE IMPRISONment, the Arraignement, and Execution of the late
Traitors.

WITH A RELATION OF THE other Traitors which were executed at Worcester, the
27. of January last past, with others that were executed at VVoluer-Hampton.

LONDON Imprinted for Ieffrey Chorlton, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Great North door of Powles. 1606.

TO All faithful and obedient Subjects
GEntle Reader, the horible and abominable Treason of the traitors lately
executed, with many others, some already executed at Worcester, and
Wolnerha^pton, and others their co^federats, whom God of his mercy, at his good
pleasur bring to light, and give the due punishment of their deserts. This
treason J say, so horrible and detestable in the sight both of God and man, for
which their bewitched hearts, not having that true repentance, that in true
Christians may be required: I have set thee down a brief discourse touching
the Arraignement of these that were here in London and Westminster, upon just
condemnation executed upon Thursday and Friday being the 30. and 31. days of
January last past, to the joy of all true subjects, that living under so
blessed and gracious a King, may rejoice to see the cutting off, of all such
accursed traitors, as entend the death of his Majesty, and subversion of the
whole kingdom: and so beseeching God to root out all such wicked weeds as
may be hurtful in so good a ground as this our land, which J hope does
contain a world of loving Subjects unto his Majesty, and their Country,
which do continually pray to God toblesse his Majesty, with our gracious
Queen, Prince Henry, and the rest of his royal Progeny, with long life, a
blessed peace, and never ending happiness, and to continue his holy word and
blessed Peace among us, and to give us all grace with one heart, ever to love
and serve him in all true faithfulness. J end.

Your loving friend, T. VV.

A Brief Discourse upon the Arraignement and Execution of the 8. Traitors,
Digbie, the two Winters, Grant, Ruckwood, Caies, Bates and Johnson, alias
Foulkes, four of which were executed in Paul's Churchyeard in London, upon
thursday being the 30. of January: the other 4. in the old Palace in
Westminster, over against the Parliament house, upon Friday next following.
NOt to aggrauate the sorrow of the living in the shame of the dead, but to
dissuade the idolatrously blinded, from seeking their own destruction, in the
way to damnation, I have here briefly set down a discourse of the behavior
and carriage of the eight persons before named, from the time of their
imprisonment, to the instant of their death: the nature of their offense, the
little show of their sorrow; their usage in prison, and their obstinacy to
their end. First, for their offense, it is odious in the ears of all human
Creatures, that it could hardly be believed, that so many monsters in nature,
should carry the shapes of men: Murder, oh, it is the crying sin of the
world, and such an intended Murder, as had it taken effect, would have made a
world to cry? and therefore the horror thereof, must needs be hateful to the
whole world to hear of it.

Men that saw them go to their Execution; did in a sort grieve to see such
proper men in shape, go to so shameful an end, but the end was proper to men
of so vaproper minds, who to satisfy ablinded conceit, would forget their
duties to God and their King, and unnaturally seek the ruin of their Native
Country: They are said to be borne unhappy, that are not some way profitable
to their Country, and then how accursed are they borne, that seek the
destruction of the whole kingdom?

Papists will perhaps idely say, it was a bloody execution, but in respect of
their desert, in the blood they ente^ded to have shed, it was a merciful
punishment: For if Iezabel a Queen for seeking the murder of one private man,
was thrown out of a window, and fed upon by dogs: How can these people be
thought to be cruelly used, that could entend and practice so horible a
villainy, as the death of so gracious a King, Queen, and Prince, so noble
Peers, and the ruin of so flourishing a kingdom.

But since my intent is chiefly to make report of the manner of their
demeanors from the prison to the Arraignement, and from thence to Execution: I
will truly set down, what I have gathered touching the same. After their
apprehension in the Country, and brought up to London, upon the Appearance of
their foul treason, before his Majesty's most Honorable Council, they were by
their commandment committed to his Majesty's Tower of London, where they
wanted nothing, that in the mercy of a Christian prince was thought fit, and
indeed too good for so unchristian offenders.

For in the time of their imprisonment, they seemed to feel no part of fear,
either of the wrath of God, the doom of justice, or the shame of sin, but as
it were with seared consciences, senceles of grace, lived as not looking to
die, or not feeling the sorrovve of their sins; and now that no subtle
Fox, or rather Goose that would feign seem a Fox, shall have cause to say
or think, that the justice of the law has not been truly ministered,
according to the rules of the divine vvil, behold here a true report, as I said
before of their behavior, and carririage, from their apprehension, to their
imprisonment, and from condemnation to their execution. In the time of their
imprisonment, they rather feasted with their sins, then fasted with forrow
for them, were richly apparrelled, fared deliciously, and took I abaccoe out
of measure, with a seeming carelessness of their crime, as it were daring the
Law to pass upon them: but the Almighty and our most merciful good God,
first revealed them: His Majesty's and his Counsels careful head apprehended
them, the law plainly did discipher them, Justice gave judgment on them, and
death made an end of the^. But to come to their Araignment, and to deliver the
manner of their behavior, after they went from the Tower by water, and come
to Westminster before they came into the hal, they made some half hours stay,
or more in the Star Chamber, whether being brought, and remaining til the
Court, was al ready to hear them, and according to the law to give judgment
on the^, it was strange to note their carriage, even in their very
countenances: Some hanging down the head, as if their hearts were full of
doggednes, and other forcing a stern look, as if they would fear death with
a frown, never seeming to pray, except it were by the dozen upon their beads,
and taking Tabaccoe as if that hanging were no trouble to them; saying little
but in commendation of their conceited religion, craving mercy of neither God
nor the king for their offenses, and making their consciences, as it were as
wide as the world, and to the very gates of Hell, to be the cause of their
Hellish courses, to make a work meritorious.

Now being come into the Hall, and upon the Scaffold, at the bar standing to
answer to their inditementes, they all pleaded not guilty, but were all
found guilty, Digbie without craving mercy, or favor of either God or the
king, made only five worldly requests, that his wife might have her Iointer,
his children the lands intailed by his Father; his sisters their legaties in
his hand unpaid, his debts paid, and for his death, to be beheaded, and not
hanged.

Thomas Winter in like manner thinkeing himself already half a Saint for his
whole villainy, faid little to any purpose, that either made show of sorrow, or
sought mercy, but only made a rerequest to the King for mercy toward his
Brother, in regard of his offense as he said, thorough his only persuasion.

His brother said little, but with a guilty conscience, swallowed up a
concealed grief, with little show of sorrow for that time.

Grant stubborn in his Idolatry, seemed nothing penitent for his villainy,
asked little mercy, but as it were careless of grace received the doom of his
desert.

The younger Winter said little; but to excuse the fowlenes of his fact, in
being drawn in by his brother, and not of his own plotting, with little
talk to little purpose; troubled the time the lesser while.

Ruckwood out of a studied speech would feign have made his bringing up and
breeding in idolatry, to have been some excuse to his villainy, but a fair
talk could not help a foul deed, and therefore being found guilty of the
treason, had his judgment with the rest of the traitors.

Now after their condemnation and judgment, being sent back to the Tower,
there they remained till the Thurseday following, upon sleddes and hurdles,
they were drawn into Powles Church-yearde; Four of them, vz. Euerarde Digbie,
the elder Winter, Grant, and Bates, of whom I forgot to speak, having no
great matter to speak of, but only that being a villain, and hoping of
advancement by the same, he had the reward of a traitor.

Now these four being drawn to the Scaffolde, made on purpose for their
execution: First went up Digbie a man of a goodly personage, and a manly
aspect, yet might a wary Eye in the change of his countenance, behold an
inward fear of death, for his color grew pale and his eye heavy,
notwithstanding that he enforced him self, to speak as stoutly as he could,
his speech, was not long and to little good purpose only that his belied
conscience, being but indeed a blinded conceit, had led him into this offense,
which in respect of his religion alias in deed Idolatry, he held no offense
but in respect of the law he held an offense for which, he asked forgiveness
of God, of the king, and the whole kingdom, and so with vain, and
superstitious crossing of him self betook him to his Latin prayers, mumbling
to him self refusing to have any prayers of any, but of the Romish Catholics,
went up the Ladder, and with the help of the hangman made an end of his
wicked days in this world.

After him went Winter, up the Scaffold where he used fevv words to any
good effect, without asking mercy of either God or the king for his offense,
went up the ladder, and making a few prayers to himself, staide not long for
his execution.

After him went Grant, who abhominably blinded with his horrible idolatry,
though he confessed his offense to be heinous, yet would feign have excused it
by his conscience, for Religion: a bloody religion, to make so bloody a
conscience: but better that his blood and all such as he was, should be shed
by the justice of law, then the blood of many thousands to have been shed
by his villainy, without law or justice: but to the purpose, having used a
fevve idle words to ill effect, he was as his Fellows before him, led the
way to the Halter: and so after his crossing of himself, to the last part of
his tragedy.

Last of them came Bates, who seemed sorry for his offense, and asked
forgiveness of God, and the king, and of the whole kingdom, prayed to God for
the preservation of them all, and as he said, only for his love to his
Master, drawn to forget his duty to God, his king and Country, and
therefore was now drawn from the Tower to Paul's Churchyeard, and there hanged
and quartered for his treachery. Thus ended that days business.

The next day being Friday, were drawn from the Tower to the old Palace in
Westminster, over against the Parliament house, Thomas Winter the younger
brother, Ruckewoode, Cayes and Faulks the Miner, justly called the Devil of
the Vault: for had he not been a Devil in carnate, he had never conceived so
villainous a thought, nor been employed in so damnable an action. where Winter
first being brought to the Scaffolde, made little speech, but seeming after a
sort as it were sorry for his offense, and yet crossing him self, as though
those were wards to put by the Devils Stoccadoes, having already made a wound
in his soul, of which, he had not yet a full feeling, protesting to die a true
Catholic as he said; with a very pale and dead color went up the ladder,
and after a swing or two with a hal, ter, to the quartering block was drawn,
and there quickly dispatched.

Next him came Ruckwood, who made a speech of some longer time, confessing his
offense to God, in seeking to shed blood, and asking therefore mercy of his
divine Majesty, his offense to the King, of whose Majesty he likewise
humbly asked forgiveness, his offense to thewhole state, of whom in general he
asked forgive nesse, beseeching God to bless the king, the Queen, and all his
royal Progeny, and that they might long live to reign in peace, and
happiness over this kingdom, but last of all to mar all the pottage with one
filthy weed, to mar this good prayer, with an ill conclusion, he prayed God to
make the King a Catholic, otherwise a papist (which God for his mercy ever
forbid) and so beseeching the King to be good to his wife and children,
protesting to die in his Idolatry a Romish Catholic, he went up the
ladder, and hanging till he was almost dead, was drawn to the block, where
he gave his last gasp.

After him came Caies, who like a desperate villain using little speech, with
small or no show of repentance, went stoutelie up the ladder, where not
staying the Hangmans turn, turned himself of with such a leap, that with
the swing he brake the Halter, but after his fall, was quickly drawn to the
block, and there was quickly divided into four parts.

Last of all came the great Devil of all, Faulkes alias Johnson, who should
have put fire to the powder: His body being weak with torture and sickness, he
was scarce able to go up the ladder, but yet with much ado, by the help of
the Hangman, went hie enough to break his neck with the fall: who made no
long speech, but after a sort, seeming to be sorry for his offense, asked a
kind of forgiveness, of the King, and the State, for his bloody intent, with
his crosses and his idle ceremonies, made his end upon the gallows, and the
block, to the great joy of the beholders, that the land was ended of so
wicked a villain.

Thus have I ended my discourse upon the Arraignement, and execution of these
eight traitors executed upon thursdaie, and friday last past in paul's
churchyard and the old palace at westminster.

Now there is certain report of the execution done on mundaie being the 27. of
January in the city of worcester, upon one Perkises and his man, for the
receiving of traitors. vz. Rob. Winter, Stephen Littleton, and two more
executed at VVolnerha^pton for the same. God be blessed for it and continue the
Justice of law to be executed upon all such rebellious and traitorous wretches
as either plot such villainies, conceal such treasons, or relieve such
traitors, for since the betraying the Lord of heaven and earth, was there ever
such a hellish plot practiced in the world? if the Pope were not a very
Devil, and these Jesuits, or rather Iebusites, and Satanicall Seminaries,
very spirits of wickedness, that whisper in the ears of Euahs to bring a
world of Adams to destruction how could nature be so senceles or reason so
graceles as to subject wit so to will, as to run all headlong to confusion? is
this a rule of religion? or rather of a legio^, where the Sinagogue of Satan
sat in counsel for the worlds destruction, for the satissactio^ of a lowzie
humor or bloody devotion, or hope of honor, or to make way to some mad fury to
bring the most flourishing kingdom on the earth to the most desolation in the
world, to kill at one blow or with one blast, King, Queen, Prince and Peer,
Bishop, Judge and Magistrate to the ruin of the land, and utter shame to the
whole world, and left naked to the invasion of any enemy: is this a holy
father that begets such wicked children? is this religion, where is no touch
of charity? or is there any spark of Grace, in these priests? that so
poison the souls, and break the necks of so many people.

Ignorance in the simple and Idolatry in the subtle, take ceremonies for
certainties superstition for religion, envy for zeal and murder for
charity, what can that church be but hell where the diuill sings such masses:
seruus seruorum says he that would be Dominus dominorum servant of servants,
that would be master of masters; is not he a cunning heards-man, that can
make one painted cow, or printed Bull give him more milk, then many a Heard of
better kine: are not these sweet Notes to be taken in the nature of the
Popish government, kill princes; sow seditions, maintain bawdie houses,
blind the simple, abuse the honest, betray the innocent, swear and forswear,
so it be for the popes profit, the Church will absolve you, and if you miss
the mark to hit the mischief you shoot at, you shall be a hanging Saint,
till you be taken down to the Devil. Oh fine persuasions, that infinite
sins by numbered prayers, inward curses, by outward crossings, an offense
against God, by a pardon from man, should be believed to be helped. A child
cannot conceive it, a wise man cannot digest it, and surely none but either
blind women or mad men can believe it. If a man would but a little look into
their Idolatries, he should see a world of such mockeries, as would make him
both laugh at their fooleries, and abhor their villainies. Their kissing of
babies, their kneeling to wodden Ladies, their calling to Saints that cannot
hear them, their praying by the dozen, their taking of penance, their
pilgrimages to Idols, their shauings and their washings, their confessions and
their crossinges, and their devilish devises to deceive the simple of their
comfort. These with a world of such tricks, as would make Jack an Apes a
fine Iugler: He that could see them with that clear eye, that can judge
betwixt light and darkness, would, if they were his friends, be sorry for
them, if his enemies, laugh at them, and howsoever, or whatsoever leave them,
and say as he may say, that Papistrie is mere Jdolatrie, the Pope an incarnate
Devil, his Church a Synagogue of Satan, and his priests the very locustes of
the earth.

But let us leave them to their loathsome puddles, and let us be thankful to
Almighty God, for the clear water of life, that in his holy word, we
receive from the fountain of his gracious mercy, and let us a little look
into the difference betwixt the Traitorous Papist, that dies for his villainy,
and the faithful Protestant that dies for the truth of his conscience in the
belief of the word of God.

The traiterous Papist will pull down princes, and subvert Kingdoms; murder
and poison whom they cannot command; The faithful protestant prays for
princes, and the peace of the people, and will endure banishment, but hate
rebellion: The proud papist will show in temperancie in passion, while the
humble protestant will embrace affliction with patience: The Protestant cries
to GOD for mercy for his sins, the Papist gives authority to sin, when
before the offense the pardon is purchased.

I say, was it not a strange speech of Digbie, through the blindness of his
bewitched wit, that to bring the kingdom into the popish Idolatry, he
cared not to root out all his posterity.

Oh the misery of these blinded people, that forsake the true God of heaven and
earth to submit their service to the Devil of the world, be Traitors to their
gracious Princes, to serve a proud ungracious prelate, loose their lands,
goods, beggar their wives and children, loose their own lives with an open
shame, and leave an infamy to their name for ever, only to obey the command of
a cunning Fox, that lying in his den prays on all the geese that he can
light on, and in the proud belief to be made Saints will hazard their souls
to go to the Devil.

But how many millions has this Devil inchaunted, and how many kingdo^es has
he ruinated, and how many massacres has he plotted, and how many souls has
he sent to damnation? God for his mercy cut him off or open the eyes of all
them Christian princes, that they may agree together and pull him down. For
during his pride, Princes that are of his Religion, will be but as
Copie-holders to his Countenance, Soldiers that fight not under his banner,
shall be as shake-rags to his Army; Lawyers except they plead in his right,
shall have but curses for their fees: Divines, if not of his opinion, shall be
excommunicate out off his Church, Merchantes that bring not him commodities
shall keep no shops, in his Sanctuary, nor Beggars that pray not for his
Monarchy, shall have any alms in his Basket: and therefore I hope, that God
will so wipe off the skales from the eyes of the blind, that both one and
other, Soldier and Lawyer, Divine and Lay man, rich and poor, will so lay
their heads, their hearts and hands, and their purses together, that where
as he has been long in rising, and could not sit fast, when he was up,
shall take a fall of sudden, and never rise again, when he is down: to
which prayer, I hope all true Christians will say Amen.

FINIS.

