Of the principal points which are at this day in controversy, concerning
the holy Supper of Jesus Christ and the Mass of the Roman Church, and of the
resolution of them.
The first Book.
Chapter. 1.
Of the principal reasons whereupon they ground them selves which maintain the
Mass, and of the weight of them.

IT is no marvel if they which have been nourished under the Mass eue^ from
their childhode, are greatly offended when they hear the same blamed and
condemned as a false service by the which God is dishonored and blasphemed,
seeing that the same has been accounted heretofore for the most holy thing that
ever was in the world, since the first creation thereof. And in deed they
should have just cause to be offended in that behalf, if the reasons which
cause them to have such opinion of the holiness thereof, were so certain and
true as they think them to be, and cause them selves to believe, for so much as
they have been so instructed. For first they have been taught that it was
instituted and celebrated by Jesus Christ him self: and afterward continued
by his Apostles, and consequently by all their successors from age to age, even
from the first institution of the same even until our time. And then they do
consider the matter whereof all the pieces of the same are composed, the which
they do think to be all taken out of ye holy Scripture, because that some of
those pieces are taken from thence. And therefore they say, Have you not in it
the Epistle and the Gospel, and the Pater noster, and the Credo? Are not these
good things? Behold then three reasons of very great apparauntes which they
do allege for them selves, of the which the first is taken of the institution
of the Mass, and of the author of the same: and the second of his long
continuance, which is as they think even from the death and passion of Jesus
Christ until our age: and the third is taken of ye matter of the good and
holy words and things whereof it is composed. If all these reasons were true
and well grounded upon truth, they were worthy of great account. For, for the
first, how great a crime is it to reject and condemn the ordinances of the
Son of God? And afterward what a pride were it, to make so small account of
the common consent of the whole Church of God, and of so many holy men, and of
so long a time? And on the other side should they be accounted for Christians
which do reject the expressed word of God?

Chapter.ii.
Of the examination of the reasons before alleged: and whether the Sacrament
of the holy Supper of the Lord, and the Sacrament of the Altar, and the Mass
of the Roman Church, be one very thing or else be things different and
contrary.

SEeing then that they allege such reasons, and that they give them so goodly
a show, it rests now to consider whether they be true or false. For if
they be true, they have then won their process. But if they be false, they
may not find it strange at all, if that a man do discover the falshod which
hinders the knowledge of the truth of this matter. And therefore so far
forth as it touches the institution of the Mass, and the author of the same,
we do first ask them what it is that they do understand by this word Mass:
for if they understand by the same the Sacrament of the holy supper of the
Lord, we will easily grant them that Jesus Christ him self did institute and
administer the same holy Sacrament, and gave commandment to his Apostles, and
to all their true successors to do the like, even as he did in the institution
and administration of the same, and that they have done it according to the
commandment which was given unto the^. But if they understand by this word
Mass, such a service as is that which at this day is so called, in the Church
that is called Catholic Roman, we do not only then not grant that Jesus
Christ did ever institute that Mass, nor that ever the Apostles or their true
successors did ever celebrate such an one, but yt which more is, we say, that
so far of it is that such a Mass may be the holy sacrament of the supper
instituted by Jesus Christ, that on the contrary, the ordinance of the Lord is
there wholly overthrown, with the whole form of the holy supper and of the
divine service which has always been observed in the true ancient Church, by
mean of the reasons which I will anon yield.

Chapter.iii.
Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles did ever ordeine, say, or celebrate the
Mass: and of the ancientie of the same, and of the workmen which laid their
hands to the framing thereof, and of the pieces which have been added unto it
by succession of time.

THus much touching the foundation of their first reason, which is the
strongest and the most apparent that they have. For if they cannot show that
their Mass is of the institution of Jesus Christ, and of the ordinance of God,
it must then necessarily be placed amongst the inventions and traditions of
men, by the which God him self does witness, not only by the mouth of the
Prophet Isai, Isai. 29. Mat. 15 Mark. 7
but also by that of his own son Jesus Christ, that he is served in vain.
Wherefore, if this first foundation be already overthrown, the second which is
founded upon the same, will also be forthwith overthrown. For if Jesus Christ
did not institute such a Mass, nor his Apostles and their true successors did
ever celebrate or know such an one, at the least for the time of six hundredth
years after the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ: where is that whereupon
they will build the auncientie thereof, and the long and continual succession,
and the common and public consent of all the Church, for so long a time
wherewith they make them selves so great a buckler? It is here then needful
to enquire, and to consider what difference there is between the Sacrament of
the supper ordained by Jesus Christ, and that which is called the sacrament of
the Altar in the Romish Church, and how long time the holy supper of the Lord
did remain whole and perfect, and when it began to be changed, corrupted,
overthrown, and converted into the same fashion that it now is in the Mass
of the Roman Church. For their own doctors can not deny but that since the
time of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles, and of the first and most ancient
Christian Church, they have changed and added much to the first institution of
the Lord, and in the form of the administration of this holy Sacrament the
which the Apostles did use. For this cause no one, but the most shameless
amongst the^ dare say openly, that Jesus Christ did ordeine and make the
Mass, but they say that he gave only the matter, and that afterward the
Church gave it the fashion by the successors of the Apostles, and chiefly by
the Roman Popes, wherein they do greatly honor the son of God. For if it
be so, he did but rough hew the work, whereof he left the matter confused and
evil polished, as a first purtraiture rude and not polished, leaving the thing
to be better polished, adorned and brought to perfection by those which should
come after him, the which work was not made perfect by one or two workmen
only, but by a great number as they them selves do witness. For they are not
so shameless that they dare affirm that it was made or perfected, neither by
one workman only, but by many, nor at one instant, nor at one only time, but
in sundry ages.

Chapter. iiii.
Of the principal authors of the Mass, alleged by the Roman doctors, and
of the diversity of Masses, as well Greeks as Latins, and of those Masses
which were celebrated by the Apostles.

THose which dare not make Jesus Christ the author, do attribute the fashion
of it, some to Saint James, others to Basile the great, and some other to
Gregory the first. And in deed they do set forth diverse forms of Masses,
the one sort Greek, ye other Latin masses, which are greatly different among
the^ selves. As touching ye Greek Masses they do again set forth diverse
forms, the one of Basile, the other of Chrysostom. And as touching that of
Chrysostom, they do not set forth only one form, but two at the least. And
as touching the Latin mass, the principal honor whereof they give to Gregory
the first, how many crafts men have there been which have laid their hands
unto it, ever adding something the one to ye others inventions, according as
their own doctors and the historians of the Roman Church do witness? And
after the time of Gregory the first, how many pieces have been added unto it?
and how long a time was it before it was such an one as it is at this present?
How the^ is Jesus Christ the author, or Saint James, or any other of the
Apostles? And how did the Apostles sing and celebrate the mass, the one in one
country, and the others in others, as many of the Roman doctors do boldly
and assuredly affirm without any shame at all, clean contrary to the evident
testimonies as well of the holy scriptures, as of their own doctors and
historians, which give testimony of all the pieces that every one of the said
crafts men which have wrought in the same work have added thereunto. Whether
their testimonies be true or no, I will not now enter into disputation of it.
It suffiseth that those which do uphold the Mass do vouch them, and that by
their own testimony, the which they do receive, they are convinced that there
was no such mass as there is at this day in the Roman Church, not only in
the Apostles time, neither also in a long time after their days. ^^maunde
How then comes it to pass that the Apostles could sing and celebrate the
mass before that it was made or borne? If they take the mass for the supper,
I will willingly grant, that all the Apostles and their true successors have
often celebrated the same: But it was in the same manner that Jesus Christ did
institute and administer it, and not in the same manner that it has been since
disguised and converted into mass, and such as now it is celebrated in the
Roman Church: wherefore it is a great filthiness or too great a malice, so to
disguise things, to make the poor ignorant people to believe that the mass
is of the institution of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles, and that they them
selves have celebrated the same, and that even from their time it has always
been observed in the Church, such as it is at this day in the Roman. For it
is an over filthy and shameless lie.

Chapter. v.
Of the names of the Supper and of the Mass, and whether the difference that
is at this day because of the same between the reformed Church and the
Roman, is only for the names and titles, or else for the matter and
substance, and whether the Mass be in substance the Supper of the Lord.

IT must then be that the Roman doctors confess, that the Mass which they
do now call the Mass, is far different from that which they affirm to have
been said and celebrated by the Apostles and their true successors. And if
they do reply that it is the same in substance, and that there is no
difference, but in respect of the ceremonies and ornaments wherewith it has
been adorned and enriched since that time, by the successors of the Apostles:
we must yet see whether it be so or no. Behold then one point which stands
yet in question: whereupon it must be considered whether ye Mass, such as it
is at this day, be in substance the holy supper of Jesus Christ or no, such as
he him self did institute and administer, and his Apostles and his true Church
did receive from him, and did celebrate according to his ordinance and
commandment. For our chief controversy is not for the words or for the
names, but for the thing it self and the very substance thereof, for the which
we are at controversy. Wherefore when we shall agree upon the substance, we
shall then easily agree upon the accidents and names, so far forth as the
thing which they do signify, be contained in the holy scriptures, and in the
Lords ordinance, as we do it in the name of the trinity and of Sacrament, and
such like. For albeit that the very same words are not found either in the
old testament, or in the new, yet for all that we do receive them, for so
much as the things signified by them are therein contained. Wherefore it would
be uncomely and of small edification to debate upon names and words, when men
are agreed upon the things that they would signify by these same. It rests
now that we understand the one the other, and that we do agree upon the sense
according to the which we shall take the words which we shall use. ^^ndry
^^^nes of (...) supper.
As touching the Sacrament whereof we do now speak, it is called by Saint
Paul, sometime the table, an other time the supper of the Lord, and also the
Communion and communication of the body and of the blood of the Lord. Seeing
then that the holy Ghost has given unto it such names and titles by this holy
Apostle, it is then the surest and the best to use the same. This
notwithstanding, if the Roman Catholics will call it both Mass and
Sacrament of the Altar, we will not greatly strive for it, provided that we do
agree in the principal point of our different.

Chapter. vi.
Of the chief different that is between the reformed Church and the Roman,
touching the Supper and the Mass, and of the mean to agree it.

IF then they be able to show that their Mass is in substance the very supper
of the Lord, and their sacrament of the Altar his very table, our strife is
ended. For we will never strive against the troth, when they shall make it
appear unto us by good and sure testimonies of the word of God, the which is
reueiled unto us by the scriptures. But if they cannot show the same unto us
by this mean, and that we be able to show them the contrary by the same
mean which we require of them, to wit, that the Mass such as it is at this
day, is not only not the very table and supper of the Lord, but is wholly
contrary to the same, we beseech them that they would not resist the manifest
truth, but that they give glory to God, and do suffer that their Mass be so
reformed according to the ordinance of Jesus Christ, that as it has been
perverted into the same, even so the same may be restored again to ye true
form which he gave to his holy supper, and was observed in the ancient
Church. And then when that shall be done, which is so just and reasonable that
nothing can be more, all the controversies shall be ended, and they shall be no
more divided nor banded the one against the other for the supper and for the
mass: wherein every man may judge whether we demand any thing that is not
very just and very reasonable, and whether they may justly refuse the same. It
rests yet that I do declare the principal reasons which do hinder us from
the accepting of ye mass, such as they do set forth unto us for the true
supper of the Lord, and for what cause we may in no wise receive nor accept
the same, but are constrained to reject it, as a thing which cannot agree with
the true Christian religion, if there be not such reformation that it be no
more that which it is at this present, but that it be the true supper of the
Lord, such as it is set forth unto us by the Evangelists and the Apostles,
who are sure and true witnesses of the doctrine and of the ordinances and
works of Jesus Christ their master, who did choose and call them to that office.

Chapter. vii.
Of those which will allow the Mass by the good and fair words taken out of
the holy scriptures which are contained in the same, and what judgment and
consideration is meet to be had of the same.

BUt before that I do expound these reasons thoroughly, I will yet touch one
point, concerning that which has been spoken of the good and holy words which
are in the mass. I do not deny but it is so: but I do answer further, Of go^^
(...)
that it is not enough to have good words taken out of holy letters, except
they be well applied to their true use, and to that end whereunto they ought to
serve. For if it were not so, a man might by the like reason allow, not only
the charms and enchantments of Charmers, Sorcerers and Enchanters, but also
the Alchoran of Mahomet, and the doctrine in manner of all the heretics. For
there be many good and fair words taken out of the holy scriptures, and fair
names of God and of Jesus Christ our Lord. And if the crosses might serve to
the holiness of the things with ye words, they have ordinarily many in charms
and enchantments. It is not enough then to have such words, Instru^^tion.
if the right use of them be not had with them. And further it must be seen
whether there be any thing mingled with them, which does corrupt them, as does
poison good meat which otherwise is of it self good. For there needs no
great quantity of poison to corrupt the best meats of the world, and the
better that the meat is, the more dangerous is the poison which is hidden
under the same, for so much as it is very hard to discover it, and that men are
the more provoked to take it. Wherefore so far of is it from letting ye
poison to be any more poison, that it makes it more dangerous, and more
mortal, if that the poison be not expelled by a contrapoyson. It is not then
altogether to see if there be fair and good words in ye mass taken of ye holy
scriptures: but we must yet consider whether there be any poison, false
doctrine, and men's tradicions mixed with them. And if there be any such, a man
may profit nothing at all by it, but may be hurt thereby, if the same poison
be not taken away and expelled by his contrapoyson, the which can not be taken
but of the pure word of God. And therefore the controversy upon ye which we
are at this present, rests yet in this, to wit, whether all the meat which
is set forth to us in ye mass, be wholly good, or whether there be poison mixed
with the same: if it be al good, then may there none of it be rejected: if
there be poison, no man may receive it without danger and peril.

Chapter. viii.
Whether there be any thing in the Mass other then good words, and whether
those good words which are in it be well applied: and whether that for those
good words, the Mass ought to be accounted good.

ANd even as good meat does not let but that poison is always poison, and
makes it more hurtful: even so the good and holy words do not let at all,
but that God is dishonored in the^, when men do abuse the^: Similitude.
but he is more dishonored by yt mean, then though they did wholly abstain
from naming him. For they do not use it at all, as they do which take it in
their mouth to call upon God and to sanctify him, but do abuse it not only
taking it in vain, but also villainously profaning and polluting the same.
Therefore Irenee says, ^ee, ^^e. 1. (...) 1.
that the heretics, and consequently, al those which abuse the holy
scriptures, do with the^, even as when an excellent workman should make the
image of a king very fair and of fine gold, and well furnished with all
fortes of precious stones, and there did come an evil workman, which should
take the same matter, and should make thereof either a dog or an ape, or some
other beast, or some monster. Albeit that it should be always one self
matter, very good and very excellent, yet for all that the workema^ship should
be greatly different, and the matter very evil applied, in as much as by
applying thereof they should destroy a good and very fair piece of work, to
make one both evil and filthy. And by the same mean a man should do great
wrong to the king, in so counterfaiting his image. It is not enough then to
take the matter whereof the Prophets and the Apostles have made the work of
the Lord, if it be not euenly laid, squared, and wrought as they them selves
have done it. ^ee.
For if any man make an other work contrary to theirs, and by the which theirs
should be destroyed, the stuff which men have taken of the^ is not well
applied. Wherefore so far of is it, that the work is the better because of
the same, that on the contrary it is more worthy of blame. Thus much for the
shuting up of the mouths of those which do allege the good words and the
good things which are in the Mass, if they cannot otherwise show the goodness
thereof, and that there be nothing at all in it that is good and applied as it
ought to be.

Chapter. ix.
Of the division of the matters which shall be handled hereafter, and of the
principal points which are at this day in controversy concerning the Supper
and the Mass.

I Will now come to the principal points which do move us by good reason, not in
any wise to allow the mass, being of the same form and quality that at this
day it is set forth unto us, of the which points I will firs make a general
division, and afterward a more special, and then I will propone and expound
them all, the one after the other, every one of them in his place. The first
division which is the most general, shall contain five points, of the which
five points I will after ward make more special divisions. 5. point^.
The first is touching the matter and all the pieces and inventions and human
tradicions in general, whereof it is compounded. The second is of the words
of the same in special. And the third is of the signs, and of the things
signified by them. The fourth of the prayers. The fifth of the collectes. As
touching the second point, which concerns in special the words of the mass,
I divide it again into three points, The first is touching the language of
them. The second concerning the pronunciation. The third concerning the
application of them. And for the third point, which is concerning the signs
and the things signified, I do divide them again into six other points. The
first is the transubstantiation of the signs. The second, the adoration of
them. The third, the reservation and application which used beside the use of
the supper. The fourth is of the sacrifice. The fifth is of the communion. The
sixth, of the application, as well of the sacrifice as of the communion, both for
the dead and for the living. Now concerning the first, the fourth and the
fifth. Of the five points which I did in the first place set forth in
general, I do not at all make any other more special division of them. Now
all these points joined and comprehended together, do amount to the number of
12. the which I am not determined here to handle all at large, but only
summarily, to the end that men may understand, which be the principal
differences to agree upon between the reformed Church and the Roman Church,
concerning the Sacrament of the supper, and that of the Mass.

Chapter. x.
Of the first general point which is of the whole matter of the Mass, and of
the additions which men have given to the supper of the Lord in the same, by
the which they have clean overthrown his institution.

THe first point then that we do condemn in the Mass, is, that ingeneral
there are so many inventions, traditions, and humane additio^s to the Lords
institution, and so many chaunges and disguisings of the same, and so many
ceremonies and foolish and doultishe superstions, and insufferable Idolatries,
that there remains in the same no kind of form of the pure ordinance of the
Lord, but that it is there wholly overthrown. And by the same mean the
expressed word of God is there openly violated, in as much as it is so often
and so expressedly forhidden by the same, in ye holy scriptures, Deuteronomy. 4.1^
Apoc. 22. Jos. 1. Eze. 10.
to add or to diminish any thing to or from the law, statutes and ordinances
of the Lord, or to go out either on the right hand or else on the left. For the
which cause Saint Paul meaning to correct the abuses which were already in his
time committed in the supper among the Corinthes, said plainly, setting forth
the institution of Jesus Christ: I have received of the Lord that which also I
have delivered unto you. 1. Cor. 11.
And after ward he expounds it point by point, in what sort Jesus Christ
did institute and administer this holy Sacrament, and ordained it to be
administered afterward in his Church, wherein he meant to give plainly to
understand, not onley to the Corinthes, but also to the whole Church of God,
as well for that present time as for all the time to come, that the institution
of the Lord is pure, whole and perfect, and what rule there was and is to be
observed in such matter, without adding any thing to it, or diminishing,
cha^ging, and disguising any thing from it or in it. For if Saint Paul which
was plucked up even to the third heaven, ^or. 12.
and who saw there secrets incomprehensible to man, and has so fair and
excellent a testimony of his vocation by Jesus Christ him self, neither would
nor durst take in hand such a matter, but did content him self with the
simple ordinance of the Lord, and tied him self to the fame rule, and did
draw thereunto the whole Church, what pride is this in those which dare
undertake more then he, yea more then the very son of God him self did:
These which are so audacious, ds they not fear at all the curses which are
denounced by Saint John in the Apocalypse, ^oc. 22.
to all those which either add or diminish any thing to or from the doctrine
revealed by the Lord? for that which he says in his Apocalypse, does no less
agree to all the rest of the body of the holy scriptures then to it self, for
so much as there is no canonical book which is of less authority. And if
Saint Paul did assubiecte the very Angels to the Gospel which he had preached,

Chapter. xi.
Of the second general point which is of the words of the Mass, and of the
division of the same into his members, and first of the language of the Mass.

AS concerning the second point, which is touching the words of the Mass, we
have to note first, that albeit that it were so, that there were not one only
word in the whole content of the same, but that it were taken out of the holy
Scriptures, and were very agreeable to the same: yet for all that, there are
three great and insufferable faults therein, of the which three the first is
common and general to all the whole Mass, and every part thereof: the other
two belong more special to the sacramental words, but they are
notwithstanding altogether manifestly repugnant to the expressed word of God,
and to the institution of the holy Supper. And by that mean this second point
does contain those other three, of which I made mention in the division of the
same, which are touching the language, pronunciation and application of the
words. As touching the first, it is manifestly against the express
commandment of God, in that that he has expressedly forbidden by S. Paul,
that in the assemblies of the Church, ^^te well (...).
there should be neither prayers nor other words spoken in a tongue which were
not known to ye whole assembly, if there were not forthwith some one to
expound the same in a tongue which should be well understood by the whole
congregation. Now it is so that all that ever is spoken and sung in the mass,
is there said and sung in an unknown language, at the least, to the greatest
part of the people and assistantes, and oftentimes to them al. Whereof it
follows according to the testimony of S. Paul, that the commandment of God
is there manifestly violated. ^onclusio^.
Whereupon I do further conclude, that the mass can not be the supper of the
Lord, for so much as he has plainly commanded that men should set forth the
remembrance of him in the same. Which thing can not be done by unknown
language, but only by such a language as is understood of all, as Saint Paul
does sufficiently declare, when expounding the words of Jesus Christ
concerning this commemoration, ^. Cor. 11.
he says plainly, You shall show the Lords death until the time that he
come. The which showing cannot be set forth by a language not understood, but
only by preaching and doctrine set forth in a language which may be
understood of all, for so much as speech without understanding profits no
more then though a man spoke not at all. For that is as much, as though he yt
speaks were domme, and he which hears were dease.

Chapter. xii.
Of the pronunciation of the words of the Mass, and chiefly of those which
are called sacramental, and what fault there is committed in the same, as well
against the commandment of God, as against the laws Imperial.

FUrthermore, we have yet to note in the other point, which is of the
pronunciation of the words of the Mass, that albeit that whatsoever should be
there said in a language that should be understood of al men, yet for all
that, by all the assembly. Wherein they fall again into the first
inconvenience that I have already touched. For be it that they speak with a
loud voice in an unknown tongue, or with a soft voice, in a known tongue,
in sort that he is not heard at all, or else that me^ can not understand the
words, the one sort is even as good as the other. This notwithstanding, they
do commit both the faults in all their masses, chiefly in their cannon and in
many other pieces, and namely in those, the which because of the same they do
call the secrets. For beside that, that the language of them is unknown, at
the least to the greatest part, they add thereunto also the pronunciation so
soft, and so secret, that hardly there is any man that may understand one only
word thereof, as I have already said. This thing is common to all Masses, as
well high as low. For they have these two sorts, the which they do so
distinguishe according to the pronunciation which they use in the same. They
call high masses, High mas^^s.
those which they say with song, because that they speak and cry more loud
in them. Yet are they greatly to be blamed in the very same, that they sing, in
so much as they do use such songs as does greatly hinder the understanding of
it, even to those which could otherwise understand the words and the language.
For how many notes do they put oftentimes to one syllable, from whence it
comes to pass that they make the words and the pronunciation of them so
long, and do make so great distance from one syllable to an other, that men
forget the first before they be come to the last, and namely when they do sing
in set Music? Wherein it appears plainly, that the song of the Roman
Church has been used more to feed the bodily ears, then the soul and the
spirit, and to serve men for delectation and pastime, as do their belles, and
their organs. For there is all the profit which comes of them, which
consists in sound which vanishes in ye air. Again, they call low Masses
such as are not said with song, but only with a soft voice. And albeit that
there be very few which can understand any thing of it throughout the whole
mass, yet not contented therewith, they do also speak it more softly, when
they come to their secrets and to their Cannon, and therein they doublely
transgress, not only the law of God, S. Paul, but also the humane and
Imperial laws. For the Emperor Justinian, which reigned about the year 528.
did make a law expressedly for that point, the which he grounded upon the
sentence of S. Paul, which I have already alleged, taken out of his first
Epistle to the Corinths. Iustinia^ new Constable 123.
The same law commands all ministers of the Church to speak so loud and
so plain, especially in the administration of the Sacraments, that all the
people may hear and understand it, and make answer, So be it, to that which
shall be there spoken. He does not command the^ that they should speak in a
language understood of al men, for so much as yet at that time they did
always so according to the example of the ancient Church: but only so to
speak and pronounce, to the end that they might be the better understood of
all men: the which thing had been to no purpose at al, if speaking in such
sort, the speech had not been known and understood of all men. Wherefore in
comma^ding the fame, he presupposes that which already was, to wit, that
the language was known and understood of all men. Seeing then that in that
respect the mass is repugnant to all law as well divine as human, in deed
if there were none other but this only point to be blamed, we have just cause
to condemn it, and to require reformation of the same.

Chapter.xiii.
Of the application of the Sacramental words in the Mass, and whether they
should be spoken either to those which do there assist, or else to the bread and
to the wine of the same, and whether the signs of the sacraments may be the
signs of them or no, beside their true and proper use.

THE last point of the same very purpose, which concerns yet the words of ye
mass, is, that beside that which I have already showed to be worthy of blame
in the pronunciation of them, there is yet this very foul fault, and contrary
to all reason, to wit, that in stead of declaring the words of the supper
to the people assistant at the mass, and in speaking them unto them, to cause
them to understand them, to the end that they should be taught by them,
according to the commandment which the Lord has given by Saint Paul, they
speak them to the bread and to the wine which are upon the Altar, and do
pronounce them over them. And therefore the priest is turned toward them, and
has his back toward ye people, to whom he should speak, and deliver his
words to teach and instruct them in the understanding of the doctrine
belonging to this sacrament, and in the mysteries and secrets which it
contains. But in stead of doing this, he represents them to the people by
gestures, countenances, and diverse ceremonies, and oftentimes by so foolish
and doultish countenances, as are those of a very Iugler. Therefore I know not
for what cause a man may not say as well of a Priest, that he goes to do, as
well as to say, Mass. For he has there as much to do as to say. For the
like cause, men might as well say, Let us go t^ see, as well as let us go to
hear mass. For the assistance do there oftentimes see more the^ they do
hear, and namely in ye Iowe masses, where in they do plainly declare, that
they do very it understand, In excellent Instruc^^on.
both the nature, and the use as wel^ of the word of God as of the Sacraments.
For the word whereupon they are grounded, is no^ there set forth to be spoken
to the signs there of, but to chose persons to whom both the one (...) the
other should be administered, to wit, as wel^ the word as the signs, or
otherwise the sacraments should be no sacraments. For they are no sacraments
being out of their proper use, for so much as they are only ordained
thereunto. And therefore, Note well ^his.
the water is not the water o^ Baptism, nor a sign, nor consequently the
sacrament thereof, but so far forth as it is joined with the word of Jesus
Christ, by the which it is dedicated and consecrated to that use, and so being
applied to those persons, which men do^ baptize, Matt. 28. Note well ^his.
according to his commandment. The very like is of the bread and of the wine
of the supper. For they can no more be ye signs thereof, then may the water of
baptism, if being joined together with the word of Jesus Christ, whereby they
are dedicated and consecrated to this sacrament, they be not given and
distribu^ed to those which should be partakers of the same: as it does appear
by the expressed words of Jesus Christ, in that which he says of both the
signs, Take ye and eat ye. Likewise, Mat. 26. Mark. 14. Luke 22.1. Cor. 11.
Note.
Take ye and drink all ye. For it is plain that these words may not be
spoken either to the bread, or to the wine, but only to those persons which
might understand them, and execute the commandment that Jesus Christ gave
unto them by the same. For the bread and the wine can neither eat or drink
them selves.

Chapter.xiiii.
That the words of the Supper appertain not to such as are capable thereof,
and what fault the Roman priests do commit in that behalf.

THis notwithstanding, it is to them that the priest does speak and deliver
their words, and not at all to those which do assiste as well at their Mass
as at their Supper, the which they do administer seldom times to the people.
No more may they be delivered also to beasts, for so much as they can not
understand them, as also because the sacraments of the Lord were not ordained
for them, the like may we say of all other creatures, which are not partakers,
either of sense or understanding. Wherefore if they (...) spoken to others then
to such as are capable (...) this sacrament, which may understand them (...)
may obey to that which Jesus Christ comma^deth the^ thereby, it is a mere
mockery, whe^^by the intent and purpose of Jesus Christe^^ wholly overthrown.
^he bread and to the wine, which can not vnder^tand or comprehend either the
one or the other.

Chapter. xv.
Of the office as well of the ministers as of the Christian people in the
supper: and of the fault which the priests and the Roman Catholics do
commit against the same in their Mass.

WHen then the Lord does say, Take ye, and eat ye, and then expounds by the
pro^ise which follows this commandment, the ^ause of the commandment, he
admonishes as ^ell the ministers as the people, of that which ^oth the one and
the other ought to do in the ^upper. As touching the ministers, their office
is ^o advertise the people both of the commandment, and of the promise, and
of that which they ^^ught to do according to the one and the other, and what it
is that they ought to attend. And ye ^ffice of the people is to be obedient to
yt which ^s commanded them, and to believe the promise which is made unto them.
Then if the mini^ters do not this office, they are sacrilegious, in ^s much as
they do steal and hide the word of God from his people, which is so holy and
sacred a thing. Wherefore they may be well placed among ^he false prophets, whom
the Lord accuses by ^eremie, to have stolen his word from his people. Iere.
23.
They are in like forte very open rebels to Jesus Christ. ^ote well ^^is.
For seeing that they ought to repr^sent his person in the administration of
the si^per and of al sacraments, it must in any wise b^ that they do that
which he commands them t^ do, and that they follow his example. For if the do
otherwise and contrary thereunto, they man not be called the ministers of Jesus
Christ bu^ only by a wrong title. Now it is certain tha^ he commanded them
to do in his remembrance the very same which he then did. And what is (...)
that he then did: him: and also do great wrong to his people, in not
administering unto them that which ^hey ought to administer unto the^. The fau^^
of the p^^ple.
And as they ^aile in this behalf, even so the people do not their duty, if
they will not receive the word nor ^he signs, when they are duly and sincerely
^dministred unto them. For therein they show them selves rebels against God.

Chapter xvi.
Of the difference and distinction that the Roman doctors do make in
thapplicatio^ of the sacramental words of the sacraments, as well concerning the
signs of them, as the persons which are capable thereof: and of the foundation
of their transsubstanciation which they ground upon the same.

^Eing the^ that it is so, it is easy to judge, how foolish and full of
filthy ignorance, the distinction and the difference that the Roman do^tors
do make between Baptism and the su^per, and their other sacraments, is,
touching t^ applying of the words and of the signs (...) them. For they say
that in baptism the sacr^mentall words are addressed to the person which they
baptize, Note well.
For albeit that they hau^ blessed and consecrated it after their manner, an^
that they do reserve it in their fonts for the use of baptism, and that they
do pronounce the sacramental words thereof in thadministration yet for all that
they hold it neither for sacrament, nor for sign of baptism; but in the very
accion and use thereof, to wit, when it is applied to the persons that men
do baptize. Demand
But if they grant us this point concerning baptism, why make they so great
difficulty to grant us the same concerning the supper? For have they more
express commandment of Jesus Christ to administer the water in Baptism, then
the bread and the wine in the supper, which are the signs? I say yet further,
that it is so, that they have a more express commandment to distribute the
bread and the wine of the supper, Note the well.
then to administer the water of the Baptism. For where is it that they shall
be able to find that Jesus Christ has said so expressly of the water of
Baptism, Take ye, baptize ye, and be ye baptized, as he has plainly spoken
of the bread and of the wine of the supper, Take ye, eat ye, Take ye, drink
ye, yea every one of you. And to who^ did he speak these words following, to
wit, This same is my body, and this same is my blood, but even to those very
men to whom he spoke ye words going before, as I have already declared, and
to whom he gave commandment to eat ye bread and to drink the wine, which he
brake and distributed unto them for signs of his body and of his blood:

Chapter xvii.
Of thapplying of the sacramental words t^ the signs of the sacraments and
of the consecration of them.

THey may not then at all allege, that they d^^ better agree with ye matter of
ye bread and (...) the wine in the supper, then with that of the w^ter in
Baptism, and yt it has not equal respe^^ to the persons, as well in the one
sacrament as (...) the other. Note well.
Wherefore to speak properly, the^ must be referred in both the sacraments
as well (...) ye signs as to ye persons, to whom they ought (...) be
administered, but it is ever in the respect of the persons. For it should be to
no purpose that the^ were pronounced in secret, and in their absenc^ For that
should be more like to a charm and a^ enchantment, then to a sacrament. For
the ma^ter which is taken for the signs in all sacr^ments, cannot be the
signs, Note well.
if the same be n^^ dedicated and consecrated thereunto by t^^ word of God, by
the which they are made h^ly and sacred signs, where as before they we^^ but
simple and common matter. And therefo^^ there is so great difference between
that th^^ it was, Example.
and that that it is after that the word (...) added unto it, as there is
between a piece of s^uer before it be stamped, and that that it is aft^^ the
coining thereof having imprinted in it (...) mark of the prince, the which
gives unto it his estimation and value: It has also like difference, as has
the wax, An oth^^
whereof men make a ^eale, before it be printed, and after that it is printed
having received the form by the Impression of the seal, it is then no more
simple wax as before, but the true seal of the prince. For that cause the rod
the which Moses held ^n his hand, Exodus 3.
keeping the sheep of Iethro his Father in law when God appeared unto him in
^he bush, is afterward called the rod of God, when God had commanded him to
use ye same ^n his ministry, and in the miraculouse works which were done by
the same. Aug. in Ioh. Ho^^ 13.
And in this sort must we understand that which Saint Augustine said speaking
of baptism, The word is joined ^o the element, and it is made a sacrament. He
^nderstandeth by the element the water of bap^isme, the which is dedicated to
be the sign ^hereof by the word which is joined unto it, ^he which is not
joined unto it, but to be vn^erstood of those unto whom it belongs, and ^o
understand by the same to what end it is ^^yned to the signs. those which do
present them and assist at their baptism, for so much as it is not founded
onel^ upon the person of the infants, and upon their faith, but also upon the
faith of their Godfather^ and Godmothers, and of the whole Church, i^ as much
as it is grounded upon the alliaunc^ that God has made with the faithful,
because h^ has also comprehended in the same, their chi^dren, saying that he
would be their God and the God of their children. ^^ene. 17. ^^^t. 13.
Wherefore seeing yt baptism is the sacrament thereof in the Christian Church,
as the Circumcision was in the Church of Israel, the children of the Christian^
are no less capable of Baptism the^ were thos^ of the Jews of circumcision,
for so much as ther^ is one very foundation and one very reason i^ them both
touching this point. And therefore such is the consecration which is done to
the water in baptism, whereby the same is consecrated to that use. Saint
Augustine, as hau^ those of the supper to the bread and to the wine, i^ sort
that ye water is no less consecrated by thi^ mean to be the sign of
baptism, then is the bread and ye wine in ye supper to be signs thereof For a
man may say in very troth thereof, the ^ame that Saint Augustine has said of
the wa^er of baptism. For there is like reason in both, ^n as much as there is
none other mean, wher^y the matter which is taken to be the sign ^f the
Sacraments, may be dedicated and con^ecrated to that use, otherwise then by the
word of God, whereof they are signs and sacraments. Behold here then that
which the ancients did ^all here properly, Consecration.

Chapter xviii.
Of the change and conversion of the signs of the sacraments into the thing
signified by them, according to the usage of the ancient Church, and of the
doctors of the same.

ANd when they speak of the change and conversion of the signs of the
sacraments into ^he thing which they do signify, they do understand this
change of the usage of them, Note wel^ this.
for the which cause they do also change their name, taking the name of the
thing which they signify, in contemplation and in respect of this change of
the use, and not at all of the change of one substance into an other, to wit,
of the substance of the signs, into that of the things which they do
signify. For if there were such (...) change of substance, by the virtue of
the sacramental words and of the consecration o^ the signs, it should
necessaryly then come t^ pass, that the same should be in all sacraments, (...)
not more in the one then in the other: fors^^ much as there is none at all that
may be sacraments without consecration and without sacramental words, and
they have all this common together, and the like reason is in them all,
concerning this point. ^ote.
Wherefore the Romayn^ transsubstantiators have no ground of reason to affirm
that there is more transsubstanciati^^ in the supper, by change of the
substance of the signs, into the thing signified by the virtue o^ the
consecration and of the sacramental words then in all the other sacraments. And
therefore if they would that we should believe them, the^ must then prove their
sayings by other testimonies then them selves, for so much as they do^
overthrow the whole nature of sacraments by their doctrine. For the bread and
the wine o^ the Supper, can not be made the signs there of, but only by the
virtue of their consecration and of the sacramental words by the which they
are consecrated to that use. For as we hau^ already heard by Saint Augustine,
the word^ must be always joined to the element, before that it may be made a
sacrament. Now it is ther^ then joined, when the bread and the wine which are
taken of the elements of this world, are applied to the use of the supper, and
this application is made by the consecration and by the sacramental words,
when they are pronounced and declared in the administration of the Supper in
the same sort as Jesus Christ did pronounce and declare them, and commanded the
same to be done according to his example. Behold then here all the conversion
and all the transsubstanciation which may be in the supper, as well as in the
other sacraments.

Chapter xix.
Whether every change carry with it conversion of one substance into another:
and what difference there is between change and transsubstanciation: and of
the double change of the signs which should be required in the supper, if the
doctrine of tra^ssubstanciation were true.

ANd therefore when the ancient doctors did speak of change and conversion
of the signs into ye same, they understood none other, as I have showed and
proved very plainly, and by good testimonies of the ancient doctors the^
selves in other treatises of mine. For every change and every conversion of
one thing into an other carries not with it at all transsubstanciation of one
substance into an other. For there may be change, without conversion of
substance. But conversion of substance can not be without change. We may then
say yt where there is transsubstanciation by conversion of substance, there is
there change. But there is not always transsubstanciation and conversion of
substance, where there is change. Wherefore there is as great difference
between change and transsubstanciation, as is between the general and the
special. For change is the general which comprehends under it
transsubstanciation, but transsubstanciation does not comprehend in it change,
for so much as his signifiration is more ample (as that of change, of
transmutation and of conversion) then that of transsubstanciation. For, all
these names do comprehend other kinds of change and of conversion, then of
one substance into an other. For as there is change of substances, so is there
also change of accidents, to wit, of qualities, of time, of places, of
habits and such other like things, according to their natures, and to the
predicaments under yt which they are comprehended, as the Logicians distinguish
them. ^egenera^^on.
Our regeneration is not without change, which is wrought in our own persons.
But it is not at all by conversion of ye substance of our bodies nor of our
souls into others, or into any other substance, but it is in quality, which
is, from vice into virtue, by the change and renewing of the old Adam, and of
the old man into the new. Conu^^^ this we^^.
And therefore if there be any change in the supper, touching the matter of the
signs thereof, it must then be considered of what kind this change is, and in
what predicament it must be sought, if we will speak as becomes Logicians,
and if there be chaunges, either of substance or of quality, in as much as the
matter of the signs thereof is otherwise qualified, when it is applied to that
use, then it was before. I have already declared and proved, that there can be
no more change of one substance into an other, then there is in all other
sacraments, because of the reasons that I have already alleged, taken as well
of the nature of them, as of the testimonies of the word of God, whereupon they
are grounded. And if there were such a change, Note w^^
it must needs be that it should be in 2. sorts, to wit, the one, by the
which ye bread and the wine should be appointed to be the signs of the body
and of the blood of Jesus Christ: and the other to convert the substance of the
bread and of the wine into his body and blood, after that they should have been
made ye signs thereof, by the first consecration, and by ye first change
which should have been made by ye same. And by this mean it would come to
pass that there should be 2. consecratio^s, Way wel^ this.
and 2. sorts of sacramental words. The first, to consecrat and cause ye bread
and the wine to be the signs: and then the second, to convert them afterward
into the body and into ye blood of Jesus Christ: or else it must be, that the
same very words should do both at one instant. And if the same might be done
in the supper, there is no reason, why it should not be done also in the other
sacraments, for the reasons which I have already declared, and chiefly in
those in the which ye holy Ghost has used like manners of speech as in the
supper.

Chapter xx.
Of the ground of the error of transsubstanciation, and of the absurdities
which follow the same, and of the application of the sacramental words to
those persons which are capablc, and what faith there is there required.

BUt the Roman doctors, having not well understood ye meaning nor ye manners of
speech of the ancient doctors, have taken them for a change of one substance
into an other in stead of taking them for the change which is in the use
thereof. Note the
It is no marvel at all if they be fallen into that error, seeing that they
have so il understood the nature of the sacrament of the supper, that not only
they have converted it into a sacrifice in their mass, but also they have made
it a sacrament of the altar, the which they account for a sacrament, yea when
it is out of ye use thereof. Wherefore seeing they know not what the true use of
the supper is, no more have they well understood what was the change of the
signs in the same, in respect of their proper use. For that cause even as they
have changed their use into an other wholly new and strange, by their
doctrine and invention, even so have they found out an other new sort of
change, of the substance of the signs of the supper, into the substance of
the thing signified by them, against the doctrine and the usage of all the
ancient Church. This ignorance and new invention has been the cause of
great and filthy errors and abuses of the transsubstanciation, and of the
infinite absurdities that the same draws after it. We must then first note,
to know in what sort the same is dedicated and consecrated to that use by the
same word, according to that which I have lately alleged of Saint Augustine,
saying, The word is joined to ye element, and it is made a sacrament. And then
we must go on further, to consider how the same word is applied to the
persons, to whom the sacraments are administered, and for whose cause the matter
of the signs and of the sacraments is dedicated and consecrated to that use
whereunto it serves. For if the word were not joined and applied, but only to
the matter of the signs, the which Saint Augustine calls element, because it
is taken of these earthly elements, it should not be converted into a sacrament
by the conversion of the use whereunto it is converted: but should always
remain in his first quality, and should not be qualified, as it is when that
it is applied to the use of ye sacraments. For God has not given the word to
man to declare ye same to insensible creatures, ^say. 29. ^^g. in ^oh. Hom.
(...).
and to babble and mumble the^ without understanding, as also Esaias does
witness. And therefore Saint Augustine says yet very well, that ye element
is made a sacrament by the word which is joined unto it, not so much because it
is spoken, but because it is believed. He does not deny, but yt the element is
made a sacrament by the word, because it is spoken and pronounced, but it is
chiefly because yt men do believe ye same word. For men could not believe it, if
it were not declared unto the^ which should and ought to believe it. But his
only meaning is, yt it is not enough to speak and pronounce it, but yt it must
also be received by faith. From whence it follows also, that it must needs be
yt it be declared and understood. For otherwise men could not believe,
considering that faith can not be faith without the understanding and ye
knowledge of the things, which are set forth unto men by the word of God. into
a manner of sorcerie, of charms and of enchantments against the expressed word
of God*

Chapter xxi.
Whether the Sacraments and their virtue do depend as well of the persons which
do administer them, as of those to whom they are administered.

But they may reply that if it were so as I say, ^eplie.
according to the testimony of Saint Augustine, the sacraments, and the virtue
and the efficacy of them should depend more upon the faith of the^, to whom
they should be administered, then upon the ordinance and the word of God,
whereupon they are builded. ^swere.
Whereunto I answer that so far it is of from me so to conclude, that I say
yet further, that they do not only not depend at all upon those unto whom
they are administered, neither yet upon the very ministers which do administer
them. For albeit ye minister were as unfaithful as Judas was, yea thoroughly an
Atheist, and of the worst conscience of the world, yt notwithstanding the
sacraments which they should administer, should be no less sacraments, then if
a very Apostle of Christ, or some other very holy personage should administer
them, provided that such a minister should be called by lawful vocation,
according to the order which the Lord has ordained in his Church, and that he
should administer the sacraments in the very true manner that they have been
ordained by the Lord, without adding or diminishing, changing, disguising and
counterfaiting in any thing which belongs to their proper nature and
substance. Consider very welthre^ points.
whether the Lord did ordeine the Sacraments which are set forth unto her in
his name. The second, whether he that does administer them, be called by
lawful vocation to that charge to administer them. The third, whether he
does administer them according to the ordinance of the Lord or no, or
whether he do disguise and peruerte them, or whether he do administer
others in the stead of them. For as there ought nothing to be attempted in the
Church without lawful vocation, even so the only vocation is not sufficient,
if the charge by her committed, be not executed according to the Lords
ordinance. For albeit that a man shall be called by lawful vocation, he may
very well straye afterward, and may pass the limittes thereof, and do clean
contrary to his duty, but he shall not be allowed therein. Consider this.
And therefore it behooves every man herein to take good heed that he be not
deceived. For if the Minister do deliver any other word, then that which God
has revealed unto us in his holy scriptures, and any other Sacraments then
those which the Lord has ordained, and in any other sort, he may well
boaste of his calling, for that shall not at all let, but that he is a false
minister, and a seducer in that behalf, and that those unto whom he shall
administer, be not seduced and deceived by him. For his vocation may not exempt
him, but so far forth as he follows the same, and not at all in that
wherein he does contrary thereunto. On the contrary, if he do administer the
word and the Sacraments which he ought to do, and in such sort as the
Lord has commanded, his infidelity and wicked life shall not let, but that
which is of God shall be always of God, and shall always have his virtue and
his efficacy in those which are made capable by him, because that, that which
the Lord has ordained, takes his virtue and force of him, Excellent
instruction.
and not at all of the Minister which is but the instrument, which of him self
can do nothing, but so far forth as the Lord shall work by him. And
therefore the Gospel, Example.
which Judas preached, was no less the Gospel then that which was preached by
the other Apostles his fellows; for so much as he was called to the same
ministry with them. This notwithstanding, Jesus Christ yet in those days
said that Judas was a Devil. He was then a Devil and an Apostle both
together. An Apostle by mean of his vocation, and for so much as he did
execute it according to the charge that was committed unto him, and a Devil in
respect of his hypocrisy, and of his infidelity, covetousness and malice.

If then during the time that he was yet an Apostle, he should have
administered the supper, in such sort as Jesus Christ did ordeine and administer
the same, it should have been no less^ the Lords supper, then if Saint Peter
or some other of the Apostles had administered the same* On the other side, if
Saint Peter him self, or any other of the Apostles, yea a very Angel, should
administer it in that sort as it is at this day administered in the Roman
Church, and should say mass as the Roman priests at this day^ there do,
yet could it not be the supper of the Lord, nor acceptable or pleasant unto
God* for so much as his ordinance is there utterly ^^uerthrowen: and in that
respect could be no bet^ter then if Judas had said it. A good instruction.
We must the^ consider not only the vocation of the ministers but also the
execution of their charge. And whe^ther they do both agree together, the rest
which may be in their person, be it never so vicious may not hinder the virtue
of the Lords mi^^sterie. But if these things be there wanting, (...) namely
the second; Example.
do deli^^ forth false money in stead of good, the offi^^ whereunto he is
called, can not make it oth^ then false money, because he does not execu^ the
office faithfully, and does change the go^ money which he receives to
distribute by the commandment of his Lord, into that which is not the same
that he received to be distributed. And by this mean they which shall have
received the same, shall be deceived and spoiled. On the other side, although he
were wicked and unjust, if he did distribute it good and such as he was
commanded, the same could not let at all but that it should be good, and that
they which should receive it, should very well make their profit thereof. So
much concerning ministers, and that which their ministry may receive of them.
Let us now speak of those to whom they are sent. Consyd^^ this well.
If they do administer that which they ought to do, their ministry has his
virtue as well in the respect of God, as in the respect of them selves. And as
concerning those to whom they do administer them, Co^municantes.
they may in no wise make their profit of it, if they do not receive in faith
that which is administered unto them. For they can not communicate with Jesus
Christ, nor be partakers of his graces, the which he communicates to his
church, by the means of the ministry, which he has ordained in the same,
without having faith in him and his promises. Then if they have true faith, A
good lesson.
they do receive with the signs the things signified by the^, but if there be
no faith in them, they shall receive nothing but that which they may receive
without the same, but not at all that which without the same they may not
receive. ^ote.
Now they may well receive the signs of the sacraments without faith,
because that they have in their bodies and in their members the instruments
whereby to receive the^. But they may in no wise receive the thing which they
signify, because that it is spiritual, and that they want the spiritual
instruments, without the which no man may receive them: the which no man may
have but by the mean of faith. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 21. c. 25. and In
10. Tra. 26. c. 6.
And for that cause Saint Augustine says, that they do in deed receive the
sacrament, by the which he understands the signs, but not the thing of the
sacrament, which is to say, that which is signified by them. For he does even
in that sort take the name of Sacrament, when he so speaks, as it appears
by that that he does distinguish from the thing signified by the same. For the
sacrament is not a true sacrament, 3. things in a true sacrament.
if it have not always these three things, to wit, the word of God, and the
signs ordained by him, and the thing which they signify. All these things
never fail in ye respect of God: but they which do abuse them, are the cause
that it is not a sacrament unto them, in as much as they do reject through
their unbelief, the grace which is offered unto them by him. Example.
Wherefore the like happens unto those to whom the sacraments are
administered, as to me^ in respect of ye Su^ne, the which shines well for all,
but not to all. For there are none but those which have eyes, that do receive
his light, the which he presents to all: but in the mean time, such as are
blind do not receive it. For they have not the instrument, without the which
they cannot receive it. So stands it between the faithful and the
unfaithful in respect of the ministry of the Church, for it presents unto
all the benefits of God. And albeit that the faithless do not receive them at
al, that not withstanding the same lets not, but that the ministry has
always in it self his virtue. But in the mean while it is not ordained but to
be exercised toward those for whom it was ordained, or otherwise it should
not be a ministry, and by consequence should not have his virtue.

Chapter. xxii.
That the signs of the Supper may no more be Sacraments out of the usage
thereof, the^ that of Baptism out of the time of Baptisime.

TO return again then to the point whereupon I was, Conclusion.
I conclude that as the water of baptism cannot be the Sacrament, nor ye sign
of baptism, but only in the administration of the same, even so is it of the
bread and of the wine in the Supper. For the sacramental words, both of the
one and of the other sacrament, have no more respect to the matter of the
signs, nor less to the persons which are capable in the baptism, then in the
supper: as S. Augustine has very well understood it. For if he had said of
the supper only, that the element is made a Sacrament, when the word is
joined unto it, ^pinion of ^he Roman^istes.
ye Roman doctors might more justly serve them selves with his testimonies to
prove the difference which they make between the baptism and the supper,
saying that the sacramental words of baptism have regard, and do belong to
the persons which men do baptize, and not at all to the matter of the
sacrament, which is the water and the sign thereof: and that those of the
supper have regard and do belong to the matter of the same, to wit, to the
bread and to the wine and not to the persons, as they do in baptism.
Conclusion.
Whereupon they do conclude, that the bread consecrated by them is no less a
sacrament, being kept in a box, pixte, or hutch, then when they do
administer it in their supper. And therefore they do always call it the sacrament
of the altar, and the body of the Lord, and the body of God, as well in their
pixtes and hutches, as in the administration of their supper. Note this.
And we on the contrary, do say and prone forth with by the very words of
Jesus Christ, that if it were so in deed, that the bread and the wine should
be transsubstantiated into the body and into the blood of him, as the
transsubstanciatours do affirm, yet for all that they can not make the same by
their transsubsta^tiation, if that forth wc they do not distribute it, and that
they be not communicated, as Jesus Christ has done and commanded. For they
can not do that which he has done and has commanded to be done in that
matter, doing the clean contrary to that which he has done and commanded.
For the minister can not have the virtue which the Lord has given to the
ministry of his Apostles, and of their true successors, if it be not the
very same ministry. Now it appears plainly that it is not the very same
ministry, for so much as the ordinance and purpose of Jesus Christ, is there
manifestly and wholly violated and overthrown. For Jesus Christ declares
openly by the same, that he has not ordained the bread and the wine, to be
signs of the holy sacrament, but to the end that they should be administered,
distributed, and communicated in the same, according as he has expressly
commanded, saying, Take ye and eat ye. Likewise, Take ye and drink ye. Who
may then believe that Jesus Chrisse did give such power as the Roman priests
do there attribute, to these which do clean contrary to his so expressed
ordinance and commandment: not here question only of their vocation, but also
of the execution of their charge and office. For albeit that it were so that
the vocation were in all things else very lawful, yet for all that, doing
clean contrary to the same, that which they do, may in no wise be allowed by
God. And therefore I demand of them, ^mande.
whether they be ordained and called to the ministry, whereof they do so
glory, either to preach the word of God, and to administer the supper, and the
other sacraments according to the same, as the Apostles and their true
successors have done before them: or else to say mass, and to overthrow in
the same the whole institution of the Lord. If it be but to say mass, and to
do only that which they do in the same, I can not in that respect grant, that
their vocation nor the work which they do according to the same, ^ote this
may be of God. Wherefore I do again conclude, that albeit that the doctrine
of their transsubstantiatio^ were in the rest true, yet notwithstanding, it
could not have place out of the use of the supper, and their bread and wine
could be but bread and wine, and not at all the body and the blood of Christ,
except they were distributed and communicated, accordingly as he has
expressedly commanded. And therefore I say again that so far of is it that
the testimony which I have alleged of S. Augustine, may establishe the
distinction which the transsubstantiatours do make between Baptism and the
Supper (whereof I have even now made mention) that on the contrary it does
clean overthrow it. For he said those words, Con^^o^ this.
speaking not at all of the Supper, but of Baptism, by the which he does
plainely-declare that the sacramental word thereof, have no less regard to
the sign which is appointed unto it, then those of the Supper have to the
bread and to the wine. From whence it follows, that if for that cause there
be transsubstantiation in the one, it is also in the other: for the
sacramental words are no less spoken of the one then of the other, to the
persons which are capable of these Sacraments.

Chapter. xxiii.
Of the true distinction and difference which ought to be had between Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord.

SEeing that I have declared the abuse and the error which is in the
distinction and difference that the transsubstantiatours do make between the
sacraments of baptism and the supper touching their signs, and the
application of the same, I will touch briefly ye true distinction and
difference which must be put between them, taking the same of their proper
nature and use, And for the better understanding of it, we ought first to
consider what it is that is common to them both, and then what it is that every
of them has proper and special to it self. ^at ^^gs are ^^mon and ^^per to
^se sacra^uts.
They both have this common and general, that they send us to the death and to
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and that they are ordained to the end that by
the mean of them we may communicate with Jesus Christ, and may be made
partakers of his benefits. But because that God does offer unto us diverse
graces by him, of the which he would make us partakers, he has ordained two
sacraments the better to represent unto us his principal graces, the which do
comprehend all the rest. For seeing that by sin we are dead of spiritual
death, (...) good in^uction.
we must first receive that life which is contrary to that death, as though we
should rise from spiritual death to spiritual life, the which we receive of
the benefit of Jesus Christ, who brings us that life, because he has it in
him self, as he him self does witness, saying, I am the way, ^oh^. 18.11
the truth, and the life. Likewise, I am the resurrection and the life. For we
cannot attain to the blessed resurrection and to eternal life, which we wait
for, but we must first be made partakers of this spiritual life, which Jesus
Christ by his death and resurrection does bring unto us. Note this ansplan^tion.
And we can not be made partakers thereof, if we be not planted and graffed
into him, which is the new Adam, and the new man, and the new stock of
mankind, in the which we must be renewed, even as we have been planted and
graffed into the old Adam, and into the old man which is the old stock of
mankind, the which is altogether corrupted through sin, wherefore we must
needs be transported from this stock into the other, if we will be transported
from death to life. And to bring this transportation to pass, we must die to
our old man, and must rise again to our new, and we must spoil our selves
of the first, and clothe us with the second. And because that we can not find
this virtue in our selves, we must therefore take it of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, to the end that we may be thoroughly renewed and
made new creatures. This grace, and this benefit of Jesus Christ, is called
in the holy scripture Regeneration, because that we are regenerated and borne
again as of new by him, not bodily, but spiritually. For we have already
bodily life by our first nativity, the which we hold of ye stock of Adam.
Wherefore we have no need of a second nativity, the which we do call new
birth, and regeneration in respect of this life, the which we have already, but
in respect of the spiritual life, the which we receive of ye stock of the new
Adam, and of the new man, as the stippes and branches which are graffed into a
good tree, and as the vine branches which receive their life and nouriture of
their stock. For that cause Jesus Christ is compared to the stock of the
vine, ^n. 15.
and his disciples to the branches joined to the stock, and they which are
not at al graffed nor joined together with him, are compared to the branches
that are cut off from the stock. ^^gnifica^^^n of bap^^^me.
And therefore that this benefit is represented and communicated unto us by
Baptism, and how we do put off the old man and put on the new, ^^m. 6.
^^l. 3.
Saint Paul says, that by Baptism we are dead and buried with Jesus Christ,
into his death, and risen again with him, and planted and graffed, and
incorporated into him, and that all those which are baptized, have put on Jesus
Christ. And thus much concerning the benefit of regeneration, and of baptism,
which is the Sacrament and testimony thereof, whereby the Lord witnesses
unto us, how that he does renew and regenerate us in his son Jesus
Christ, into a new life, and does refourme us to his image, by the virtue of
his holy spirit, and does adopte us by the spirit of adoption, and does aduowe
and receive us for his children into his house, which is his Church. For the
which cause we are baptized in ye name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. Thus much concerning the nature and (...)

(...) faults, and very apparent to those which understand what sacraments are,
and do know the nature of them, and also that of the body and of the blood of
Jesus Christ, and of the union and the distinction of his divine and human
natures in the person of him. The first is, touching the manner of expounding
the sacramental words of the supper. The 2. concerning the signs of the
same, and the abolishing of them. The 3. concerning the things that they
signify. For the first they give to the sacramental words, by Jesus Christ
pronounced in the Supper, an exposition altogether new and strange, which
cannot in any wise agree with any kind of sacrame^tal speech, that is in all the
holy scripture, like unto that which Jesus Christ has used in the Supper. For
first of a sacramental proposition, they will make a natural proposition. Note
these propofitions.
By mean whereof they have already overthrown the nature of the Sacraments.
For if I say of the bread of the Supper, This bread is the body of Christ,
there is no appearance to take it naturally so, as when I say, Jesus Christ is
man, and Jesus Christ is God: but this proposition must be taken sacramentally,
for so much as we must always take the signification of ye terms and words
which men do use, according to ye matter whereof men speak and ye nature of
ye same. Wherefore if me^ speak of natural things, the words must be taken
naturally, but if men speak of spiritual and sacramental things, they must
be understood spiritually and sacramentally. ^acrame^^ speches ^^d their ^^^^e
use.
If there be then sundry sorts of sacramental speeches in the scripture, like
to that which Jesus Christ did use in the Supper, there is no reason to take
them in one sense in some sacraments, and in an other clean contrary in some
others, for so much as the matter is always sacramental, and the manners of
speech always like. And on the other side, it is a great fault to take the
words in their proper and natural signification, when they should be
understood by figure, and that the meaning of them cannot be true otherwise,
as they ought to be understood chiefly for two causes in the speech of Jesus
Christ in the Supper, which words are at this day in controversy. The first
is because that al other manners of sacramental speeches like unto this may not
be otherwise understood, nor also diverse others which resemble them. The other
is, that if they be expounded otherwise, there follow infinite absurdities,
the which do sufficiently declare that such an exposition may not agree with
the meaning of the words of the Lord. And that which more is, on which side
soever the transsubstantiatours and their adherentes may turn them selves,
they can never in any wise expound these words according to ye very sense
that they would give them, but that they will be constrained to acknowledge
and receive some figure, as I have very amply declared all these matters in
diverse other books. I say further also, that they shall not be able to find
in all the holy Scriptures any manner of speech, Note (...)
which carries with it transsubstanciation and conversion of one substance into
an other, like to that that Jesus Christ has used in his supper. Wherefore is
it then that they will here disguise and transsorme the language of the holy
Ghost by a new exposition, whereof they have neither testimony nor example in
the whole scriptures, namely in the matter of sacraments, where they have many
to the contrary: For albeit they say they will take the words of Jesus
Christ simply and according to the letter, Yet for all that they do it not
when they do expound the meaning of them according to their doctrine. For
Jesus Christ has not spoken that which they say by their exposition.

Chapter ii.
Of the abolishing of the signs of the Supper, and of the things signified by
them: and consequently of all the sacrament by the Roman Transsubstanciation.

THe other fault which is concerning ye signs, confisteth in that, that by
their exposition, whereby they would establish transsubstanciation, they do
abolish the material signs of the supper, converting them into the thing which
they signify, or at least they do confound them both together, whereas they
should be distinguished the one from the other. ^^te well ^^s.
For even as a sacrament cannot be a true sacrament without the word of God:
no more can it be without material signs which are joined to that word, as
seals thereof. Now if the substance of bread and wine were transsubstanciate
and converted into that of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ, there
should be there no more bread nor wine, and by consequent there should be no
more material signs, forasmuch as there is none other but the bread and the
wine. From whence it should also follow, that there should be at all no
sacrament. Signs ^^gniftyng thing sig^ifted.
And so willing to convert the signs into the thing which they signify: they
have neither ye one nor the other. For in abolishing the signs, they abolish
also the thing which should be signified by them. Note this
For it can not be there offered nor communicated sacramentally, as it ought
to be set forth and communicated, if the means be taken away which the Lord
has ordained to make us partakers thereof. And for to allege that the signs
do always remain signs albeit that they be converted into the thing which
they should signify, because that their accidents do always remain whole,
the which do there remain for signs: that is not to satisfy ye question and
the difficulty, but to make it yet greater. For as the accidents may not be
without substance, Note the argume^
no more may they be accidents of substances, if they be not agreeable to
their nature. For albeit that a man may not see and perceive the substances but
by their accidents, it follows not for all that, that all accidents do agree
with every substance, but are attributed unto them according to their nature,
and distinguished as they are: or otherwise al nature should be confounded in a
marvelous confusion of substances and accidents. An other argumen^
And further we have to note, that among accidents there be some that are so
proper and natural to their substance whereof they be accidents, that they may
not be separated, without corrupting the subject which sustayneth them: in sort
that when they shall be separated, it is no more yt which it was when they were
joined unto it. And by this mean the bread and the wine may be no more bread
and wine, if they have not the color, and the savor, and ye other qualities
which are proper and natural unto them. And if they cannot be that which they
should naturally be without their natural qualities and other accidents,
other ^ument.
their qualities and accidents may much less be without their substance.

Chap. iii.
That the bread and the wine of the Supper can not be the true signs of the
same, if they do not remain always bread and wine in their proper substance and
nature: and that the transsubstanciators cannot cover their error with a cover
of miracle.

Note well his argument.
FRom whence it follows of two things, the one: which is, that the bread and
wine remain always bread and wine, as well after the pronunciation of the
sacramental words, as before: for so much as they do always keep their
first nature, as all the senses may judge, the which are not false: or else it
must be that there is some illusion which deceives the senses, and that makes
the things to appear otherwise then they are in deed: by mean whereof the
signs should be false and not true signs. Wherefore being false they could
not be fignes of true things, for the troth cannot be represented by a lie,
nor the true by a false, for so much as there must needs be a true
correspondance between the signs and the things which they signify. They
must then confess that the accidents are wholly without substance and without
subject, against the whole order of God and of nature, or else that the
accidents of bread and of wine, be the accidents of the body and of the blood
of Jesus Christ, and that the same body and the same blood are the subject and
the substance of them. On which side soever they will take it, Mirac^^
if that they will not by that means overthrow the whole nature of the
miracles of God, as by their doctrine they do overthrow the whole order of
nature. For as the power of God may not be separated from his wisdom, by the
which he never employeth his power, but wisely, and keeping always good order:
even so no more does he, be it that he work naturally or supernaturally,
Works natural supernat^rall.
but that he makes that which he has made, and that that which is, is the
same in deed, that it is. For if it were otherwise, he should be against him
self and against his own works. that which they are, and that he would that
they should be. The which thing they should be, if the bread and the wine of
the supper did keep continually their former nature, as they do in deed, and
the experience shows if: and yet for all that they should not hold their
proper substance, without the which they could not have nor keep their natural
virtue, as in deed they do hold it, as well after the consecration as before.
And if they will not confess it, they must then needs confess that the
natural senses which God has given us, ^nfider ^s absur^^e.
do deceive us, and that the bodily and outward senses do show false things
to the spiritual and inward senses. And if it be so, there is then the work
of God corrupted, and his order wholly perverted. For even as we may not
separate his wisdom from his power, no more may we also separate his will,
the which we cannot know but so far forth as he declares by his word.
Now he has not declared unto us by the same, ^gument.
that the bread which should be baked betweens two hot prons, should be
converted into the body of his son Jesus Christ, by the virtue of certain
words spoken over it, by the priests so appointed and qualified as they are in
the Roman Church, nor that the same has ever been done, nor that it shall be
done: as he has declared that his son should take unto him our flesh, and
that he should be conceived in the womb of a virgin, of whom he should be
borne and that he should be conversant, not inuisibly, but visibly among men.
Even so is it of all the other articles of our faith. Note thi^
But of that of Transsubstanciation, there is no one Prophet, which has ever
prophesied any thing, nor Apostle, no Evangelist that ever wrote any thing in
such sort as the transsubstanciatours do expound it and set it forth. For
this cause the true ancient Church, and the ancient doctors and divines of
the same by whose hands we have received all the symboles, which the Church
yet at this day uses, which do conteyne the Articles of our faith, have not
set down any thing touching this Transsubstanciation, nor no one of them which
do depend no not in the very symbol, the which the priests do recite and
sing in their mass.

Chapter iiii.
That the doctrine of transsubstanciation can not be true, without spoiling of
Jesus Christ and his human nature.

NOw if they take their second point, whereof I have lately spoken, they
redouble their fault, for by that mean, they spoil Jesus Christ of the
proprieties, great ab^ditie.
without the which his human nature cannot be a true human nature, in sort
that they give him a human body, the which altogether and at one time shall be
a human, and not a human body. For it cannot be a true human body, if
it have not all that which is proper to a true human body, and without the
which it cannot be an human body, be it glorified or not glorified. For it
must needs be always that a body be a body (be it glorified or not) and not a
spirit: ^ngnlar struction
and that it do keep always his natural proprieties, without the which it
cannot be a true body, and such as God has created it, and would that it
should be. For even as the soul of man united to his body, ^^ample.
cannot be a body, because that it is a spirit, but remains always a soul
and spirit: even so the body cannot be the soul, because it cannot be a
spirit: or else if it be converted into spirit, it is no more a body, as also
the spirit is no more the spirit if it be converted into body. The like is
of the body and of the soul of Jesus Christ, and of his divine and human
nature, of the which every one of them holds so continually his proprieties,
that the one cannot be that which the other is. For albeit that they be united
together by personal union, yet for all that they remain always distinct in
their unity, according to their proprieties, Note (...) distinct^
and not confused in sort that the one cannot be the other: wherefore we may
not say at all, that the divinity is the humanity, or that ye humanity is
the divinity, nor that the one is converted into the other. For if there were
such a conversion, they should no more be that which they are, but should be
changed into other natures, which thing cannot be. For God can never be but
God: Instruct^
Wherefore he can not be converted into man, but he may well unite man to him
self, as he has done in the person of his son Jesus Christ. In likewise man
can not be converted into God, for so much as he is a creature, and that God
which is the creator of all, cannot be created, but is without beginning as he
is without end and infinite: the which thing can not agree with any creature.
From whence it follows that the Gods which are created, and that have had
any beginning, are no Gods at all, but are only creatures, or else
illusions: Or vain imaginat^ons, or fantasies.
And as the substance of God cannot be converted into that of man, nor that of
man into that of God, for otherwise God should not be God, nor man should not
be man at all: Even so neither the one nor the other may be without his
convenient and natural proprieties. For if the human nature have the
proprieties belonging to the divine nature, it is no more human nature, but
divine. ^ote.
In like sort, if the body and the blood of Jesus Christ have the natural
proprieties which do belong to the bread and to the wine, as they have indeed,
if they have their qualities, and accidents, and these same effects, they are
not at all the body and the blood of him, but bread and wine, remaining always
in their substance with their accidents.

Chapter v.
That the doctrine of transsubstanciatio^ does overthrow a great part of the
Articles of the faith and Christian religion, concerning the work of the
redemption wrought by Jesus Christ.

THen even as the transsubstanciators do abolish from the supper the true
signs of the same by their transsubstanciation: even so do they take away the
things signified by them, to wit, the body and blood of Jesus Christ, in
as much as they transfigure them into an other nature, Note well.
spoiling them of their bodyly proprieties in such sort that they are no more a
very body nor a very blood, for so much as they have not their natural
proprieties, but have those of the bread and of the wine which should represent
them, and should not be the thing it self, the which they should signify. And
by the same ineane they overthrow all the Articles of our faith, touching the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, Acticle^ our fai^^ clean o^^ thrown^
and his conception and nativity, his death, resurrection and ascension into
heaven: for if he have such a body as they attribute unto him in their mass
and supper, it is not a true humayne body, in as much as it has no thing at all
of that which is required in a true humayne body, but only that which is
proper and natural to the bread, if it be so that the bread be converted into
the same. From whence it follows, nyther that it is not the same very body
which was conceived and borne of the virgin Mary, Note the
and which died, rose again, and went up into heaven: or else if it be the
same very body, it was never a true body, neither in the conception and
nativity, nor in the death, resurrection and ascension: or else it was
afterward changed, either into an imaginatiue body, or into a spirit, or
into God, in sort that it is become infinite as God, and that it is every where
in his proper essence and substance as God: or at the least yt it is in many
places at one instaunt, and that it has no one quality nor quantity
agreeable to a humayne body: The which things can in no wise agree with the
nature of a true body. And yt which I do say of ye doctrine of the
transsubstanciators, may be also said of that of the consubstanciators, who
albeit they do condenme transsubstanciation as we do, yet for all that they do
constitute a corporal presence of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ
with the bread and with the wine in the supper, which is not greatly different
from that of the transsubstanciators, and draws after it as many absurdities,
concerning ye proprieties of the human nature of Jesus Christ.

Chapter vi.
That the doctrine as well of the transsubstanciators as also of the
consubstanciators has no certain foundation upon the words of Jesus Christ,
and for what causes: and of the chief different which is between them and us,
touching the presence of Jesus Christ in the Supper.

IT may not then be that the transsubstantiatours, nor also ye
co^substantiacors may brag and glory as they do, that they have the
expressed word of Jesus Christ, who said, Con^^^ well (...) chapte^^
This is my body: and that their faith of transsubstantiation or
consubstantiation, is grounded upon the expressed and certain word of God.
For seeing that their faith does overthrow the true faith of the principal
articles of the Christian doctrine and religion, which are very plain and
thoroughly certain, it follows then in deed, that it can not be a true faith
as touching that point: and by consequent, it cannot be builded upon the word
of God. For they may not brag to have it in their favor, if they do not take
it in his true sense, without the which it is no more the word of God, but it
is disguised and overthrown. Now it appears evidently, Take t^^ word of God
in h^ true sense.
that it is taken in an other then his own true sense, when it is taken in
such a sense as overthrows the principal articles of the Christian faith:
which are not grounded upon any passage of the holy scriptures that is not well
understood, but upon so many testimonies of the Prophets and of the Apostles,
and so plain and evident, that there may remain no ambiguitie or doubt to
those which do believe the divine letters. The which thing can not be said of
the doctrine of transsubstantiation, nor of consubstantiation, which have no
other ground, but upon a wrong and evil understanding and exposition of the
words of Jesus Christ, the which does plainly and manifestly appear to be
contrary to the true sense of the same, for so much as it is impossible to
agree it, ^onsider ^ell this ^^atter.
either with the other manners of sacramental speech of the scriptures, and
with their lively signification and exposition, or else with the nature, as well
of the sacraments as of the true body of Jesus Christ, or of all those
articles of the faith, whereof I have now made mention. Exposition in matter of
sacraments.
For the exposition, which in matter of sacraments can not agree with all
those points, may not be true. On the contrary, that which disagreeth not at
all, but does very well agree with all these points, may in no wise be
rejected as false. Now we say that the same of ours does agree with them very
well, Note this.
in as much as it agrees with all other the like passages of the scriptures,
and like manners of sacramental and figurative speeches, and with the natures
of the sacraments and of the signs of them, and with that of the body and of
the blood of Jesus Christ, and with the articles of our faith. For we are not
at all in controversy with the transsubstantiatours, nor with the
consubstantiators, touching the words of the Supper, whether they be of Jesus
Christ, and whether they be true or no, and whether he be present in the
Supper or absent, and whether his body and his blood be there present and
distributed and communicated or no: for we all agree in all these points. But
the different is only in the manner of the presence and communication, to
wit, whether it be bodily, or spiritually, and whether the body and the
blood of Jesus Christ be there distributed, Note the matter.
and eaten and drunken bodily and naturally, or else spiritually, and
suppernaturally. We say, that it is spiritually and supernaturally, by mean
of the reasons which I have already alleged: the other say, that it is
bodily and naturally, which thing we can not grant them, if we will not
forthwith grant them all the absurdities whereof I have made mention, and a
great number of other which follow their doctrine.

Chapter. vii.
Of the adoration of the bread and of the wine, as well in the Mass as in
their pixtes and boxes, and of the idolatric that therein is.

SO much touching the error of transsubstantiation, from whence there
follows yet an other very great and very insufferable, the which I set down
for the second, concerning the matter of transsubstantiation, and for the
seventh of the twelve, into which number I bring all the points. This same is,
Note this well.
concerning the worshipping of the bread and of the wine, in stead of Jesus
Christ the very son of God, This is an error which yet draws after it many
other. ^e first ^our.
The first is, that where the bread and the wine should be distributed in the
mass, to those which be there present, as the Lord has commanded that it
should be done in the supper, they do only set them out to show, lifting
them up on high, and causing them to be worshipped of every one, as idols,
through great superstition and idolatry: whose like never was since the
beginning of the world, how great soever the blindness have been. ^icer. de.
^at. deo. li. 3.
For as Cicero himself witnesses, there were never men that did believe or
think, that that which they did eat was God. And there was never any people
so beastly, which did think that the idols and the visible things which they
did honor and worship, were really and essentially gods, but only that they
were remembrances and representations. But the idolatry whereof I now speak,
passes on much further. For it contenteth not it self to cause the bread and
the wine to be worshipped and honored as holy and sacred signs, ordained to
be remembrances and representations of the very body and blood of Jesus Christ,
but as Jesus Christ him self in flesh and bone, and man and God together.
Affirmation.
For they affirm, that there is no more bread nor wine, but that that which
was bread and wine before the consecration, is really and in deed Jesus
Christ him self, which thing may not be, by mean of the reasons which I have
already alleged. From whence it follows, Note t^^ idolatry.
that the bread and the wine are there worshipped for gods, and that that same
worshipping is a very idolatry, and clean contrary to the holy ordinance of
the Lord, and to that which he has said and done, and commanded in the
institution and administration of the same. For he commands expressly, Luke
22.^ 1. Cor. 11.
to do that which he did in the remembrance of him, and not otherwise. Now
having taken the bread and the wine, Consider this well.
he did not lift them up on high, nor caused them to be worshipped by his
disciples, before he did distribute them, but did distribute them to every of
the^, with express commandment, that they should take both the one and the
other, and even at the same very time, that they should eat the bread and
drink the wine, even as they did in deed. And if this can not be proved to be
done, neither in their mass, nor in the very supper which they do administer
to the people, there is the^ lesser reason to reserve the bread in pixtes,
caskets, cupbordes, and such like, not only to cause it to be worshipped as
God, or to bear it about in procession in great pomp and solemnity to that
very end, as the Persians did bear in time past their sacred fire, Abuse of
the Persians.
but also to conjure the time and the tempests, and the Devils, and to use
them in such like superstitions, according as it falls in their fantasy. For
as I have already heretofore showed, ^ote well.
albeit that it were so, that according to their doctrine of
transsubstantiation, the bread were changed into the body of Jesus Christ,
yet for all that, it could not have place out of the use of the Sacrament, by
mean of the reasons that I have already yielded. Where the ^se of the ^crame^t
is
Now it is very true that there is no use there, where the Sacrament is not
administered: and that it is not administered there where it is not distributed
with the word, to those which are capable of it. And if they do apply the
signs thereof to any other use then to the same, for the which they are
ordained, that use is not lawful: wherefore it may not be taken for an use,
but should be rejected as an abuse, manifestly contrary to the word and
ordinance of the Lord. And on the other side, if this abuse were not so
great, yet so is it for all that, that this worshipping of the bread and of the
wine, and of their holy hostie, can not be without putting them always, which
do worship them, in great danger of Idolatry. At the least it can not be
done in faith, to their doctrine, Doctri^ of the a^ uersarie
there is no transsubstantiation, if the intent to consecrate be not joined
with the pronunciation of the words: and that there is no man that can judge
and be assured of the purpose of the priests, no more then they can of their
faith, only God excepted, which knows the hearts. Note t^ argume
Wherefore either they put them selves in danger to be idolaters, according
to their own very doctrine, worshipping the bread and the wine, in stead of
the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ: or else they must needs worship
them with condition, the which can not be void of doubt. From whence it
follows, that it can not be in faith, but only in opinion: and by
consequence it is sin, seeing that whatsoever is not of faith, and without
the same, Romans 14
can not please God, but is sin.

Chapter. viii.
Of the division of the signs of the Supper, and of the Sursum corda of the
Mass, and of the signification of the same, and whereunto it serves at this
present.

ANd on ye other side, seeing yt the Lord has ordained 2. signs in this
sacrament, ye one may not be separated from the other, (...) ordi^e of the ^de
vio^ed and ^ane ouer^owne.
but that his ordinance is there violated and overthrown, contrary to his
intent and his expressed commandment. Now so it is, that the wine appointed to
be that sign of the blood, is separated from the bread which is appointed to
be the sign of the body, ^surditie.
not only when the bread is reserved in their pixtes and boxes, all alone
without the wine, but also in their supper, which they administer beside their
mass, to them whom they call the Lay people. From whence it follows that
this bread is not at all the sacrament of the supper, for so much as it is not
applied to his true use, according to the intent and express commandment of
Jesus Christ, but clean contrary. And if it be not a sacrament of the supper,
it can not be an other sacrament. For Jesus Christ has not instituted any
other, to yt which he has appointed the bread for a sign, but only this. And
if it be not at all a sacrament, Demand.
how may it be the body of Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ him self, God and
man? yea, in so many places at one instant, as there be boxes, pixtes,
cupbordes and caskets, in the which this bread is reserved and kept as a
relic? Therefore I would gladly, that the transsubstantiators and Roman
doctors should well consider, in all their worshippings that they do to this
bread, be it in their masses, or in their pixtes, cupbordes and boxes, or in
their processions, to what purpose a little before they do lift it up in their
mass, to cause it to be worshipped, they say and sing, Lift up your hearts,
which is as much to say, Sursum corda. For it is an exhortation to the
Christian people, taken of the true ancient Church, Consyde^ this.
whereby the ministers did admonish them, which should communicate at the
supper, not to stay them selves and rest upon the visible signs of the same,
but that they should lift up their hearts and their minds on high, to
heavenly and divine things, represented by them, and to the Lord which only
can communicate those things, and will be served and worshipped in spirit and
truth, as he him self witnesses, and not in visible and corruptible things,
nor in things base and earthly. For if the time be come, that he will not be
any more worshipped, either in Jerusalem, or in the mountain, no more will he
be worshipped between the hands of the Roman priests, nor in their masses
and boxes, cupbordes, pixtes, and caskets. For that cause after that this
exhortation, Sursum corda, was given to all the assistantes, they answered,
Habemus ad dominum, which is to say, we have them up to the Lord, to wit,
the hearts, the which they were exhorted to lift up on high. Sursum corda,
before the poor people, and the ignorant, which know not what men say unto
the^, neither do they understand at all the exhortation which is given unto
them, for so much as it is delivered in Latin, and not in their own language?
^ote.
And although that it were delivered unto them in their own language, saying,
Lift up your hearts on high, it could not serve them, but only to make them
lift them up to the hands of the priests, which hold and lift up their
hostie and their cup, even as hye as their pixtes and boxes, wherein they
hold their holy hostie enclosed, ^onsides ^is.
and no higher at all. For seeing that they do teach them there to seek God
and Jesus Christ our Lord, they need not to lift their hearts more high to
worship him in spirit and truth, but rather that they do abase them to the
earth, where they show them their visible god, whereupon they think and rest.
Wherefore they may very well boaste the^ selves, that they have a god which they
see, and he sees not them. ^ur God ^s invisible
But as for us, we know no God created nor visible, but only he, which has
created all things, and is not him self created, and which is eternal and
invisible, the which does very well see us, albeit that we see not him at all,
for so much as his divine nature can not be seen. And albeit that he made
him self visible in his Son Jesus Christ, in whom he has declared him
self, yet for all that, Jesus Christ would withdraw his bodily presence from
this visible world, An i^^i^ble world
to the end that we should not seek him any more in this base territory,
nor in corruptible things, but that we should seek him in the heavens, where
he is at the right hand of the Father, to worship him there in spirit and
truth. He must (...) worshipp^^ in spirit and truth. John. 4.
For he will not be worshipped with any other worship then that, wherewith
he has taught us, that God must be worshipped, seeing that he is the cause
for the which he is worshipped, for otherwise it should not be lawful to
worship him, seeing that that honor apperteineth to none but to God only.

Chapter. ix.
Of the auncientie of transsubstantiation, and of the worshipping and keeping
of the holy Roman hostie, and of the feast and procession which is dedicated
unto it.

LEt them not then find it strange, The very words of the Lord
if we do not believe the^ at all, when they say unto us, Lo here is Christ,
yea there is Christ: behold, he is in the wilderness, or in the closets. For
Jesus Christ does not give us testimony of such a presence of him in his
Church, neither of any such coming of his from heaven but in deed gives
unto us one clean contrary. No more may they also allege unto us in this
behalf the authority of the ancient Church, nor of the ancient doctors, nor
the auncientie of their religion, touching such worshipping, reservation, and
keeping of the bread, and of their holy hostie. ^ranssub^antiation ^^onght in^^
ye church about the ^^ert 1060.
For the ancient Church has at the least continued upon the point of a
thousand and three score years, before that the doctrine of
transsubstantiation was brought into it, received and approved by the council,
in such sort as the Roman Church has holde^ it ever since, to wit, from
the time of the Pope Nicholas the second, Nicholas ^he second. Gregory ^e
seventh.
and afterward of Gregory the seventh, about the year 1074. But this was not
done at all without contradiction of many, which could not profit at al,
for so much as they were oppressed by the authority of the Roman Popes, and of
ye multitude of their adherentes. The custom for all that, was not in the same
church, to keep the bread in cupbordes, boxes, and pixtes, before the time of
Honorius the third, Honorius the third. 1226.
who ordained it about the year 1226. that he was in the Roman Chair, nor
also to bear it in solemn procession, and to dedicate a special feast to it,
unto the time of Pope Vrbane the fourth, Urban the fourth.
who ordained that feast, which commonly is called the feast of God, or of the
holy body of God. Behold then the antiquity of the religion which follows
such doctrine and such manner of doings, and as touching the principal
authors, unto the which it may be ascribed. Note we this.
And thereby every man may know, what faith they ought to give to the
tra^ssubstantiatours and Roman doctors, which affirm that the Roman
religion which they at this day do follow, is the religion of the true
ancient Church, and that they have received it of Jesus Christ, and of his
Apostles, and is come even to them, from hand to hand by a continual
succession. Roman Apostles.
Men may also judge by the very same, which were the Apostles, from whom they
received such doctrine, and such ceremonies, superstitions, and idolatries, and
what injury they do to Jesus Christ and to his Apostles, and to all the
ancient Church, in abusing, as they do, the name and authority of them, to
give a more fair show to the inventions of men, and the more to confirm the
poor ignorant in their errors and abuses. For as I have already declared, the
whole ancient church and the true doctors of the same did not know any such
transsubstantiation, as that of the Roman Church, which is at this day, nor
any other conversion of the signs of the sacraments into the thing which they
signified, but only in respect of the use of them, as I have already declared.
And therefore it had also no such worshipping and keeping of the bread and of
their hostie, as is that whereof I have now spoken.

Chapter. x.
Of the sacrifice of the Roman Mass, and of the building of the same upon
the transsubstantiation, and of the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and of the
contrariety that is between the same and that of the Mass.

I Will not now bring forth any more proofs, wherewith the better to
confirm that which I have already said of all these things, because that I
have sufficiently written of it in diverse other books, and that I did not
determine for this present, but only to touch and handle them briefly and
summarily. And therefore I will now come to the eight point, ^. point.
which is concerning the sacrifice of ye Roman priests in their mass: the
which depends also of the transsubstantiatio^, and has his foundation upon
the same. For if they did confess that the bread and the wine did remain
always bread and wine in the same, Note this cunning.
they durst not affirm nor say, that they do offer unto God bread and wine in
sacrifice for the remission of sins, and the redemption of souls, as well
the living as the dead, as they boaste them selves to do daily in their
masses. For, for the first, seeing that according to the testimony of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Conside^ well this point concerning sacrifice.
there is no sacrifice offered for the remission of sins, without shedding of
blood, they can in no ways make sacrifice of bread and of wine, for so much as
it should be without sheading of blood. And then what reason should they have
to offer to God bread and wine for ye redemption of souls, Demand
and for the salvation of man? and of what virtue and efficacy might such a
sacrifice be? And therefore, seeing that they would convert the Sacrament of
the Supper into a sacrifice, Note this cunning.
and transform it into a Mass, they must in deed forthwith
transsubstantiate the bread and the wine, into the body and into the blood of
Jesus Christ, to the end that by that mean they might afterward offer them
in saerifice, for the remission of sins, and for the redemption of souls,
and not only for the living, but also for the dead. We may not then greatly
marvel if that they do fight strongly and assuredly to maintain their
transsubstantiation: Note this combat.
without the which they are never able to maintain their sacrifice: without
the which also their purgatory would yield them a very barren revenue, with
all their other inventions. But what foundation have they for this sacrifice, I
do not say in the institution of the supper of the Lord only, but also in all
the holy scriptures? For, for the first, we do not read at all, Note the
^stitution (...) the Lord
that when Jesus Christ did institute and administer the supper, he did in any
wise offer in sacrifice, either the bread or the wine, which he ordained to be
signs of the same, nor in like sort his body nor his blood. For it is not in
the supper yt he did offer the^ really in sacrifice to God for man, (...)
matter ^f great ^aight.
but upon the cross. For the whole scripture makes no mention of two
sacrifices of Jesus Christ, for the redemption of man, but of one only, which
is so perfect that he needed not to make it but one time only, and it could
not be offered by any other then by Jesus Christ him self, the very son of
God, which only is the priest, Jesus Christ the priest, sacrificer, sacrifice,
temple and altar.
the sacrificer, the Sacrifice, the Temple, and the Altar: and the same may in
no wise be reiterated by any creature, seeing that it is of virtue eternal and
of deserte infinite. For this cause the sacrifice of the mass can not stand
with this, but it must necessarily be that ye one or the other be abholished,
to give place to one only, seeing that there is but one which is full and
perfect, and there may none other be had: seeing then that the same of Jesus is
such an one, it abolisheth all the others.

Chapter.xi.
Of the difference that the Roman doctors do put between the bloody sacrifice
and the not bloody of Jesus Christ, and in what sense the ancient doctors of
the Church did take both the one and the other, and did call the supper by the
name of sacrifice: And of the things which were observed in the assemblies of
the ancient Church.

IT may not be then, that the Romayne sacrificers do lay before us 2. sorts
of sacrifices of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, to wit, Blouddy
(...) not bloud^
the one not blouddy, that is to say, without shedding of blood, the which he
offered in the supper, and the other blouddy, to wit, with shedding of ^loud,
the which he offered upon the cross. For by what testimony of the Scripture
will they ^oue this first sacrifice which they term, Note this. Demand.
not blouddy, upon the which we are in controversy with them, and of the which
they say that they ^e sacrificers, and successors of Jesus Christ in (...)
behalf? For we do not disagree with the^ ^t all, as touching the second. And
concerning ^^e first, we will not make any difficulty to ^^aunt them that the
ancient doctors of the church, and the ancient Church which folo^ed their
doctrine, have indeed called the sa^^^^e^t of the supper, sacrifice, in that
sense that the holy Scripture calls the same name the work of the preaching
of the Gospel, ^om. 5. ^undry sa^^fices.
by the which the true ministers thereof bring men unto God, as though they did
offer men unto him: and as it does call also the mortification of the
Christians, whereby they offer them selves unto God for living and reasonable
sacrifices, and in like sort the prayers, Romans 12. Psalm. 50. Hebru. 13.
thanks giving and the alms, because that al these things were done auncie^tly
in the supper. For it was not celebrated without the preaching of the word of
God, Ancient celebration of the supper.
nor without prayers and thanks giving (from whence it has had the name of
Eucharistie among the Greeks) nor without alms and gathering; and such other
like good works, the which God accepts for sacrifices. Not sacrifices
propiciatories.
But these are not at al propiciatory sacrifices for the remission of sins,
and the redemption of souls, but are sacrifices of praise and thanks giving.
For the Christian Church does not acknowledge any other sac^^^fice
propiciatorie, but only that which Jesus Christ him self did offer in his
own person* not when he did iustitute and administer the supper, but when he
suffered for us, and namely inh^^ he died for our sins. The whole life of
christ was a perpetual sacrifice.
For all his life was a pe^^petuall sacrifice, but we take him chiefly in hi^
death, because that it was therein ended, as (...) him self did witness upon
ye cross. Then wh^ the ancients did call the sacrament of the su^per, a
sacrifice not bloody; they took it in the sense that I have already declared,
that the Supper was a sacrifice of praise and thanks giving: John. 19.
they have also called it so because that they have often times taken the name
of sacrifice, for that which we do call divine service and prayer, for so much as
al ye parts thereof, and al ye things therein required, are comprised in the
celebration of the Supper, in that same manner as it was instituted by Jesus
Christ, and celebrated by the Apostles, and by ye true ancient Church. Acts.
4. things in singular reco^mendacio^
For according to the testimony of Saint Luke, the first Christian Church had
four things in singular reco^me^dation in their assemblies. The first was the
prayers, and then the doctrine of the Apostles, and the thied, breaking of
bread, and the fourth, the communion by the which two latter we must
understand the administration and distri^^tio^ of the Supper, and the
gatherings for the ^oore, and the distributio^s which were made unto them. When
then the ancients do call the sup^er sacrifice, and that they do make mention
of sacrifice not bloody, they use it in that sense yt have already declared, as
it appears plain^^ by their own testimony. Wherefore, we will ^^t make any
great difficulty, to grant yt the ^upper was a sacrifice in that sense, to
wit, a ^acrifice of praise and thanks giving, (...) not a Sacrifice
propiciatorie for the remission of sins and the redemption of souls, in such
sort as the Roman catholics do affirm their mass to be, into the which
they have converted the supper of the Lord.

Chapter xii.
Of the trumperies of the doctors of the Romayne Church concerning the name of
sacrifice and the use thereof: and chiefly of the confusion which they put
between the sacrifice propiciatorie, and Eucharistique, and between sacrament,
and sacrifice, and of the difference that must be put between the one and the
other.

WHereupon it is needful that every man he warned of 2. trumperies, by the
which the Romayne doctors do deceive the ignorant, a^using the name of
sacrifice and of the authority and testimony of the ancient doctors of the
Church, The first deceit.
in this matter. The first is in the confusion yt they make between the
sacrifices: The other, in that they take the name of sacrifice in the writings
of the ancient doctors, for ye mass such as it is in the Romayne Church. For
first they do take for sacrifice propitiatory, that which the ancient Doctors
did take for sacrifice (...) praise and thanks giving, and for a commem^^ration
of the death of Jesus Christ, the whi^^ for the same cause men may call
Eucharistique, even as some men do call it, to give men ye better to understand
this difference, as men do call the Supper Eucharistie, for ye same cause. For
the which cause they have called the Supper sacrifice not blouddy, to give to
understand, Sacrific^ not blou^
that they did not mean to offer Jesus Christ to God in sacrifice in the same
for the remission of sins and the redemption of souls, for so much as the
same cannot be done but by the very and only son of God Jesus Christ, nor
without the shedding of his blood: but only for a co^memoration of the
propiciatory sacrifice, yt which Jesus Christ him self did offer of his own
body and blood, and to yield him praise and thanks. For they did know very
well, what difference there is between sacrament and sacrifice, and that the
supper was not instituted by the Lord for a sacrifice, but for a Sacrament. An
argument of great weight.
For in a sacrifice which is offered for the remission of sins and the
redemption of souls, it behooves that the man offer unto God the thing which
he sacrifices unto him, and that it be sufficient to appease ^is wrath: or
otherwise the sacrifice is not per^ect, neither may it satisfy God. And
therefore it was, that al those of ye Leuits which were ^rdayned in the law,
to represent that of Jesus Christ, did cease to give place to him only. But ^e
sacraments are ordained, not at all to offer any thing to god for the remission
of sins, but on ye contrary, to receive of him the spiritual and heavenly
good things which he offreth and communicates unto us by the same. And
therefore Jesus Christ did not offer unto God either the bread or the wine of
the Supper, Confider his well
or yet his body and his blood in the same, but did offer and communicate them
both, to wit, the signs and the things signified by them, to his disciples,
distributing bodily unto them that which was bodyly and earthly, and
sptritually that which was spiritual and heavenly. (...) commandment.
And therefore he said, Take ye, and eat ye, and drink ye, the which words
he did not address unto* God, nor consequently the bread and the wine which he
commanded to eat and to drink, neither his body nor his blood signified by
the same, but to his disciples, and consequently to al those unto whom the
supper is administered according to his ordinance. And therefore when Jesus
Christ said, Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my body which is given and broken for you, he said it not in respect
of that which he then did in the supper toward God his father, but in respect
of that which he after did toward him upon the cross, very shortly after his
supper. For it is there where he was given for us, One Lord gave him self for
us upon the cross.
when he offered him self upon the cross in sacrifice (...) his father, and
not at all in the supper. For it (...) not there where he gave him self for
us* (...) where he is given to us: for he is there given unto us, in as much as
he is communicated unto us by the mean of this sacrament of the Supper.
Whereupon we have to note that Jesus Christ did use the present time, for the
time to come, Note the Ebrew n^ner of speech.
according to the Ebrue manner of speech, which uses often times indifferently
the time passed, ye time present, and the time to come the one for ye other,
and chiefly when it concerns the promises of God, for so much as that which he
promises is as certain, as if it were already present, or as if it were
already done. The latin translator
For the which canse the translator of the common Latin translation, the which
ye priests use in their mass, and in all their divine service, has translated
these, words into the time to come for the time present, saying, which shall
be given, and which shall be broken, and which shall be shed etc. in the stead
that there it is, which is given, and which is broken, and which is shed, in
the words of the Evangelists and of Saint Paul, as they have set them down
in ye Greek. And all the ancient doctors of the Church have not taken the^ in
any other sense. ^^te.
And for so much as they did well understand what difference there was between
sacrament and sacrifice, they had not any mass to offer unto God a sacrifice
of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ, as ye Roman priests at this day
do boast the^ selves to do in theirs: but in the stead of such a mass they
had the Supper, the which they did not celebrate at any time, but that they had
presently communion of the faithful to whom the same was administered, and not
only to a priest in particular, as they do in the mass.

Chapter xiii.
Of the name of sacrifice falsely taken for the Roman mass, and how the
Roman doctors in stead to prove that Jesus Christ and his Apostles did
institute and celebrate the Mass, do prove that they instituted and
celebrated the Supper, and in stead to prove that the ancient doctors did take
it for a propiciatory sacrifice, they prove that they used the name of
sacrifice in an other sense.

Behold then here one great trumpery, the which proceeds either of the
ignorance or of the malice of the Roman doctors and priests, which do make
the ignorant believe, Consider this
that the ancients did call the Supper sacrifice in the same very sense that
they at this day do take it in their mass, wherein they do them great wrong.
For they did never so understand or teach. And albeit their should have so
understood and taught, we might not follow their doctrine in that behalf,
because that it should be clean contrary to that of the Apostles, and namely
to all the Epistle to the Hebrews. And then following that trumpery, they do
yet build an other very great one upon ye same, which is ye second, 2. Dece^
whereof I am now to speak: which is, that they willing to prove that the
ancient doctors have approved their Mass, and that the same was in the
ancient Church, such as it is at this day, they take the passages wherein the
ancient fathers do use the name of sacrifice, oblation and offering, and such
other like, as well in the latin as in the Greek, when they speak of the
Supper, or of all the divine service, as though they had used the name of mass
in the same, and that they had understood by the names which they did use, of
such a mass as ye Roman mass now is. such like, yt which they used, to
signify all the divine service of the Christians, yet should they have nothing
gained at all. For it must yet be, that they do show that the mass of ye
auncie^tes was such an one as theirs is, and that there was in it like
sacrifice. The which they shall never do. For albeit that some of the ancients
did begin to use the name of mass for the divine service, after three or four
hundred years after the nativity of our Lord, that notwithstanding it was but
in small use: yet in two hundred years after that, to wit, before the time of
Gregory ye first, no more was it then taken for such a mass as it is at this
day in the Roman. Church. For there was not yet at that time any such, ^ante
of ^^fts men
neither could there be, for so much as ye greatest number of the workmen,
which have framed ye same from age to age, and from year to year for a long
time, were not yet borne at ye time. Behold then how the Romayne doctors do
deceive ye ignorant, under the name of sacrifice, and under the authority of
the ancient doctors, as under the name and authoritte of Jesus Christ and of
the Apostles. For after that they have greatly bragged that Jesus Christ and
the Apostles did institute and celebrate the mass, they prove, to confirm the
same, that they have instituted and celebrated the Supper, wherein they prove
and confirm that which is not at all in question or in doubt, and not that at
all which is in controversy: but in stead of proving and confirming that, they
prove and confirm an other thing which is out of al controversy. Even so do
they concerning the ancient fathers. For willing to prove by them the same of
the mass and of the sacrifice thereof, they prove that they have used the name
of sacrifice, and other names also as well Greek as Latins, which signify as
much as divine service, and public ministerye in our language.

Chapter xiiii.
In what sort the sacrifices of the law were sacraments and sacrifices both
together: and that the supper cannot be both, but only a sacrament: and of the
agreement and difference that is between the same, and the sacrament of the
Paschal lamb.

But they will reply, Replc^
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and the ancient dnctors of the Primitive
Church, have done both in the Supper, to wit, that they offered unto God in
Sacrifice, the body and the blood of Jesus Christ: and the^ have also forthwith
communicated them to the Christian people, and that in so doing, there is no
inconvenience but yt the supper may be both sacrament and sacrifice together. I
answer, ^we^^.
it is not enough that they do affirm, except they do prove it forthwith. I
will grant them that the sacrifices of the law were also as a kind of
sacraments, and that there were some, in the which there was oblation to God of
one part of the beast which was sacrificed, and in like sort communion of an
other part among the people, and that there was joined to the sacrifice a
banquet, the which signified the communion of the people in ye same. But that
cannot agree with the supper. (...).
For, for the first, as there was daily new banquet in these sacrifices, so was
there new hostie. For they might not sacrifice one very thing oftener then
once, nor by consequent communicate the same more often to the people, but they
must needs take daily new. But ye like is not of the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ. For there is but one only hostie of the same, which is very Jesus
Christ, ^ry. 53 ^hu. 1. ^et. 2. ^or. 5. ^hu. 19.
the which is the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
figured chiefly by the paschall lamb, which among the rest was chiefly
sacrifice and sacrament both together, because that the Lord had two regards in
the institution of the same. For first he instituted it to be in the Church of
Israel, for a memorial and remembrance of the passage which the Angel of the
Lord did make in Egypt, striking the first borne of the Egyptians, ^^od. 12.13.
and of the deliverance of the Israelites from the captivity of them, as
Moses does plainly witness. For the which cause it was called by him, and
consequently by the other Hebrews, Pesah, which is to say Passage, by the name
of the thing that it did signify, of the which the Greeks and the Latins
have made their word Pascha, the which they have used, and which since have
been converted into our speech, by the name of Easter. Behold then how this
sacrament had regard unto that which was already done, and to that benefit of
God ye which the Israelites had already received, touching their deliverance
out of Egypt. And by that mean, it was a memorial and a sacrament
co^memoratiue, and a sacrifice of praise and of thanks giving, in respect of
the things which were already passed. But beside that, A doubl^ regard ye
passeo
the Lord had yet regard to the deliverance of mankind the which should be
wrought by Jesus Christ, whereof yt of Egypt was a figure. Our del^uerauce
And for so much as he should work this deliverance by the passage of his death
and by the sacrifice of his body and of his blood, Sacrific^ with sa^^ment.
the sacrifice was joined to the sacrament in the Paschal lamb, to the end
that i^ should the better represent that which was yet to be done and
accomplished. Behold wherein it was ordained for the things which were yet to
come, and of the which men did yet look for the accomplishment. For that cause
there was there a sacrifice, which did represent that of Jesus Christ to come.
And also there was joined unto, a banquet, which did signify the communion of
him, as it ought to be in every sacrament. And therefore Saint Paul has joined
the one with the other, expounding the verity of that figure. For after that
he has said that Christ our passover was sacrificed, ^or. 5.
he exhorts the faithful to the spiritual banquet of this sacrifice, and to
the continual feast which we should make and celebrate always. Seeing then
that the thing to come figured by this sacrifice and sacrament, was
accomplished, the one and the other are ceased. For we have now the Sacrifice
offered by Jesus Christ, whereof the other was but a shadow and figure.
Wherefore seeing that we have the body and the truth, the shadow and the
figure does clearly cease. And therefore even as our Lord Jesus Christ did
change ye Circumcision of the Church of Israel, ^^^^de^ ^his ^ge.
into the baptism of the Christian Church, even so has he changed the
Sacrament of the Paschall lamb, into that of the Supper, the which has that
in common with the sacrament of the Paschall lamb, that as it had regard to
the passage which was made in Egypt, and to the deliverance of the children of
Israel, which were things that were already done: in like sort the Supper
has regard to the passage which Jesus Christ has made by his death, and for
the deliverance which he has brought to mankind by the sacrifice which he has
offered in the same, which are also things that are already done and passed.
They have in like sort both of the^ this in common, Note the
that even as the sacrament of ye Paschall lamb, was ordained and celebrated
according to the commandment which the Lord did give to Moses, in the same
very night, and in the same very time that the passage should be made in Egypt,
and ye people delivered from the same, Exodus 12.
even so Jesus Christ did intitute and celebrate his Supper in the very fame
night, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
and even before the very time, that he was taken to be brought to be
sacrificed, and to work the deliverance of mankind. For yt cause he used ye
very same manners of speech in the institution, and in the administration of
this sacrament, as Moses did in that of the Paschall lamb. The word^ of Moise^
For even as Moses did fay of the lamb, It is the passover of the Lord,
which is to say, the passage the which he did represent, giving to the sign
the name of the thing signified: words ^ar lord.
eue^ so Jesus Christ did say of the bread of the Supper, This is my body, and
of the wine, This is my blood of the new testament, or, This cup is the new
testament in my blood. Wherefore it is not also to be doubted, that even as he
did follow the manner of speech of Moses, which was much frequented in the holy
Scriptures in ye use of the sacraments: even so did he also use them in the
like sense and signification, without disguising any thing at all the accustomed
language of the holy Ghost, by sense new and strange to such manners of
speech. Thus much concerning that which the sacraments of the Paschall lamb,
and of the supper, may have common together, touching these points. But the
Supper has this different from the same, ^fferent.
that it was not instituted to be a figure of any sacrifice to come, nor of any
other thing which might be yet to accomplish, but only to be a sacrament
co^memoratiue of the sacrifice already offered by Jesus Christ and for the
communication of the same. And therefore there is no propiciatorie sacrifice
for ye remission of sins, in this sacrament offered to God by the ministers
which do administer it, but only the banquet, which witnesses unto us the
communication which we have in the sacrifice which is already offered. For
seeing that it endures for ever because of his eternal and infinite virtue,
it needs not at all to be offered again: wherefore there rests no more to
do in respect of the same, but only the application and communication which
is done ordinarily in the Church, by the ministry of the word of God and
of the sacraments, and chiefly of the supper. And therefore Jesus Christ did
command none other thing to be done in the same, when he commanded the
distribution of the bread and of the wine, which are the signs, but only to
celebrate the remembrance and commemoration of him, in awayting his coming
from heaven, as Saint Paul declares it unto us, Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
saying, As often as ye shall eat this bread and brinke this cup, you shall
show forth the death of the Lord until the time that he come. Seeing then
that Jesus Christ has joined none other propiciatorie sacrifice to his supper,
but only that which he him self has offered upon the cross: it follows
then that they which do join any other unto it, Falsaries of the testament.
are very falsaries and counterfaitors of his testament, for so much as the
supper is as his testament, and the sacrament and witness of the benefit which
he offers and communicates unto us by the same. Wherefore if men accounte
them falsaries, his for the remission of sins, seeing that it may not in any
wise be reiterated? For seeing that there is but this only hostie, even so
may the same dye but only one, and his blood may be shead but only once. From
whence it follows also, ^om. 6. ^eb. 9.
that it can not be offered nor sacrificed to God, but only one time for the
remission of sins. The virtue if this sarifice.
Wherefore, seeing that Jesus Christ has already offered the sacrifice which
is of eternal and infinite virtue, there rests no more but the partaking and
the communication of the same, which is represented unto us by the table of the
Lord in the Supper, and in the visible banquet of the same, as it is done in
very deed inuisibly, and spiritually toward the faithful, by the virtue of
the holy Ghost and of faith. And by that mean the Supper is not ordained
therein to offer a new sacrifice of the body and of the blood of Jesus
Christ, nor to reiterate that which he him self has already offered, but
only to be a Sacrament, testimony and commemoration of the sacrifice once
offered, and to communicate in the same by the mean of this Sacrament: for so
much as the sacrifice can not at all profit us to salvation, but so far
forth as we are made partakers thereof, as it is needful for us to be
continually.

Chapter.xv.
That the Mass may be neither sacrifice nor Supper of Jesus Christ, if in
deed there were there no other addicion then that of the sacrifice: and that
Jesus Christ may not be offered in sacrifice, but once, nor by any other then
by him self.

Propiciatorie sacrifice by wh^^
ANd therefore when the Roman priests do make of the sacrament of the supper,
a propiciatorie sacrifice of Jesus Christ to God the Father, in stead of
administering this Sacrament to the faithful, as Jesus Christ him self did
and commanded, and as the Apostles and their true successors, and all the
true ancient Church did observe and practice, it appears evidently that
they do wholly overthrow the ordinance of the Lord, in what sort soever
they color their Mass. For, for the first, seeing that there is no true
communion for the whole Church therein, Intent of Christ.
behold there already the principal intent of Jesus Christ oue^ ^rowen, in
respect of the institution of the Supper, and of the chief point of the same.
But there is yet more: For albeit that they did indeed administer the Supper
to the whole Church, as often as they should say and sing their Mass, yet
should they for all that overthrow the ordinance of the Lord, ^^se.
in adding a sacrifice the which he has not ordained, to the sacrament by him
ordained. For first he has not commanded to offer and to sacrifice to God his
father, ^ote well ^^s.
either the bread or the wine in the supper, neither yet his body and his blood
signified by the same, and the^ to offer, present and communicate the same to
his Church, but did command to do that only which he has done in the supper,
(...) most sin^^lar note.
to wit, to distribute and administer the things which he did administer in
the same. But in stead of doing that, the Roman priests do nothing in
their mass of all that which Jesus Christ has done and commanded in the
supper, ^bedience ^etter then ^^crifice.
but on the contrary, they will do that which he has not done and commanded,
neither may they in any wise do, nor yet any other creature whatsoever, no not
ye very Angels them selves. Who is a ^ufficient ^ostie to God.
For even as there is no other hostie which may be sacrificed to God for the
remission of sins, sufficient to satisfy his judgment, but very Jesus
Christ: even so the same can not be offered any oftener then only once, the
which endures always, for so much as it (...) ^erfect and eternal: nor yet by
any other the^^by him self only, for so much as there is no sacrificer meet
to offer such a sacrifice, nor that may be allowed of the Father: as is very
plainly and evidently set forth in the whole Epistle to the Hebrews. From
whence it follows that the sacrament of the supper can not be ye sacrifice of
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, Consyd^ well thi^
and then much less the mass, for so much as it is not the supper of the
Lord, and that in deed it can not be such a sacrifice, albeit it were the
very true supper of the Lord. For being the supper of the Lord, it could be
no more the same, then that of Jesus Christ and of the Apostles, and of the
true ancient Church. For the supper can not be the sacrifice which Jesus
Christ did offer upon the cross, by mean of the reasons which I have already
yielded. Now there is none other which is propiciatorie for the remission of
sins, and the redemption of souls, be it bloody or not bloody, as it shall
please them to call it, but even so as I have already declared.

Chapter.xvi.
Of the strange consequence which follow the sacrifice of the Mass, and how
the Mass may not be either sacrifice propiciatorie, or Eucharistique, and the
cause why.

Way well this co^clusio^ throug^out.
FRom whence I conclude either that the mass may in no wise be a sacrifice,
either for the living or for the dead: or else that Jesus Christ is not the
true, perfect, and eternal sacrificer, and the only savior and redeemer, and
that his sacrifice is not full and perfect, and by consequent, that he is not
the true anointed of the Lord, and that all that which is written of his
office of Sacrificer, and of his sacrifice, in all the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and in all the rest of the Scriptures, is false. From whence it should also
follow, either that the Scriptures which we do call holy, should not be
revealed by the Spirit of God: or else that the Spirit of God should not be
the Spirit of truth, as it is, ^^hu. 14.
but the spirit of error and of lies, and by consequent God should not be
God, but should be in stead of the Devil, which is a liar and the father of
lies. Behold the strange conseque^ces, ^traunge ^^nsequen^^s.
on the which men may not think without great horror, which the mass draws
after it: for it can not be such an one as it is set forth unto us in the
Romayne Church, but that all these consequences must needs follow. Now they
can be none other then great blasphemies against Jesus Christ and his
sacrifice, ^he virtue ^f these co^^^quences.
and all his benefits: from whence it follows necessarily, that the mass
may no more be the propiciatorie sacrifice of the body and of the blood of
Jesus Christ, then it may be that Jesus Chiste should not be the true
anointed of the Lord. for all that, the same could not be offered by any
other then by him self only. Virtue ^^finite.
But seeing that it is eternal, and of virtue infinite, it is no more
needful that it be reiterated, not only by any other then by him, This
sacr^fice may not be rei^terated.
but also by him self. Seeing then, that not only the Mass, but also the
very Supper, may not be the propiciatorie sacrifice of the body and of the
blood of Jesus Christ, it follows then in deed, that it can not be the
very self Sacrifice which was offered by Jesus Christ upon the cross. From
whence I dos again conclude, that if it be a Sacrifice, it can not be other
then a Sacrifice commemoratiue, Sacrifice co^memoratiue.
of the Sacrifice offered by Jesus Christ. And if it be but a Sacrifice
commemoratiue of him, it is not then a Propiciatorie Sacrifice, but
Eucharistique, to wit, of praise and thanks. be no pleasant sacrifice to
God, either in one sort or in an other.

Chapter. xvii.
Of the merchandise of Masses, and of the sacrifices of the same, and of the
abuses that therein are.

^niuty ^^one by the ^omaine ^^iests.
ANd by the same men may judge, what injury the Roman priests do to the
Catholics of the Roman Church, in selling to the^ their masses for
sacrifices, not only commemoratiues and Eucharistiques, but also
propiciatories, being notwithstanding either the one or the other. And thereby
men may know what marchantes they are, and what is their marchandises in that
behalf. And albeit that it were so, that they were sacrifices in both those
sorts, ^illain ^^affique.
yet the markets and faires which they make of the^, should be a very villain
traffic. For do they not sell them for prices agreed upon, as they do all
their other sacraments and ceremonies, eue^ against their own councels and
canons, and their own very decrees: ^emande.
And do they not call the marchandizes of holy things Simonie: O how many
priests have they, which have neither cure nor benefice, nor charge of soul,
which were made priests only to say masses, and which do live of the
marchandizes which they daily make thereof? And how many be there among them
which do live from the day to his days labor, as the proverb is, and which
have their teeth very sharp that day that they find no marcha^ts to buy
their marchandizes: If I should speak of these merchants, that which one of
their books, Stella cle^^corum.
called Stella clericorum, does, they would think them selves marueilously
outraged by me. And therefore I will cause it to be spoken unto them by the
doctor which was the author of that book. And to the end that they do not
think that I do allege him falsely, I will cause him first to speak in his
own proper language, and then I will expound both the words and the sense.
Behold now his words. The priest which does celebrate mass for money, seems
to say with Judas, What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you.
Therefore it is wrong to sell his Lord. Think thou that ye first servant which
said, did hang him self, Judas did cast down the money in the Temple. The
priests which do bestow the money that they have of them, for whom they do
sing, at the stews, and upon their belly, are worse. Judas sold Christ once,
and repented him thereof. And thou perchance have sold him oftentimes, and
do not repent thereof. Take heed lest despairing thou do hang thy self. The
words in Latin are these, Sacerdos qui pro nummis celebrat, videtur dicere cum
Judah, Quid vultis mihi dare and ego vobis eum tradam? Ergo nefas est vendere.
Dominum suum. Cogita quod primus seruus venditor seipsum suspendit, Judas enim
nummos misit in Templum. Peiores sunt sacerdotes, qui denarios pro quibus
cantant, mittunt in lupanar and in ventrem suum. Judas semel Christum vendidit,
and de hoc penituit. Et tu forte multoties ve^didisti, and non penites. Cave ne
desperans te ipsum suspendas. Behold how this good doctor speaks. And if the
little marchantes, which are in great travail to gain their poor living by
these marchandizes, may not be excused in this point, how much more are the
great and fat merchants, which sell them in gross, and make greater and more
rich traffic of them: Seeing then that it is so, they may not find the
matter strange, if Jesus Christ do again take the whippe in hand to drive
such merchants out of his Temple, Matt. 21. Mar. 11. Luke 19. John. 2.
and out of his Church, and that he overthrow their seats and their tables,
by the preaching of his Gospel. For if comparison should be made between them
and those which Jesus Christ did drive out of the Temple of Jerusalem, the
difference would be found so great, that those which Jesus Christ him self
in his own person did drive forth, should be justified by those here, as
Samaria did justify Sodom, and Jerusalem Samaria, according to the testimony
of Ezechiel. Eze. 1^.
For the merchants which were by Jesus Christ driven out of the Temple of
Jerusalem, had sufficient authority by the law of God, for that which they
did. A notable argument.
they could not sell any Mass, without selling forthwith Jesus Christ i^
flesh and bones, the which they do make of ye bread and of the wine of the
same, according to their own very doctrine. And if it be not true, so much
the more false and untrue is the merchandise. This notwithstanding, he that
should suppress all the faires, markets, and traffiques, which they do make,
should forthwith see very few^ Priests at the Altar. For it is for such stuff
that they do so fight against the preaching of the Gospel, to maintain their
mass and the sacrifice of the same, and consequently their
transsubstantiation, which is the foundation thereof and of all that which it
draws with it. ^o sell one thing for an other.
a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, in stead of a sacrifice
propiciatorie, for the remission of sins, and the redemption of souls, as
they do boast that they do in their mass. And if it be neither ye one nor the
other, as I have already proved, yet are the merchants which do buie such
marchandizes the more deceived. Wherefore I leave the^ to think in what
estimation they ought to have their marchantes. For if they committed none
other fault, this here should be sufficient to cause them to leave and abandon
them clean. For who is so evil a merchant as takes pleasure to be deceived,
and to buy evil marchandizes. Thus much concerning the sacrifice of the
mass: I will now come to the ninth point, which is yet in controversy, the
which is concerning the communion as well of the Supper as of the Mass.

The third Book.
Chapter. 1.
Of the Communion, which may be in the Roman Mass and Supper, and how there
is not at all any true Communion, and how that it may in no wise be the true
Supper of Jesus Christ.

Now the supper in^^ be the supper.
I Have already here before declared, how that the Supper may not be the Supper
without the Communion of the things which do belong thereunto, and which ought
to be therein communicated, according to the ordinance of Jesus Christ. Now
there is no such communion in the Roman Mass. From whence it follows that
it is not the supper of the Lord, and consequently also that it is not the
Sacrament thereof, but is a new sacrament invented by me^, and wholly contrary
to that of the Lord, from the which they would give unto it his foundation
and his countenance. ^emande.
For what communion is there ordinarily, either in private or particular
masses, either in those which are public the which they do call parochial: for
there is both in the one and in the other, but ye priest only which is at the
altar, who does participate of the bread and of the wine yt which he does
consecrate in the same. For he eats and drinks al alone at his altar,
without offering or presenting any thing of that which he eats and drinks,
not only to the people which do assist at his mass, but also to his own
fellows which are of the same occupation that he is of, and which help him to
say and do the same, and are the nerest to his table and altar. This
notwithstanding, he calls this little banquet which he makes in his mass,
Communion: and the prayer which follows it shortly after, Postcommunio^.
Communion is taken of common: but what is it that is there common where one
takes all? The only name which they do use, does convince them of their
error, and of the wrong that they do to all Christian people. And if they do
reply that they ^o call this little banquet Communion, 1. Cor. 11.
And therefore S. Paul has written, The bread which we break, is it not ye
communion of ye body of Christ, and the cup of blessing, the which we bless,
is it not ye communion of the blood of Christ? For we which are many are one
bread and one body, in as much as we are al partakers of one very bread. S. Paul
does here set forth unto us 2. things. The first, Note these two things
yt the supper is not for one alone but for many, and for ye whole church: and
the other, yt it ought not to be disme^bred, but to be fully administered, as well
to ye Christian people as to ye ministers of ye same, without cutting from the^
yt one half, or any thing whatsoever, as ye Romain priests do in their
Supper, which they do administer to the people, in cutting the cup clean from
them. For it sufficed them not to cut them off from all the Communion of their
masses, which they do say, and do daily, and likewise from that of the
parrochial masses, which they do say every sunday: but that they must needs
cut from them the full one half of that Supper which they do minister unto
the^, once, twice* or thrice in the year, upon certain of their most solemn
feasts. ^oce well.
The which thing is yet an other new invention, clean contrary, both to the
supper of the Lord, and to all the true ancient Church. ^onc. ^onst. ^es. 13.
For before the Council of Constance, holden in the year, 1415. there was never
any ordinance made in the Church, whereby it was forbidden to administer the
cup to all the people, as the Roman doctors them selves are enforced to
confess. This notwithstanding, the corrupted and abastardised Roman church,
Consider ^ell this.
which has made this ordinance, clean contrary to the express commandment
of Jesus Christ and to the observation of the true ancient church, as well the
Roman as of all ye true universal church, is that true ancient Roman
Church, and the true catholic Church, which did immediately succeed ye
Apostles, if we will believe the Roman doctors, albeit that she be
apparently clean contrary to it.

Chapter ii.
Whether the Supper of the Lord may be a true supper, if any of the signs of
the same be cut off, and whether Jesus Christ did ordain any thing superfluous
in the same, whether he did ordeine one sort of supper for one sort of men, and
an other for the others.

But they will yet reply, Reply.
that as the blood is contained under the body, and that the lay people in
receiving the body, receive also the blood, albeit that they do receive but
the sign of the body and not yt of the blood: even so, when the priest
communicates alone in the mass, he communicates for all the rest, and all the
rest do communicate also in the person of him. Behold a very fair starting
hole, and a reason very well grounded. Whereupon I ask them for ye first,
whether Jesus Christ did ordain any thing superfluous and in vain in his holy
supper, Demand.
and that was not very necessary? I do not think at all that they dare
gainesay this. If there be the^ nothing superfluous, neither that is ordained
in vain, and without great and necessary cause in this sacrament and mysteries
which it contains, wherefore is it that they dare to cut off any thing from
thence: And if there be any thing superfluous and not necessary, they not as
well cut off in their mass, that whi^^ they do cut off in the supper of the
people, forse much as it must needs be that there be equaltie among al in the
supper of the Lord: For h^ ordained none other for the ministers, then h^ did
for the people, nor for the pastors then f^^ the sheep, nor for the clerks
then for the lay^ And what reason have they to cut off rather the wine, An
other demand.
a did that Church which has bin since: There (...) no doubt at al, but that
the error of transsubstanciation has brought forth this also. For the Church
which has counterfaited it, has ha^ since greater fear to shed the blood,
into the which the wine is converted according to the^^ doctrine, then the true
ancient Church ha^^ which did not know any such transsubstanciat^on. Wherefore
she did not also fear any su^shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ. as they do
at this day in the Roman Church: in like sort she did not fear that the body
and ye blood of the Lord should corrupt in the vessels, wherein they were kept.
Behold then one reason, that the most modern Roman Church has had, more
then the true ancient Church, concerning this point. And on the other side,
even as the priests of the same have magnified their dignity, by mean of
their transsubstanciation, not only above all other men, but also above the
virgin Mary and the Angels, even so have they done in the communion of their
mass and of their Supper. For it is no small dignity to be able to cause
Jesus Christ to come and to be between their hands, every day and when it
pleases them, and to make gods, and to be the creatours of the creator, as
they have named them selves heretofore in their own very books. Therefore it
is very reasonable also, that they have their communion apart, separated from
others which are not of such dignity, and that it be different from that which
is common to al persons.

Chapter iii.
Whether the Priests may receive the Supper for the people, and what communion
and excommunication is.

FUrther I ask them if they would be contented that an other man should dine
for them, Demand.
or else that he should receive the revenues of their benefices, and that he
should keep ye same for him self, and in the mean time should say that he
had received it for them: I do believe that they would not have such vicars nor
such receivers for them, neither at the table nor i^ their recepts: but would
do both the one and y^ other in their own person. This notwithstanding they
will needs be vicars of their Parochians in such matters, Vicars.
in receiving alone for them al, that which belongs generally to every of
them. And the Parochians are very we^ contented to have such vicars and
receivers, which do ordinarily receive the Supper for the^, because that they
know not what the Supper of the Lord is, nor what profit or hurt they man
receive by the administration or privation of same: wherefore they cannot know
nor cons^der the wrong which they do to them, in so d^priuing them, be it in
all or in part. For who (...) shall well consider the communion which is in^
mass, and shall judge thereof according to the truth, may of right call it, no
communion at all but excommunication. For as communicati^^ signifies the
partaking of many in one thing which is common to them al: Excommunication.
so on the contra^ excommunication signifies the deprivation (...) such a
partaking and communication, as also to excommunicate, signifies as much as to
be put out of the communion and comminalty. Now it is so that the Church, as I
have already declared, is the communion of Saints and the comminalty of the
faithful. And for so much as the sacraments, being administered according to the
pure ordinance of the Lord, are of the principal outward marks of the true
Church, and of ye communion, and comminaltie, she is also signified and
represented by them. Note thi^ instructi^^
For that cause they do receive those the which they do esteem for true
members of that whole body, and of all that co^minaltie which we do call the
Church, and the communion of Saints, acknowledging the^ as true Burgesses and
Citizens of the kingdom of heaven, and of the holy City of God. And by that
mean they do communicate unto them ye Sacraments, which are unto them as
marks and tokens, which Princes, Lords, and Captames do give to their
servants and soldiers the which they do aduow and esteem the^ worthy,
because of their faithfulness. Excommunication.
On the contrary they do reject from the communion of the sacraments, those
whom they cannot acknowledge for true members of the Church, but only for
notten members, or such as are cut off from the same. The which thing they do
declare unto them when they do shut them from the administration of them, to
signify unto them that they are cut off and shut out, not only from the
company of ye faithful, but also of Jesus Christ which is the head, and of al
his heavenly court. And by that mean,

Chapter iiii.
Of the difference which is betwenc the assistants at the mass, be they
priests or no, and the penitents, and excommunicated of the ancient Church,
and of the faults which are to be blamed in particular excommunications.

THen when the priest, Consider well this.
which is at the altar, receives his sacrament alone, and communicates
nothing to any one of all those which do assiste at his mass, is not this as
a kind of excommunication, whereby he shuteth them all out from the Supper
which he receives all alone? for does he not as though there were none but he
alone which were worthy and capable thereof, and. that all the rest were
unworthy and might be rejected as persons excommunicated? The exco^municate^
of the ancient Church.
For there is no great difference between that which they do at this day in ye
mass, in respect of those which do assiste at the same, and that which they
did in time passed in the ancient Church in ye administration of the Supper,
toward excommunicated persons which were in the place of the penitents. For
albeit that they did assiste in the Temple, yet for all that they were separated
from those which did communicate at the supper, and were shut forth from the
communication of the same, until such time as they were reconciled to the
Church. But yet they had that more then those have which do assiste at ye
mass, that they did understand both the prayers and the doctrine, which were
set forth in the assembly, and might make their profit thereof. But ye
greatest part of those which do assiste at the mass, may carry away with them
no such profit, for so much as they understand there nothing at al. And then when
the excommunicated were reconciled to the Church, they might go to the supper
as often as the same should be administered. For they then made no particular.
Supper for any, but made it only general for all: whereas every priest makes
his particular for him self, and shuts out all the rest. Wherein they do
commit three notable faults. ^otable ^^lts.
The first is in yt as I have already touched, yt the common people and those
who^ they call lay, are deprived of ye Supper in manner al ye whole year: albeit
that the priests do every day make theirs, every of them in particular. The
second is, that in the same very time that they do administer the supper
generally to al, yet do not the priests administer theirs with the rest of
the body of the Church, but do it all aparte, as though they were of an other
Church, and members of an other body. The third is, that being already so
separated from the rest, yet do they separate them selves among them selves
the one from the other. For every of them makes his Supper aparte, upon his
altar, without communicating any thing to any of his fellows.

Chapter v.
Of the particular masses, and Suppers of the Roman Church: and how much
they are repugnant to the institution and nature of the Supper of the Lord.

THey do very il agree in every respect in this with the ordinance of ye Lord.
For men may not say at al of any of their Suppers made in this manner, that
which Saint Paul has written of the communion of the true Supper, saying, 1.
Cor. 1^
We which are many, are one bread and one body, for so much as we are all
partakers of one very bread: For every one does not partake here of one very
bread nor at one very table, Note the abuse of (...) Supper.
for every one has his bread and his table apart. Saint Paul in his time did
rebuke the Corinthians, for that they did not tarry the one for the others, when
they did celebrate the Supper, but did separate the one from the others, and
chiefly the rich from the poor, as well for the contempt of them, as for the
bankets which yet at that time they did add to the Supper. And for that cause
he wrote unto them, When then ye do assemble your selves together, it is not
to eat the Supper of the Lord: for every man takes his own particular
supper etc. Men might by greater reason say the like of this particularitie of
masses and of Suppers, which are made in the Roman Church. It is true, that
the table of the people is more common. So is it notwithstanding, that the same
is yet greatly divided, and separated without any necessity. Example.
For as every priest has his apart upon his altar, and in his Chapel, even so
do they administer the Supper after their manner, to those which will have it
apart and in particular in all their Chapels and altars, the which will
separate them selves from the common table of others. The which thing does very
evil agree with the nature of this holy Sacrament, which is unto us a
Sacrament, ^acrame^t (...) union.
as well of ye union that the faithful have with Jesus Christ their head, as his
members, as of that which they have every of them with the other among them by
his spirit. Wherefore the more that we may represent this union, being all
united together in the communion of the Supper, so much the better do we
accomplish that which the same Supper does represent unto us. For that cause
do we eat all of one very bread, and drink all of one very wine, Cor. 10.
the which notwithstanding that they be both made of sundry grains gathered
together, yet for all that they make but one very lofe and one very wine. And
thereby ye Lord would give us to understand, that we which were scattered
abroad, are brought together by his death, John. 11.
as Saint John witnesses, and are reunited with him, and ye one with the
other. By mean whereof as we eat al of one bread, and drink al of one wine
and at one very table, Note this ^^struction
even so albeit yt we be many, yet ought we always to be altogether one,
gathered together in one body, as many grains in one lofe and in one wine.
^blessed ^nion.
Wherefore if it might he, that all ye members of the whole universal Church
might communicate together at one very table, and supper, it were to be
desired that it might be done, the better to represent such a blessed union.
But because that it cannot be so done, it is requisite yt al do celebrate the
same in those places where they may assemble commodiously in greatest nombers,
for so holy and blessed a work.

Chapter vi.
That the particular masses and Suppers of the Roman catholics do rather
represent a division and scattering abroad in the Church, then an union and
communion.

ANd therefore the priests and the Roman catholics do very evil consider
these things. For they do clean contrary, dividing and separating them selves
in sort that they do divide and separate them selves the one from the others,
both in table, in bread, and in their wine, as though their body of their
Church were a body divided, dismembered, and rent in pieces, and that there were
at all neither union nor conjunction among them. For, for the first, Note thi^
division.
behold there are the tables of the priests separated from that of other men,
the which they do not prepare very often: and albeit that they did often
prepare them, they do allow as many particulars as men would have in diverse
places, and at sundry times, without keeping any certain order. And how often
is it that they do prepare them for themselves, when they do not prepare the^
for any other at all? For in all their masses, wherein none of the assistants
do communicate with them, they do prepare them only for them selves. And when
they do prepare them for them selves, they should very well content them
selves to prepare one for all, and to communicate the one with the others, and
to receive the Supper the one at ye hand of the other, without preparing so
many tables apart, and so many bankets in a morning, al separate the one from
the other, as though every of them did excommunicate his fellow, being at his
several table and communion, who has nothing common with any man. Wherein every
of them plaieth two parts: For they play the part of the minister which does
administer the Supper, and of him unto whom it is administered. For every of
them is minister to him self, ^ote this ^fference.
and does receive of him self. If they do understand that their mass is a
Sacrifice and sacrament of the supper both together, as they do affirm it,
they should yet at the least when they have offered their sacrifice, make their
communion more general then they do, and to call the people with them
thereunto, or at the least their fellows, which are of the same very occupation
that they are. And in so dooyng, it should not be needful to have so many
tables, nor so many altars, nor so many Chapels. And the fewer yt they were,
so much the better should they represent the union, whereof the supper is unto
us a sacrament, in stead of the division and dissipation which is in so many
their Suppers which they make apart, which are no Suppers at all.

Chapter vii.
Of the inequality which is between the supper of the priests, and that of
the people, in the Roman Church in respect of the breads, and of the gods of
the same, and of their adoration and of their sacrifice.

ANd then whereas the nature of the Supper requires an equality in all men,
they on ye contrary do put there great inequalities. Note the inequalit^
For as they do separate the table of the people from theirs, even so do they
make it far unequal to theirs: chiefly in two points. The first, in that that
they do not give unto them of the same wine that they do drink, the which
they cut from them in the banquet. The other is, that also they put a difference
in ye bread. For those which are for the priests, are greater and larger the^
those which are for other men, the which are much less in quantity. And by
that mean they have great and little Gods, as they have great and little
hosties, the great ones are for the priests, and the little ones for the people.
^e gods the ^estes.
And as the dignity of the priests is great above al other men, even so is
there great difference between their Gods, and those of the common people, not
only touching their greatness and form, but also touching their dignities and
honors. For even as theirs are more great and larger, and of fairer show,
even so are they lifted up on high and showed to al men, and worshipped
solemnly of al men. But the other little gods which are prepared for the common
people, are not lifted up at all in such honor and dignity, but do remain
there quietly upon the table, until the time that they be distributed to be
eaten, without any other show or so great handling, or so much turning and
returning by the hands of the priests, as those, which are made for them, that
gods (...) offered (...) sacrifice.
have. And then there is yet this point more, that there are none but the Gods
of the priests, which are offered in Sacrifice, and not the others the which
are not made but to be eaten incontinently after, or else to be kept in boxes,
and cupbordes, for a kind of provision to the end that there be no want of
Gods ready made, but that there may be good store at what time soever need
shall require, either to carry to the sick, or to conjure ye time, the
tempests, and the devils, and to make them to serve to other such like
occupations. Behold many inequalities which do very evil agree with the
nature of the Supper, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke. 22. Acts. 2.1. Cor. 10.11. Esai.
58.
as Jesus Christ and his Apostles have used it, and as it was used and
practiced in the ancient Church. For this manner of distribution does much
better represent the communion and the union of the Church in the supper, and
the charity yt the faithful ought to have the one with the other, then when
they do give to every one a little cake apart. For ye breaking of ye bread
carries all this with it in the Scripture. But this imports not much. Therefore
it may (...) among iudifferent things, provided that al (...) which is of the
proper substance of the supper, (...) well observed, according to ye Lords
ordinance.

Chapter viii.
Whether the Roman priests may justly excuse them selves by the people, in
that that they are deprived of the communion of their masses.

BUt let us come now to that which they may reply against that which I have
even now spoken. ^ote.
The Roman doctors and catholics do answer us when we do blame their, for
that there is no general communion in (...) masses, that there is no fault at
al in the prieste^ which say it. For they do excuse them selves yt they are
not the cause that there is no communion of the assistants, for they deny it
to no man: wherefore the fault proceeds from the assista^ts which do not
demand it at all, and which are not at al disposed to receive it, as they
ought to do, and not from the priests. By mean whereof they shut the^ selves
from it. But who is ye cause thereof, but only the priests them selves? For
what admonition do they give to the people, either in their mass or before
the same, to cause them to prepare and dispose them selves to the communion
which they will administer in the same? And when they come to the Altar, do not
they know well enough what supper they ought to administer, and which be those
that are disposed to communicate at the same? do they not know very well that
there are none which are prepared thereunto? for they do not accustom at all
to communicate the same, but to such as are first confessed to them, and by
whom they are advertised, whether they have will to communicate or no. And on
the other side, Horrible deceit.
what is the chief cause, yt the people has so small care to communicate there?
is it not because that they have given them to understand, that they do
communicate for all in the communion of their mass? Wherefore the people
being so instructed and falsely persuaded, do think that they may very well
rest upon their consciences. But if they do excuse them selves upon that, that
the people is not at all disposed as they ought to be, they may not say the
like of them selves, at the least of those which are disposed to say mass, and
are accustomed daily to say it. For they come not at all to the altar without
preparing the^ selves first, according to their manner. Wherefore is it then at
the least that they do not communicate altogether, and that they administer not
a supper in common among them, and such as should be disposed to communicate
with them, and no^ to separate them selves every one the one from the other?

Chapter.ix.
That there was not at al any particular or private Mass of Supper in the
ancient church, and of the declaratio^s and decrees against such as did not
communicate at al, nor did tarry the end of the divine service: and of the
original spring, and multiplication of particular and private Masses.

WE do read well in the books of the ancient doctors, Note this.
and in the Ecclesiastical histories, that it is come often to pass, that
because the devotion of the people was already become cold, and that they did
very often celebrate the Supper, there were but the ministers and the Deacons
and the Auncientes of the Church, and those of the Clergy, and certain
others which did communicate at the Supper. But yet for all that, such as would
communicate, did communicate always together, were they ministers, bishops,
priests, deacons, or others: and there was no one at all which made his Supper
aparte. And in the mean while that true Bishops and true priests, being the
true ministers of the Churches, did never give the people to understand that
it was sufficient that they alone did administer the Supper for them, and for
all the rest of the Church, neither did they make marcha^dizes of it, as the
Roman priests do of their masses: but on the contrary, they did greatly blame
and rebuke, Note the instructi^^
such as willingly did abstain from the communion, and they declared unto the^
yt they were rebels to God in so doing, and how ingrate and unworthy they were
of such a grace. And among the rest S. John Chrysostom did oftentimes complain
thereof. There are also su^drie decrees and canons to ye same effect, against
those which did not communicate at all, and did not tarry to the end of the
whole divine service, and of the last benedictio^, whereby the minister did
conclude and end the same, as we do yet at this day, following the manner of
the ancient church. Note the names.
But for so much as the service and the divine office is called in these
canons, either by the name of sacrifice or of oblation, or of mass, the
Roman doctors and catholics do take it for their private and particular
masses, to the which they are clean contrary. For they speak fully of all the
divine service, and do make express mention of the supper and of the communion
of the people and of all the whole church. But they which apply it in this
sort, are so ignorant, or else so carried away by their own opinions and
affections, that they do take for them selves those testimonies which are
manifestly against them, and do put into our hands a swoorde, wherewith to
beat them, and to cut their throtes: but it is sufficient for them to dazzle
the eyes of the ignorant, which do delight to be deceived with them by such
fogges and smokes. ^ote this ^^^truction.
When then there is any question of the supper, there must be there certain
order, and the minister must know at what time, and in what place, and to what
persons, and in what sort they ought to administer it. And if there be not
such number of persons disposed and prepared to receive the same, as is
requisite, they must then attend a better opportunity. For they may not receive
it for ye rest, nor any one in particular separated and divided from the other.
And therefore the very Roman church has had neither particular and private
masses and suppers without communion, but only from the time that the mass
was converted in the same into a propiciatorie sacrifice, as well for the dead
as for the living. For even from that time, it has been the work and
occupation of priests and monks, and mamely from the time that they have
accustomed to set their masses at sale, and to make common marchandizes of the
sacrifices of the same. Note these ^archaun^ises.
For that traffike has also been the cause of the multiplication of the
marchaunts, which has traded that merchandise. From thence is come chiefly a
great multitude of priests and of monks, wherewith the Church has been laden
and filled. Note (...) these ca^ses folo^ing.
And for so much as the masses have been multiplied according to the multitude
of the Sayers and merchants of the same, it was needful that the communion
which should be in the Supper, should be cut off, and that it should be
converted into that of the only priest which says the mass, and that for
sundry causes. The first is, and places, as the priests do ordinarily say
Masses. Wherefore it must needs be, either that they do say fewer, and to
better purpose, or else that they do administer their supper and communion all
alone, ^^nclusio^.
as they daily do. Behold then how the true use of the true supper of the Lord
was lost by the mean of masses, and was converted into the particular and
private communion and suppers of the priests, which are neither suppers nor
communions, as I have already sufficiently proved heretofore.

Chapter.x.
Whether men may communicate spiritually at the Supper, by the mean of those
which do there communicate bodily, without communicating there with the^, and
whether the one may receive the Sacraments better for the other, then he may
hear the preaching and believe and be saved, the one for the other.

THere rests yet to answer now to that which they say, that albeit that
those which assist at the mass, do not communicate at all bodily at the
communion which the priest receives in the same, yet for all that, the same
lets not but that they may communicate spiritually. But I ask them, ^emande.
if the means which the Lord has ordained for to communicate unto us his
gifts and graces, do serve for nothing to that, for the which he has
ordained them? and whether it be all one, either to use them or not to use them
at all. For if they be there of no value, they are ordained in vain, the which
thing should very evil agree with the wisdom and providence of the almighty,
which does make and ordain nothing without very good and just cause. And if it
be so, they which do contemn these means, do tempt God, and are rebels unto
him, in as much as they do not obey his ordinance: and in so doing, they make
them selves unworthy, A worthy sentence.
and deprive them selves of the benefits which God would communicate unto them
by those means. For albeit that he is able to communicate them without those
means, must use in his own person those means by the which the Lord does
communicate them and not an other for him: as we may well judge by the
preaching of the Gospel, and by the doctrine set forth unto us in the same.
^^n. 10.
For seeing that faith is given by the hearing of the word of God, I must, if
I will receive this gift of faith, hear the word, by hearing whereof the holy
Ghost will work in me, and make me partaker: for seeing that the Lord has so
ordained it, ^onsyder ^^ll this.
if I reject the preaching of the word, I deprive my self of the faith which
I should receive by the same. And therefore Saint Paul says, ^om. 10.
How shall they belleeue in him whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a preacher? even then as an other may not believe for me, and as
I can not be saved by ye faith of an other, whatsoever he be, if I my self do
not believe in proper person, eue^ so none other may hear the Gospel for me
in such sort that it may profit me, if I my self do not hear it in mine
own person. For faith is, that faith (...).
in respect of the soul and of the spiritual life, as the soul is in respect
of the body and of the corporal life: wherefore even as no man may live a
corporal life by mean of the soul of an other man, ^xample.
but only by his own: even so no man may live a spiritual life, by the faith
of an other, but by his own faith, according to that which is written, ^^a. 2.
^om. 2.
The just man shall live by faith. And even as no man may entertain and conserve
the life which he received by mean of his soul, by the nouriture which an
other does take, nor by that which he eats and drinks, but only by that
which he him self does take, and by the meats and drinks which he receives
by his own preson, even so is it of the nouriture of ye faith of every man by
the word of God, for the entertainment and conseruatio^ of the spiritual life.

Chapter.xi.
Of the agreement which is between the signs of the Sacraments and the word
of the same, concerning the instruction of man: and of the spiritual communion
of them without the bodily in case of necessity.

Note well this chapter.
ANd that which I say of preaching and of the word, must be also understood of
the Sacraments and of the administration of them, for so much as they do
depend of the same, and that they are, as Saint Augustine has very well said,
Aug. in Ioa^ Ho. 80. and co^tra Faust. li. 16. and de doctr. Chri. li. 11.
as it were a kind of word which is visible and to be felt, and is sensible,
the which teaches men by their eyes, by the mean of the sight, and by the
other senses, by the mean of their feelings, as does the word and the voice
by the ears, by the mean of ye hearing. From whence it comes to pass, that
by the mean of the sacraments, ^^^uctio^ mean ^he sacra^^nts.
man is instructed by all his senses, as well exterior as interior, and as
well bodily as spiritual, because that they have such as agreement together,
that the exterior and bodily senses, are as the messengers and the aduertisers
of the inward and spiritual senses. Wherefore, seeing that God would that by the
mean of his sacraments, yt one should help to instruct the others every one
in their order and degree, none may then contemn and overthrow that order.
Whereupon I do conclude, that the Roman priests may as well receive the supper
for others as for them selves, as they may hear the word of God, and believe
and be saved for others, for so much as it must needs be, yt every man have
all this in his own person. ^ote this ^impariso^.
Wherefore it is as possible that the Christian people should be fed
spiritually with ye body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the communion, which the
priest alone makes in his mass, as it is possible that he may be fed bodily,
with that which ye priest dineth with, and eats and drinks all alone. (...)
good in^^ruction.
Wherefore if ye people will be partakers of ye things signified by the signs of
the supper, they must also be partakers of the word and of the signs of the
same: which are the means whereby God will communicate those things which they
do signify. For as he has ordained the mean whereby he will give,
entertain and conserve the bodily life, eue^ so has he done for the
conservation of the spiritual life. And therefore seeing yt he has ordained
the ministry of the word and of the sacraments in respect of the spiritual
life: he that would have and conserve it without this mean, should do as much as
if he would live a bodily life, without eating or drinking, and using ye mean
ordained of God, for the nouriture and entertaineme^t of the same, if there be
no such necessity and let, that they both cannot be had. For God has not so
tied his graces to external things, God dist^^buteth h^ graces as pleases him.
that he cannot distribute the same without them, by his divine virtue, and
without external means, if it please him, provided that there be no contempt
or rebellion of our part: for albeit that he has made us subject thereunto, so
far forth as he gives us the means, yet for all that he is not subject as
we are, but so far forth as it pleases him to use them of his own free
will. Example.
And therefore even as he did nourish extraordinarily and supernaturally by his
divine virtue Moses, Elie, and Jesus Christ, the space of forty days, they
not receiving in that time any bodily meat or drink, according to the order
of nature: even so may he nourishe spiritually, and communicate his gifts and
graces, without the ministry of man ordained in his Church, if it please
him, to those which by necessity are deprived of them, notwithstanding that
they have great desire to use the means which he has ordained, and that they
do all their endeavor that they may, to have the true and right use thereof,
^^ample.
as if a faithful man were so holden by necessity of sickness, or by
captivity and prison of tyrants, or by some other like necessity which
hinders him, that he may not participate outwardly. For if there were there of
his fault, ^onsider ^^ll this ^tructio^.
and that he would forbear for his pleasure, and that he would not do his
duty in that behalf, the reason should be otherwise.

Chapter.xii.
How greatly and how much the more inexcusable the Roman priests should be
for depriving the Christian people from the communion of the body and of the
blood of the Lord in their Masses, and of his blood in their common Suppers,
if the doctrine of their transsubsta^tiation were true.

ANd if the doctrine of transsubstantiation were true, that which I say, would
fight yet more sharply against the Roman priests. For seeing that they do
affirm that the bread and the wine which are the signs of the supper, are
converted into the very body and blood of Jesus Christ, the which they
signify, they must also confess, will they or will they not, that in
depriving priuing the people of these two signs in their mass, they do also
deprive them of the body and of the blood of Jesus Christ, and that in their
common supper they deprive them of the blood, delivering to them but they body,
according to their doctrine: Note. Ephe. 5.
for seeing that we must be made flesh, of the flesh, and bones, of the bones
of Jesus Christ, by the communion which we should have with him, and which is
represented unto us, Romans 6. 1. Cor. 10
as well by baptism as by the supper, an other can not be that for us. And by
that mean the priests may no more receive the supper for us, and in our name,
then they may be baptized in our name and for us. And therefore Jesus Christ
said not, Note we^ this instruction.
yt he which should eat his flesh and drink his blood by vicar and
lieutenant, should have life in him, and should be in Jesus Christ, and Jesus
Christ in him, but said openly, John. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him,
and has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the latter day. Let the
Roman Catholics then consider, whether their priests may eat this meat
and drink this drink, and rise for all their parochians, and for all those
which hear and see their masses: and whether they will be contented to be so
nourished with the flesh and with the blood of Jesus Christ, and so to rise at
the latter day in the person of their priests.

Chapter.xiii.
Of the Sacrifice and of the Communion that the priests do administer in
their masses as well for the dead as for the living.

THus much concerning the communion which is in the mass, and concerning the
ninth error which we do blame in the same. I will now come to the tenth,
which is concerning that that the priests do not doaste yt they do sacrifice
and communicate in their mass only for ye living, but also for the dead, An
horri^le sacri^edge. (...) true say^ng.
affirming that by that mean they do apply the sacrifice of Jesus Christ,
and the virtue and the merit of the same, as well to the one as to the others.
For the which cause they say, that they do divide their hosties into three
parts, in their communion, of the which they dippe the one into the wine in
their challice, against the express ordinance of the Lord, yea, and against
the very ancient canons. Note this.
For the Lord did not temper the bread with ye wine, neither did he make a
soppe in the wine in the institution of the supper, neither did he also
command to do it. And therefore, it is written in the ancient canons which
forbid the same, De Condist. 2. C. qum. ^omne. Oriestes Iubaistes. Note.
that Jesus Christ did distribute the bread apart, and the wine apart, and
that he gave not the bread, nor the morcell tempered to any other then to
Judas, which betrayed him: Duran. (...) lib. 4. Ru^^ de fract. (...) Bonau. i^
Sed did. (...) Hilper. i^ Ele. de E^cha.
and he gave it not unto him yet in the Supper, but out of the Supper. Now of
these three parts, that the priests make of their hostie in their mass, they
assign the one to the living, and the two others to the dead, because that
they do make two sorts, to wit, the one which are already happy, and do
reign in Paradise, and the other which are yet holden in the pains of
purgatory, and have not yet fulfilled their penance, nor have fully satisfied
unto God, and by that mean they do sacrifice and communicate, both for the
living and for the dead, all at one time, as though Jesus Christ had not fully
satisfied for all by his sacrifice, and as though the ministry of the word
and of the Sacraments, were not limited within the course of this life, and
as though there were such communication between the living and the dead, as
there is between those which live in this world together.

Chapter.xiiii.
That these sacrifices and communions cannot be made in faith, nor consequently
be pleasant to God.

WHerein they do again greatly fail, and in sondrie sorts. For, for the
first, Note the^ faults.
seeing that the do all that which they do, in all these points without any
word of God, they can not do them in faith. ^^^ment.
And if they can not do them in faith, they may then in no wise please God in
so doing. But they do greatly displease him. By mean whereof, so far off is
the work which they do, from being good, that it is in deed but sin. ^^te.
And that the same is true, I prove it unto them by that which is written, that
whatsoever is done without faith is sin, ^^t^. 14. ^^b. 11.
and that without faith it is impossible to please God. And then I prove that
all that which is done without the word of God, is done without faith, because
that it is also written, (...) other ^^ofe. ^om. 10.
that faith comes by the hearing of the same. Wherefore there where this
word is not, and there where faith has not the same for his foundation, there
is also no faith. ^ote.
Now I have already sufficiently showed, that they have no word of God,
whereupon they may build any propiciatorie sacrifice for the remission of
sins, either for the living or for the dead, except it be that which Jesus
Christ him self has offered, the which may not be offered again, neither yet
by any other then by him self only. ^onsyber ^^ll this.
They have no more word of God for that communion which they say also is
administered in their mass, as well for the one as for the other, but they have
the word of God directly contrary to all these points, and chiefly the
institution of the holy Supper of the Lord. It follows then, yt their faith
and religion in this matter is not founded otherwise, but only upon the
doctrines and the commandments and tradicions of men, whereby God witnesses
not only by Esaias, but also by his own son Jesus Christ, Esai. 2^ Mat. 1^ Mat.
7.
yt he is served in vain. And by what testimonies of the Scripture will they
also prove either the prayers, or the suffrages for the dead, and the
invocation of Saints? Now if there were no other reason but this, Note (...)
couclu^^^^^
Now if there were no other reason but this, it is sufficient to overthrow all
these points. For I will say always, and it shall be true, yt all that is done
without faith: from whence it follows yt it is sin, until such time as they
be able to show by certain testimonies of the word of God, that he has
commanded and allowed such works, and yt he has given commandment and promise
thereunto: which thing they shall never do, but by corrupting and perverting the
true sense of the Scriptures.

Chapter xv.
Whether the ministry as well of the word as of the sacraments be as well ordained
for the dead as for the living, and whether the work of the same may stretch
out so far as to the dead, and whether the priests may better receive the
supper for them then the Baptism, and better then the other living Christians.

ANd further I ask them whether the Lord did ordain the sacraments either for
the living, No^^
or for the dead, ^^aund ^^^at ^^quence
or for both together? It is certain yt it is not for the dead, but for the
living only. For seeing that the sacraments cannot be administered without the
word, upon the which they are grounded, it is very certain, that none may be
capable of them, but only those unto whom the word may be administered with
their signs. ^^^der (...).
Now so it is, yt the one neither the other may be administered to the dead.
From whence it also follows, that the sacraments do no more belong unto the^,
then the preaching of ye Gospel which is ordinarily used in the Church. And to
say, that the living may receive them for them, I have already declared yt it
cannot be done: For if ye very living may not do it for those yt are living,
much less yet may they do it for the dead. And if it were so yt it might be
done, wherefore also should not ye other Christians as well do it, for their
kinsmen and friends which are dead, as ye priests and the monks: And if they
might do it in respect of the supper, wherefore might they not do it in
respect of baptism, yea more justly, according to their doctrine? for they
place so great necessity in the outward sign thereof, yt they do affirm that
those cannot be saved which cannot attain thereunto. For the which cause they
have forged a Limb for the children which are dead without baptism, ^^^e.
the which according to their divinity, is at the least as it were a half
hell. If then it be so, yt the necessity be such, Note this.
and that ye one may receive the sacraments for the other, and namely the
priests and the monks, they should have greater reason to practice the same
rather in the baptism, the^ in the supper, for so much as according to their
doctrine, there is much greater danger to be deprived of baptism, then of ye
supper. For they do not at al account damned, those which do die not having
received the Supper, as they do those which do die without baptism. Wherefore
is it then that the priests are not baptized rather for the little Children
which are borne dead, Deman^^
which could not live until they might receive baptism, then to receive the
supper for the living, and for the dead, as they vaunt the^ selves to do in
their mass, saying that they are as it were ye mouth of ye whole Church, by
the which all the body of the same, and all her members are nourished
spiritually?

Chapter xvi.
Of the masses which are celebrated in the honor of men Saints and women
Saints, and which bear their name, and of the application of the^ to all
things: and what fruit the masses for the dead might bring unto them, although
indeed the invention of the Roman purgatory were certain.

ANd on ye other side, ^^hee ^^und.
I ask the^, What need have they to Sacrifice, or to communicate for ye Saints
which are already in paradise? for, what need have they so to do? Now if they
say yt they do it in their praise and for their remembrance, I answer, yt
Jesus Christ has not ordained his supper, ^^swer.
either in the remembrance, or in the praise of any other then of him self,
and for to yield thanks unto God for his benefits. And therefore he has not
ordained any supper either of S. Peter, ^ote.
or S. Paul or S. John, nor of any of ye Angels, nor of any me^ saints, or
women saints, be they either dead or living, but did ordain only one which is
ye supper of Jesus Christ: Wherefore men may not say the like of the Roman
masses, of the which ye one is of S. James, ye other of S. Philip, and others
for this or yt Saint, in sort as they have their names diverse, according to ye
Saints to the which they are dedicated, and the persons and the things
whereunto the are applied. For they do make a Recipe ad omnia, and a medicine
for all diseases. I ask them also wherein the sacrifice and communion may
serve for ye dead, the which they do receive for the^ in their mass? For, for
ye first, what sure foundation have they for their fire of purgatory in all the
holy scriptures, wherein they do lodge in manner all ye souls of those yt are
departed, to make the^ after ward to pay ransom? And what foundation may it
have, more then the sacrifice of ye mass has, for so much as it far exceeds
ye true purgatory, the which the scripture places in ye only blood of Jesus
Christ, and in the washing and in the purgacion made by the same? Hebr^ 1. Co^
Ephe^ 1. Io^h^ Apo. (...) John^ Acte^ 1. T^^ 1. Pe^^^
For it is he that has made it by him self, and by the which we are washed
and made clean by ye mean of the word of God, and of faith which purifieth
the hearts. For it is the price of our ransom by the which we are bought, and
neither by gold nor silver, as they do after the use of ye Roman church. And
albeit it were so, yt they could very well prove by good testimonies of the
scripture, that there were such a purgatory by fire, yet must they for all that
prove that they are able to redeem and to deliver the souls from thence, by
the sacrifices, and communions which they have in their masses, and such other
means which they have invented to the same effect: And under the shadow of
the which things they have gained, and do gain yet daily so great riches, yt
they have drawn to the^ selves the greatest part of the temporal goods of
Christendom. Wherefore it is not to be marueiled at, if they do endeavor the^
selves to kindle and light again this furnace of purgatory, without the which
the sacrifice of their mass, and their communion in the same, should lose a
great part of their estimation, and of their rentes and tributes. Hort^ treas^^
gain^^ sus (...)
We may say the like of the satisfactions, which they have invented against yt
of Jesus Christ, and against his merit and benefits. For if his be
sufficient, then are theirs of no value. And if it be not sufficient, he may
not the^ be ye true Christ. And may mortal men do that which he was not able to
do, and add any of theirs to his work?

Chapter xvii.
How much more comme^dable it would be for the Roman priests to do the office
of pastors toward the living, and to leave to the dead the mynistery for the
dead.

Now it is true that they have not at al any certain word of God to declare
and to prove any of all this. ^^ndacio^ maine.
Whereon then are they grounded? it is not upon the stone and upon the rock:
but upon the grauel and upon the sand. Wherefore it must needs come to pass,
infallicensure.
will they or will they not, yt all this whole building shall at the last fall and
tumble into utter ruin. And therefore it seems to me yt they do very well, to
leave ye dead apart, and to deal only with the living, doing the duty of good
ministers and pastors toward them, as their duty requires according to the
word of God. For if they dead have need of sacrifices, or of sacraments, ^ote
very ^ell this.
or of other suffrages and good deeds, ye Saints which are dead which know
better their state then we do, and which are also in better estate and more
worthy to succor the^, may better do this office then the living. And if they
cannot do it, if it be necessary yt some should do it, it shall be yet more
hard for the living to do it. And at the least, we have not at al any certain
testimony in all the holy scriptures, whereby we may be assured that they may
do it, neither yt it is needful, nor that God does allow such a work and yt it
does profit ye dead. Thus much then touching this point, concerning the
sacrifice and communion of the mass, as well for the living as for the dead, and
ye applying of the sacrifice and of the benefits of Jesus Christ by the same.

Chapter xviii.
Of prayers for the dead, and of the invocation of saints in the mass, and of
the distinction of the Roman doctors between the advocates of reconciliation
and of intercession.

I Have yet 2. points, for the 11. and 12. the which I will touch in brief. 2
poi^^
The first is concerning the prayers which they make in ye mass, wherein we
find 2. faults. The first is concerning those which they make for the dead,
God only, by our only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ, (...) 3.8. ^^n 2.
(...). 9.10. ^^hn. 2.
and by his merit, but also to dead men, and by their intercessions and merits:
the which by this mean are put in the place of Jesus Christ the son of God,
which only is given to us for mediator and advocate toward ye father,
according to the express testimony of the scriptures: or at ye least are
substituted or joined unto him for companions. And by this mean Jesus Christ
i^ robbed if not in all, yet at the least of a great part of his office.
Wherefore they may well allege yt they do always say, ^istinctio^ aduo^tes.
and mediators, of reconciliatio^, and of intercession, attributing the first
to Jesus Christ, and the second to men and women Saints which are dead. For by
what testimonies of ye Scriptures may they prove and maintain it? ^emaund.
For ye conclusion which they make from the living to the dead, is not good at
al. For it follows not at al, yt if the living do pray and may pray the one
for the other in this life, that they may in like sort pray for the dead, and
the dead in like sort for the^, be they men or women. Saints, or of what
condition soever else they be. For we have commandment and promise for the
first concerning the living, in a great number of passages, Co^^ deme^^ promi^
and such as are very plain in ye holy scriptures: But we have not one, only
for the other two. Saint Paul does witness. And therefore he, 2. Co^^
which might be advocate for others, how often does he desire the prayers of
the other faithful for him during this life? and did he ever promise or teach,
that he or any other of ye Apostles and other holy personages would pray after
their death for the^, and for ye other living, or also for the dead? Con^^
Wherefore I will always conclude infallibly, that such prayers are made without
faith, only by opinion and human fantasy. From whence it also follows, yt
they are sin, and displeasing God.

Chapter xix.
Of the Collects of the ancient Church, and of those of the mass: and of the
Deacons, as well of the one as of the other, and of their office.

THe other point, which is the twelfth and ye last, is touching ye Collects of
ye ancient Church, and those of ye mass, and his offertories. I have already
declared in an other place, how yt ye ancient Church had collects and alms
for ye poor ioyued to their assemblies, ^mes. ^^tes. 2.4. Cor. 16. Cor. 8 9.
^al. 1.8, 6. Tim. 3.
and namely to thadministratio^ of the supper, and that for the same cause it
had also his deacons, which had ye charge and dispensation, and the care and
special regard to ye poor, to ye end yt al might be distributed in good order
according to the necessity of every of the^. Therefore, when the faithful
met in their assemblies, ^ote this ^der.
and namely upon the day of the Supper, every of them did bring according to
his power yt which he would give, as well for the help and maintenance of ye
poor, as for ye other charges which ye Church did ordinaryly endure. And ye
deacons did receive and gather the same which every one brought of their own
free will, These. 3.
without any co^straint, and the^ they did husband and distribute the same so
well, and by so good order, and in such faithfulness, that the alms of the
faithful were not given but only unto those to whom they ought to be given and
had need thereof. Tim. 5.
And by this mean, even as the poor were not left in necessity, no more were
the idle and loytering ones nourished in their idleness by the mean thereof.
And they also which had wherewith to mayntaine them selves otherwise, did not
eat at al, ye goods of the poor. is now done in ye mass and in ye Roman
Church. She has not only deaco^s but also Subdeaco^s and Archdeacons: Note
here yt th author speaks of these offices, as they are in the corruption of
the Roman Church, and not of those that in good reformed Churches are
diligent preaching Arch deacons, Deacons, etc. for such be not vain titles but
necessary offices.
but they are but vain titles, which have not joined unto them the office
which they do signify: but are greatly different from those of the which ye
scripture me^cioneth. For they are such but in name, as are all ye other
ministers and officers of ye Roman Church, Acts. 6.1. Tim. 3.
yt which do keep well ye ancient names and titles of ye true ministers of ye
ancient Church, with those which they have added unto the^ by their own
invention: but others must be sought which must execute their office. For these
kind of men are well contented with ye titles, and ye benefices the which they do
enjoy under the shadow thereof, without taking any care at all for the office.
Eue^ so is it of their deacons, Subdeacons and archdeaco^s. For they have not
in all their clergy any that are appointed to have any care for the poor, nor
to distribute unto the^ any of ye goods of ye Church, nor of the offerings
which are offered in the same. For the goods of ye Church are no more in ye
Roman Church ye goods of ye poor: Dery gresacriledg^
but ye goods of the rich, which do so divide it with ye poor, yt they take al
to the^ selves, and do leave nothing, or else very little for ye poor. They
have indeed in their mass ye offertory in stead of ye collects of the
ancients. But that which is there received, is not for the poor, but for the
priests and the monks, which divide the spoil among them.

Chapter xx.
Of the Charge which is given to Archdeacons, deacons, and subdeacons in the
Romain Church, and of the offertories of the mass of the same.

ANd in the mean time their deacons, Subdeacons and Archdeacons, are occupied
but in foolish and vain ceremonies, as it appears as well by the charge which
is given unto the^, when they are appointed to their mynisterie, by their
Bishops or suffragans, as by ye also which is written of their office in their
books, and by ye execution of the same. There are in their mass prayers, to
wit, Consider his well
those which go before the reading or ye singing of the Epistle, yt which they
do call Collects. But in the mean time there is no collection made for the
poor. And the Doacons and Subdeacons which should gather the same, and should
distribute them after ward to ye poor, do there none other thing, but that the
one sings the Epistle and the other the Gospel, which is to say, some piece
as well of the one as of the other, yea often times very evil and unaptly shaped.
And as for ye rest they do serve the priest which does administer the mass,
this office, but in solemn masses and such as they do sing with a loud voice:
for in the others, it is sufficient to have some pety clarke to answer the^,
and to serve the priest which is at ye altar. And as touching the offertorie,
it is not so in every man's liberty, either to go or not to go thereunto, but
that there is also constraint thereunto, chiefly in certain feasts of the
year, and namely in those which they do call solemn. For there is certain
tribute laid upon as well men as women at the least upon fathers and mothers of
household, which they must the^ bring to the offertorie. And albeit yt the
curats have their benefices and cures certainly rented, yet for all that they say
that yt is their right, as are many other impostes which they do impose to
their parochians, as well for the living as for the dead, and as well for
thadministration of their sacraments, as for their other ceremonies,
superstitions and Idolatries. If the same be not done in every place after one
sort, yet it is done notwithstanding. For they do not any thing freely and for
naught. Thus much concerning this latter point, the which we do also condemn
in the Roman mass: the which albeit yt it be not of the proper substance of
the Supper, yet for all that, I thought good to set forth the same, because yt
ye ancient Church was not without these Collects, and namely when they did
celebrate ye supper: of yt which they did also leuy ye bread and the wine yt
they did distribute to ye faithful in the fame, the which were there dedicated
and consecrated in such sort as I have here tofore already declared to be there
signs of the body and of the blood of the Lord.

Chapter xxi.
A brief gathering of the matters handled in this book.

I Do omit very many other points, for so much as I would only bring forth such as
were most principal and most intolerable, the which we may in no wise allow,
without rejecting of Jesus Christ, and overthrowing wholly all the sacrament of
ye holy supper, and observation therem of ye true ancient Church. No more have
I also determined to make many proofs, the more to confirm that which I have
set forth, against the points yt which we do condemn, as well because that the
arguments, which I have brought forth to the same purpose, may suffice such as
will be satiffied with reason, and will not fight against all manifest truth, as
for that also, that I have handled these matters very largely in diverse other
books, in the which men shall find arguments, and testimonies sufficient to
confirm more largely yt, which I have here handled more briefly. And
for so much as the Roman doctors and catholics do make their chief buckler
of the sacrifice, and of the order of Melchisedec, Sacri^^^ of Mel^^^sedec.
for the defense of their mass and of the sacrifice of the same, I have made
an other book of purpose upon that matter, in the which I do show by
apparent testimonies and arguments, taken out of the holy scriptures, how that
the foundation which they lay upon that order of Melchisedec, does more shake
down ye building which they do build thereupon, the^ it does sustain it, and
how contrary it is to the Sacrifices that they would build thereupon. Wherefore
I will now end this treatise, bastard mass, into the (...) the supper of the
Lord, ^^d the form (...) divine service of the true ancient Ch^^^ (...) been
converted and transformed. (...) I have reduced these principal (...) ^^ereof
we are in controversy with (...) ^^^^raine catholics, and the which I have
han^^ed here before, first into five, of the which I have also divided some
into diverse articles, in sort that in the whole I make to the number of xii. by
that order that they are set down in the table, placed in the be ginning of
this book after the Advertisement.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.
1579.


