CHRIST'S Kingdom.

(...) Sermons (...).

RICHARD WEB Preacher of Gods word.

The Contents whereof follows after the Epistles.

MATH. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all
these things shall be ministered unto you.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Henry Rockit, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Poultry, under S. Mildreds Dial. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, AND HIS VERY GOOD FRIENDS, MASTER DOCTOR SINGLETON,
PRINCIPAL of Brasen-nose College in Oxford, together with all the worthy and
learned Fellows of that House; Mr. WILLIAM DVTTON, and Mr. RICHARD DASTON
Justices of Peaces Mr. Doctor SEMAN Chancellor of Gloucester, and Mr. HENRY
AISGILL Preacher of Gods Word, R. W. wishes all happiness in this world, and
eternal glory in the world to come.
THERE are three sorts of Kingdoms (right Worshipful) much spoken of in the
sacred volumes of the Almighty. The first is the kingdom of God, as it is
ruled by Christ the Mediator of the new Testament, whom the Father has
constituted the head of his Church. The second is the Kingdom of Man, as he is
set up in authority above others, by the ordinance of the most High, to command
his people at his will, and according to his laws, of whom he has received
his place of Regency. The third is, the Kingdom of Satan, as he is the Prince
of darkness, and the (...) world, ruling in the children of darkness, and
raging against the children of light. Of these three Kingdoms the first and
the last are opposite, like the fire and the water; and so contrary one unto
the other, that there can never be any good agreement betwixt them, but deadly
hatred and enmity for ever. For this is the immutable voice of the Almighty. I
will (says the Lord to the devil) put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed. He shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. But as for the midst of them, it is subordinate unto them both, and
of such a flexible nature, that it is content to participate with either side.
For it is neither wholly for Christ, nor wholly for Satan; but it self
comprehending under it the whole race of mankind, whereof some are good, and
others bad, does yield forth subjects both for Christ, and for Satan: the
children of light being the subjects of Christ, the children of darkness the
subjects of Satan. Thus do Christ and Satan hold their Kingdoms in the Kingdom
of man. So that though there be three distinct Kingdoms, yet there are not
three distinct places for the administration of these Kingdoms, but the place
is but one, and the self same for them all. In regard whereof every person
must carefully look to himself, whether living in the kingdom of Man, he
does belong to Christ, or to the devil. For of necessity he must be a subject
to the one of them, or to the other, considering that no man can serve two
masters. If we belong to Christ, we are happy, and shall have this comfortable
saying delivered unto us at the last, Come ye blessed children of my Father,
receive the Kingdom of God, which is prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. But if we appertain to the devil, we are in a pitiful case, and
shall have this doleful sentence pronounced against us at the day of
judgment: Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
his Angels. Now how men do carry themselves in regard of these Kingdoms, and
what they should also do in respect thereof, David who was himself a King, and
a singular Prophet of the most High, has notably described unto us in his
second Psalm, which spends it self wholly upon that subject. The which
Psalm of his I have handled, and preached over amongst my people; but the
Lord, that is the searcher of the heart, does know, that whosoever I be now
content to let my Sermons upon the same go in common for the common good of
all, and to commit them to the balance of Gods Sanctuary for the profit of his
Saints; yet when I preached them at the first, it was never once intended by
me, that they should come to the press. And therefore the whole discourse was
so framed both for matter and manner, as might best fit the necessity and
capacity of the present Auditory, whose benefit I did chiefly respect, and
unto whom I did accommodate my self, as in other matters, and as at other
times I was wont for to do.

Howsoever being thus penned out, in simplicity of spirit, and plainness of
phrase, without all eloquence of speech, and gloriousness of style, and being
now ready to come to the view of the world, I make bold to present them unto
you (right Worshipful) to whom if they be worthy of any respect, they do
belong in many respects. For as your love to Christ, wherein you pass many
others of your rank and order; your office under Christ, by which you are, as
it were, Kings in his Kingdom, reigning over other Kings: your hatred to them,
which are out of Christ, whereby you are carried with some indignation against
the Man of sin, and those which are in a confederacy with the arch-enimy of our
souls: and lastly, as your kind affection to them, which are in Christ, and
for Christ, which has moved your tongues to commend them, and your hands to
help them, do seem to challenge this work, which does entreat of Christ and
his kingdom, and to claim it for their own; not much unlike to that of Titus
Pomponius Atticus, who had that Treatise which Tully made of old age, committed
to him, because he was a man well stricken in age; or that of Theophilus, to
whom Luke the Evangelist did consecrate the History of Christ, for that he was
a friend of Christ, and one that loved him well. So your undeserved favors
toward me in particular, do of right vendicate the same, considering that
these are the first fruits of all my labors, which I have taken in this sort,
and after this manner, since my coming to that place, where now I am, and
which I received by your means; some of you being Commissioners appointing
that annual stipend for the continual maintenance of a Preacher amongst us,
which our recovered lands will afford; and others being Patrones presenting me
to the same. In lieu whereof, as they are in that regard most due unto you, so
I do here present them unto you, as a testimony of my mind, which is well
affected toward you, and as a token of my thankful heart, which would
recompense you better, if I could. If you judge them worthy, vouchsafe them, I
pray you, your patronage: if not, your pardon: at least your gracious and
favorable acceptance, according to the kindness of your nature, and wonted
courtesy in other matters. The which thing if I shall understand you do, it
shall not only greatly rejoice mine heart, but make me much indebted unto you
for the same.

The Lord for his Sons sake grant, that this labor of mine may be accepted
of the Saints, and tend to Gods glory: And I heartily beseech the Lord, the
God of all grace, and giver of all blessings, that he would so multiply his
heavenly graces upon you that you may always walk worthy of the Lord, and
please him in all things, battering down continually the kingdom of Satan,
and setting up the kingdom of Christ to the uttermost of your powers; that so
many souls may be saved by your means, and you your selves have the greater
weight of glory bestowed upon you at the day of judgment, when all persons
shall be rewarded according to their works. And so craving pardon for my
boldness I end, and humbly take my leave. Rodborough the twentieth of August.
1610.

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, Richard Web.

To the Christian Reader all grace and peace.
CHristian Reader, the whole care and burden of the Ministry of the Lords
word, is, or at the least ought to be, how to bring men to the living God, and
to pull them out of the kingdom of Satan that they might be planted in the
Kingdom of Christ. Every one should help forward this work, which is the
greatest, and the most honorablest work in all the world. The miserable estate
wherein they are, who do remain under Satan and his dominion, (as all men do
by nature:) and the most blessed condition that they are in, who are under
Christ and his government (as none are but by grace:) should move men
sufficiently thereunto. For mine own part, what I have done this way, these
Sermons of mine in part will show thee. Read the^ at thy leisure, and mark
them well: begin not alone, but make an end. For happily (as it is in S. John's
Gospel) the best wine is reserved till the last. When thou have ended, if
thou receiuest any profit thereby, bless thou the name of thy God for it,
unto whom all honor and praise do belong; and pray also unto the same God for
me, the instrument therein of thy good; that so I may always stand fast in the
truth, and increase daily in all heavenly graces, to the honor of his name,
and the good of his Church. Our days (thou know (are corrupt and full of
sin, and we our selves are very frail and weak: look therefore to thy
self, and keep thine heart with all diligence. Run not with the world,
neither decline after vanity, but cleave fast unto thy God, come life or come
death: and be thou sure evermore to work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling, and so fare thee well most heartily in the Lord.

Thine for thy good ever in the Lord, R. W.

The principal matters, which are handled in every Sermon.
The Contents of the first Sermon.
THe Author, Sum, and Division of the whole Psalm. It is proved, that David
and Christ had many enemies, according to the letter of the text. The causes
why Christ in the days of his flesh was rejected by men, albeit he was most
worthy of love and favor; which are in number 7. whereof 3. are intrinsecall
or inward, being inherent in men; and 4. extrinsecall or outward, being
wickedly picked from Christ himself. It is showed how the enemies of David and
Christ were oucrcome, and came to fearful ends. The godly are unlikely for
four causes to overcome their enemies, yet do they prevail against them: the
reasons why, and the uses thereof. There are four things in God, for the which
the victory does always go on his side, and theirs whose part he does take. It
is declared, how the godly do overcome, even then, when they be put to death
for the truths sake. God is a patient God, not willing the death of a sinner,
but rather that he should convert and live: the reasons why, and the uses
thereof.
The Contents of the second Sermon.
IT is proved, that Christ's enemies did rage and murmr against him in the
days of his flesh, according to the letter of the text. The multitude and
common people of the world are enemies to the Lord and his truth; the reasons
why, which are four; and the uses thereof, which are also four. Murmuring is
a sin, and to be avoided of Gods children: the reasons why, which are two; and
the uses thereof, which are also two. Eight preservatives or remedies against
murmuring. The diverse ends wherefore Questions are proposed. The acts and deeds
of the vulgar sort are so foolish and mad, that wise discreet persons fearing
the Lord, may well wonder at the^; with the use thereof.
The Contents of the third Sermon.
IT is proved, that the States of the land did oppose themselves against Christ
in the days of his flesh, according to the letter of the text. Rich men and
great persons have four chief reasons above others to serve the Lord, yet
they contemn him most; the reasons why, which are six, and the uses thereof,
which are four. Councels and assemblies are as well against the Lord and his
truth, as for him: the reasons why, which are 2. and the uses thereof which are
3. The wicked have their Comes, and Exhortations unto ungodliness, with the
use thereof. There are three causes, why the laws of God should be regarded by
men, yet the wicked do reject them: the reasons why, which are four; and the
uses thereof, which are two. There are four causes, why the godly, do delight
in the law of God, and desire to keep the same. By resisting Gods laws men do
resist God himself: the reason why, and the uses thereof, which are two.
The Contents of the fourth Sermon.
GOd is in all places, at all times, three ways. Two reasons, why God is said
to be in heaven, rather then in any other place. Gods laughing, what it is, at
whom he does laugh, and the use thereof. No power or counsel can stand against
the Lord, but down it must go: the reasons why, which are two; and the uses
thereof, which are three. Men (like Giants) fight against the Lord many ways,
but chiefly four ways. Gods anger what it is, and the double way, by the
which he does speak unto man. The enemies of Gods Church shall be overthrown:
the reasons why, and the uses thereof which are three. The Church of God is
like to an hill or mountain in three respects; with the uses thereof. The
Church of God is said to be holy for three causes; with the uses thereof. God
the Father made Christ the King of his Church: the reasons why, (respecting his
Godhead, and those eight notable-vertues which were in him, most worthy of a
King) and the uses thereof, which are three.
The Contents of the fifth Sermon.
Christ's faithfulness in opening his Fathers decree, with the use thereof. Three
causes, wherefore Christ published his Fathers decree touching himself and his
calling. Every person must stand upon his office and calling: the reasons why,
which are four; and the uses thereof, which are three. An argument to prove,
that our Church in England, is the true Church of God, and that our Ministers
are the true Ministers of God. Christ is God, as well as man: the reasons why,
which are four; and the uses thereof, which are three. There is a fourefold
difference between the manner of Christ's generation, and that which is carnal
with man. All the miracles that Christ did, and chiefly his resurrection from
the dead, do show that he was the Son of God. How we may know whether God
has begotten us, and whom we are to take for Gods children. Christ's Kingdom
is catholic and universal over all the world, with the use thereof. Men must
pray to God for benefits, and by prayer they shall receive them: the reasons
why, and the uses thereof, which are three. God does give to us more
(oftentimes) then we do ask. Christ does bruise his enemies, and the manner
how. Malefactors must be punished: the reasons why, which are 4. and the uses
thereof, which are 3. with an answer to such objections as are made against
the same.
The Contents of the sixth Sermon.
GReat persons, and men of authority, should be foremost in repentance, and in
the whole worship of God: the reasons why, which are three, and the uses
thereof. Perils and dangers must move men to repentance and amendment of life:
the reasons why, and the uses thereof, which are three. Men must defer no time,
but repent out of hand: the reasons why, which are four, and the uses thereof,
which are three; with an answer to such objections as are made against it. It
is proved that all wicked persons are fools, and unlearned in God sight, with
the use thereof. Every one must labor to get wisdom and to understand the
will of God; the reasons why, which are 3. and the uses thereof, which are also
3: with an answer to such objections, as are made against it. The course that
men must take to attain unto it, stands in six things. The evils that do
hinder men from it are many, but chiefly three.
The Contents of the seventh Sermon.
MEn must worship God the Father: the reasons why, and the uses thereof. In
every work of Gods worship, we must look as well to the manner of it as to
the matter, with the reason and use thereof. Men must fear God; the reasons
why, which are 6. and the uses thereof, which are 2. with a distinction of
fear, and an answer to such objections as are contrary unto it; together with
the means to attain unto it, which stands chiefly in three things. Men must
rejoice in God and his service: the reasons why, which are 2. and the uses
thereof, which are three; with the profits which come by it, which are four;
and the means how to get it, which are two. Men must tremble before the Lord,
and be lowly and humble before him: the reasons why, which are two, and the
uses thereof; with the means to attain unto it, which are four. Men must
honor and worship the Son, as well as the Father: the reasons why, which are
two, and the uses thereof, which are also two. The great and manifold
inconveniences or evils, that happen unto men, who obey not Christ, with the
use thereof. Those are blessed that trust in Christ: the reasons why, and the
uses thereof, which are 3. together with a declaration of those 6. things which
are in Christ, that are sufficient to move our hearts to trust in him.
SEVEN SERMONS UPON the second Psalm. Prolegomena: or the General view of it.
THERE is a time (says Solomon) for all things under the Sun, in Eccle. 3.1.
And again he says in Prou. 25.11. that a word spoken in his place, is like
apples of gold, with pictures of silver. In consideration whereof, I have
elected this portion of sacred Writ, to handle here amongst you, on these holy
days, as most fitting the time, and person, for whose sake they are observed;
and so I hope, will be most acceptable unto you. For the time, (you know) is a
time, that is celebrated for the honor of Christ our Savior, who was borne as
upon this day. And as for this portion of holy Scripture, it is a Psalm that
does entreat of Christ, and of his heavenly kingdom; who though he has many
enemies to withstand him, yet he shall remain King and Lord for ever.

The Author principal of this Psalm was God, as he is of all the rest of the
Scripture, according to Paul's testimony in 2. Tim. 3.16. But the Author
ministerial, or isntrumental penman thereof, was the sweet singer of Israel,
blessed David the king; as we may see by the prayer of the faithful, in Acts
4.25. For there in plain terms David is named, when they say unto God. Which
by the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why did the Gentles rage, and the
people imagine vain things? etc.

The chief matter herein handled, is the gracious king dome of our best
beloved bridegroom, the sweet Savior of the world. In letter and type it
speaks of David, and his kingdom; but in spirit and truth of Christ and his
kingdom. For that which was figurative in David (who represented the person of
Christ) was all of it most lively accomplished in Christ, who was represented
by him. And therefore you shall find, that those things which are here
delivered by the Prophet David, are applied by the Spirit of God (the best
interpreter of all) unto Christ in particular, and that in three places of the
new Testament. The first is in that 4. chapter of the Acts, which was quoted
before. The second is in the thirteenth chapter of the same Book, and the
thirtieth three verse. And the third and last is in Heb. 1.5. So that by the
warrant of these places of divine Oracle, this Psalm and the things therein
contained, are truly and properly to be referred unto Christ our King.
Wherefore in the handling of it, we will stand chiefly upon him, and his
kingdom, and speak but a little of David and his kingdom; only showing the
verity of it in him, and pressing it as it were, by the way of an allusion, and
in the matter of amplification.

The parts of this Psalm are two, Doctrine (which some happily would call, a
Narratiue proposition) and Exhortation, (which they would peradventure style,
an Admonitorie Conclusion.) Of these two, Doctrine goes foremost, and
Exhortation comes afterward, according to all good Methodicall instruction. For
as in the architecture of an house, the foundation must first be well laid, and
then afterward the whole building must be framed upon it, and fastened to it
with strong bands and ioints: So in every orderly and sound Instruction, the
Doctrine must be first, (like the foundation) plainly setting down the truth
of matters, touching faith or manners; and the Exhortation must follow upon it
(like the frame of the house) fitting every thing to the best edification of
the hearer, and pressing it closely upon his soul, with pitthy persuasions to
work upon it, that so it may be framed, according to the image of his creator
in that respect. The Doctrine begins at the first verse, and reaches unto the
end of the nineth verse; at which place begins the Exhortation, and continues
to the end of the Psalm.

In the Doctrine two principal things (as the several members thereof) are
laid down. The one is an Opposition that is made against the kingdom of
Christ, in the three first verses. The other is the vanity of that Opposition,
and the woeful estate, wherein they stand, that make the same, in the six
verses next following. If you would know the persons, that do oppose
themselves against Christ and his kingdom, they are of all sorts: some that
are base and mean ones, that do rage and murmr against him, spoken of in the
first verse: and others, that are noble and great ones, that do join hand and
head together to overthrow him, mentioned in the second and third verses. If
you would know again, how all these do speed, they have ill success, and
miss of their purpose, and run by this means into most woeful, and
inevitable dangers. For as they shall never prevail, but all their endeauours
shall come to naught, so they themselves (like rebels and traitors) shall be
executed, and come to most fearful and shameful ends. And this is set out two
ways. The one is in regard of God the Father and his Majesty, against whom
they have lifted up themselves, and who does take his Sons part, and will
defend him in his kingdom; in the fourth, fifth, and sixth verses. For as they
can do him no hurt, not only in regard of his place, he being in heaven, far
out of their reach who are upon the earth; but also of his power, he being
strong and mighty, whereas they are but weak and feeble; and one that makes no
more account of their conspiracies, the^ a man does of his adversaries forces,
whom he has in mere contempt and derision: so he is exceeding angry and
wrathful with them, for their rebellion and treason; and in this anger and
wrath of his he will take revenge upon them for it, and make them know and
understand, to their shame and grief, that he himself, and none other, had
placed Christ in his kingdom, and established him in the throne of Israel, and
that he did not usurp this authority to himself. The other way is in respect
of Christ himself, who is able to right his own cause, and not only to
defend himself in his kingdom, but also to overthrow al his adversaries, and
to bring a perpetual and unrecoverable destruction upon the^; in the seventh,
eight, and ninth verses. Where you have two things set down before your eyes
to contemplate upon. The one is a promise which he does make, to publish his
Fathers decree touching himself, and his kingdom; that so his enemies might
be daunted the more, and by the due consideration thereof, might be brought (if
it were possible) to leave off their rebellion against him. The other is an
opening of this decree by the parts thereof, which are in number two; the one
respecting his person, the other his office or government. For his person, he
is not only man, but also God, even the natural Son of the almighty
Ichouah, which was, is, and which is to come: and this was proved to be so, as
by his miracles, so chiefly by his resurrection from the dead, the Lord showing
by that, that he had begotten him from all eternity. For his office or
government, he is our king, and the head of the Church. And touching it two
things are recorded. First, the largeness of it in the eight verse: wherein
you may see, how it does reach from one end of the world unto the other. Then
secondly the power and strength of it in the ninth verse, which is innincible,
and bruysing down all his adversaries before him. And this his power he must
use and exercise, as for the defense of his own faithful and loyal subjects;
so also for the destruction of the forenamed rebels, and of all such as shall
at any time conspire against him. And this he is to do by the virtue of his
commission from his Father the Almighty, who did set him upon his throne, and
bestowed this universal and catholic kingdom upon him. For he does in
plain terms enjoin him to this duty, saying, Thou shall crush them with a
scepter of iron, and break them in pieces, like a potters vessel.

Upon this stablenesse of Christ's kingdom, wherein the adversaries cannot
prevail, and upon the invincible, and revenging power, wherewith he is armed,
able to crush all his enemies in pieces, as the potter does his earthen
vessels, a sweet exhortation is raised up, wherein all the offenders are
advised to submit themselves to the Lord and his Anointed, whom before they
did resist, and withstand: and that betimes without any further delay, that so
they may not perish, but be saved; in the three last verses. Wherein remember
you, what is required of them. In sum, it is nothing else, but a present
repentance, or amendment of life; but the parts of it are two, as the chief
points, wherein this repentance or amendment of life must stand. The first is
an heavenly wisdom and holy learning, in verse 10. For whereas heretofore
they had been foolish and ignorant of their duties, now he would have them to
be wise and learned, knowing all such matters as do belong unto them, and
keeping themselves within the compass of heavenly direction. The second is a
loyal subjection, and a serviceable obedience, both toward the Father, and
also toward the Son. Toward the Father in verse 11. whom they must serve in
fear, and before whom they must rejoice in trembling. And toward the Son in
verse 12. whom they must kiss in token of their love and homage to him; and
that for two causes, one, that they may not offend him any more, and so bring
fearful and sudden destruction upon themselves; another, that they may
please him, and so through his favor and kindness toward them, receive daily
and plentiful blessings from his hands, both for this world and the world to
come.

Thus you may see in a general view, as in a crystal glass, what this whole
Psalm is, and how correspondently one thing does depend upon the other
therein. But if your memories be frail, and not stable enough to retain the
stamp of all these above recited points within them; yet at the least remember
three of them, which are (Instar omnium) in the place or stead of all. The
first is the resistance that is made against the Lord and his Anointed:
wherein you shall find all forts of persons rebelling against the gracious and
sweet government of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus. The second is the
overthrow of that resistance, and the fearful estate, wherein those that made
the resistance do stand, through the powerful and revenging Majesty of God
the Father, and of God the Son, against whom this treason is committed; both
which are armed with intolerable and irresistable plagues to consume them. The
third and last is a kind and loving exhortation, stirring up, and calling upon
these traitors and rebels to leave their treason and rebellion, and to become
faithful and trusty subjects unto the Lord their king; with an insinuated
promise, that they shall be pardoned for that which they had done already
amiss, and be rewarded for all their good service, which they shall do for
the time to come.

These are the three maine points, on which the whole Psalm does spend it
self. Wherefore let us also stand a little while, and spend some time in the
due consideration thereof, before we come unto the several branches that are
included in either of them.

Of the first point.
It is apparent by the three first verses, that there is no estate, found here
in this world amongst men, but that in the same, some or other, have stood up
against the Lord and his Anointed; for all sorts of persons are brought in
rebelling, first the meaner sort, such as the common people are, in the first
verse; then the better sort (as we term them) such as Kings and Princes are,
and the states of the land, in the two next verses. But you may demand, was
this true, first in David the shadow, then in Christ the body? The answer is,
that it is true in respect of them both. For David, you may see in the second
book of Samuel, from the end of the first chapter unto the beginning of the
twentieth one. His enemies (if you will have the catalogue of them) were these.
First, Abner the son of Ner, that was Captain of Saul's host. For he took
Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him to Mahanaim and made him king
over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Izreel, and over Ephraim, and
over Benjamin, and over all Israel. So that none did cleave to David, but the
house of Judah, who anointed him king at Hebron, and did evermore take his
part; and here through this contention there was a long war between the house
of Saul and the house of David; but David waxed stronger, and the house of Saul
waxed weaker. Chap. 2. and 3. Secondly, when David was made king over all
Israel, and Saul's house was overthrown, the Iebusites the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, resisted him when he came unto them, and would not permit him as it
were to enter into their city, but with an impossible condition in their
conceits, saying unto him: Except thou take away the blind, and the lame, thou
shall not come in hither, thinking that David could not come thither. Chap. 5.
verse. 6. Thirdly, when he was established in his throne, and had taken
Jerusalem, and dwelt in Zion, as in a stately palace, the Philistines came
against him, with a great army of soldiers to take him; but they sped no
better then the former did. Chap. 5.17. etc. Fourthly, when David had smore the
Philistines and subdned them, he was troubled with many other outlandish
nations, that waged war against him, as with the Moabites, the Ammonites, the
Aramites, and the Amalckites. Chap. 8. Chap. 10. and Chap. 11. Fifthly, when all
foreign wars were ended, and the nations round about him were conquered, and
many of them made tributaries unto him, his own son Absalom rose up in arms
with all Israel with him (a few only excepted) to take his kingdom from him.
Chapter 15.16.17. and 18. Lastly, when this conspiracy of his son was ended,
and all matters quieted about the same, a wicked man named Sheba the son of
Bichri, a man of Iemini, blew the trumpet, and said: We have no part in David,
neither have we any inheritance in the son of Ishai: every man to his tents o
Israel. So every man of Israel went from David, and followed Sheba the son of
Bichri; but the men of Judah claue fast unto their king, from Jordan even to
Jerusalem. Chap. 20. verse. 1. etc. In consideration of all which conspiracies
and wars, David might well cry out and say: Why do the heathen rage, and the
people murmr in vain? The kings of the earth band themselves, and the
Princes are assembled together, against the Lord and his Anointed, saying, Let
us break their bands, and cast their cords from us.

Now for Christ, that these things are true also of him, the history of the
four Evangelists does declare: for all of them penning his life and acts, do
make mention of his troubles, and do show that from his birth unto his death,
he was never free from one cross or other; but that either some wrong was
offered unto him through slanderous tongues, or else some insurrection was made
against him, through villainous hands. So soon as ever he was borne, and the
wise men that came from the East to Jerusalem, had enquired for him, saying:
Where is the king of the Jews, that is borne? for we have seen his star in
the East, and are come to worship him; as all Jerusalem was troubled presently
upon it, so Herod Ascalonites the king intended his death, and laid a plot out
of hand which way to murder him. Mat. 2. verse. 1.2. But after he was once
baptized, and began to go about his Fathers business, by preaching and
working of miracles, his troubles and adversaries waxed more and more, and they
grew to be innumerable. Few there were that did truly believe in him, or with
a sincere heart follow him, chiefly of the greater sort; and therefore it is
said by some of them in John the seventh Chapter, and verse. 48. Does any of the
rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? Nay, these made a law, that if any
man did confess, that he was the Christ, he should be excommunicated out of
the Synagogue. Ioh. 9.22. But as for his adversaries, they, I say, were
innumerable, and their dealing toward him was too abominable, and not to be
endured; first for their words, then for their deeds. For their words, because
they did scornefully vpbraide him for his stock and kindred, saying, Is not
this the carpenter, Mary's son, the brother of James, and Ioses, and of Judah,
and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? Mark. 6. ver. 3. Then
secondly, because they did shamefully belie him, and lay slanderous things to
his charge, whereof he was clear and innocent, in that they said: Behold
aglutton and a drinker of wine, a friend unto publicanes and sinners. Math.
11.19. This man casts the devils no otherwise out, but through Beelzebub the
Prince of the devils. Math. 12.24. He has blasphemed: what have we any more
need of witnesses? Behold now ye have heard his blasphemy. Math. 26.65.

For their deeds, because they were ungrateful, inhumane, treacherous, and
bloody. When he had preached among them at Nazareth, where he had been brought
up, they (filled with wrath against him) rose up and thrust him out of the
city, and led him unto the edge of the hill, whereon their city was built, to
cast him down headlong. (though he passed through the midst of them, and went
his way.) Luke 4.29. When he purged the Temple, and began to cast out them
that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money
changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves, and would not suffer that any
man should carry a vessel through the Temple, saying unto them, It is written:
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a done of thieves; the
high Priests and the Scribes, and the chief of the people sought to destroy
him. Luke 19.47. When he had wrought another good work, and had raised from
the dead Lazarus ( Mary's and Marthaes brother) who had now been dead four
days, and began to stink in the grave, as his sister Martha said, (yet came
forth of the grave, bound hand and foot with bands, and his face was bound
with a napkin:) then gathered the high Priests and the Pharisees a Council, and
consulted again which way to bring him to his death. Ioh. 11.47. etc. Finally
(to pass over other particulars, which happened in the whole course of his
life) when he had done them what good he could from time to time (as appears
by these his words:) Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings? and ye
would not. Math. 23.37. yet they (notwithstanding the same,) took him and
apprehended him, as their deadly enemy, and as a malefactor, that was not
worthy to live upon the face of the earth amongst them any longer. Judas one of
the twelve came unto him, and with him a great multitude, with swords and
staves from the high Priests and the Elders of the people, and they took him
and led him to Caiaphas the high Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were
assembled. There he was examined by them, accused and condemned to death;
likewise some of them there began to spit at him, and to cover his face, and
to beat him with fists, and to say unto him, Prophecy unto us, o Christ, who
is he that smote thee? And the Sergeants smote him with their rods. Math.
26.47. etc. and Mar. 14.43. etc. After this in the dawning of the day, when the
morning was come, they led him away bound unto Pilate, and laid most grievous
things unto his charge; but when Pilate heard of Galile, he asked whether the
man were a Galilean; and when he knew that he was of Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod; but Herod with his men of war despised him, and mocked
him, and arrayed him (as if he were a fool) in white, and sent him again to
Pilate. Luke 23.11. Then Pilate (overcome by his adversaries) did at the last
give sentence against him, caused him to be scourged, and to be sent away to
the place of execution. Mar. 15.15. But before he came thither, see what the
soldiers did: They led him into the hall, which is the common hall, and called
together the whole band, and clad him with purple, and platted a crown of
thorns, and put it about his head, and began to salute him, saying, Hail,
King of the Jews; and they smote him on the head with a reed, and spat upon
him, and bowed their knees and did reverence. And when they had mocked him,
they took the purple off him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out
to crucify him. Mar. 15.16. etc. Being come to the place of execution (which
was without the city) they crucified him, and hanged him upon a tree, between
two thieves. And as he hanged there (in that shameful and opprobious manner,
The people stood by him, and beheld him, and they together with the rulers
mocked him, saying, he saved others, let him save himself, if he be the Christ
the chosen of God. The soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him
vinegar, and said, If thou be the king of the Jews, save thy self. Likewise
they that went by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Hey, thou
that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self, and
come down from the cross. Lastly, one of the evil doers, which were hanged
with him, railed one him, saying, If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us.
Luke 23.35. etc. and Mark. 15.29. etc. In regard of all which things, we see
that our Savior might justly make his complaint here, and say, Why do the
heathen rage, and the people murmr in vain? The kings of the earth band
themselves, and the Princes are assembled together, against the Lord, and his
Anointed: Come, let us break their bands and cast their cords behind us.

Here (before we go any further) a question may be asked, to wit, why Christ
was thus rejected by all sorts of persons? For a man may judge, that every one
should have loved him, and have rejoiced greatly for him; he was so gentle, so
meek, so humble, so patient, so wise, so learned, so holy, so merciful, so
loving; and in one word, so willing and so able to do every man good, as none
in the whole world besides him, either was or could be. We know, that the
virgin Mary did sing and rejoice, when she knew that she should bear him. Luke
1.46. etc. And that the Angels did sing and rejoice, when he was borne. Luke
2.13. etc. And that Simeon did sing and rejoice when he was brought into the
Temple. Luke 2.27. etc. And that Abraham's son, which he had by old Sarah,
that was a type and figure of Christ, was called Isaac, which name signifies
laughter, to show what joy and laughter there should be about Christ. Genesis
21.3. In consideration whereof, the question may rightly be moved, why the
world should thus oppose themselves against Christ? But the answer to it is
this: They hated him without a cause, as our Savior himself does testify of
them, in Ioh. 15.25. Some of them did persecute him through ignorance, not
knowing what he was, as we may see by his prayer to his Father for them in Luke
23.34. when he says, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do;
Also by the Apostles words, in 1. Cor. 2.8. For had they known it (says he)
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Others of them did resist him
of malice, and of a cankered stomach; they knowing well enough what he was, as
is apparent by the words of our Savior, who does accuse them (for that cause)
of the sin against the holy Ghost, which can never be forgiven, in Mark.
3.28. Some, lastly, did neglect him through fear and dread, they knowing, that
if they did believe in him, or confess him, they should be excommunicated out
of their Synagogues, according to the law of the Jews: as is apparent by Ioh.
9.22. where we find, that the blind man's parents, for that cause would not
confess, that Christ had cured their son. And as they did thus fear trouble
at home, (yea some of the great ones, as well as the small ones, as we may see
by the example of Nicodemus, who came to Christ by night, Ioh. 3.2. and of
Joseph of Arimathea, who went secretly for fear of the Jews, to Pilate, to
beg leave, to take down the body of Christ from the cross, and to bury it,
Ioh. 19.38.) so did they fear trouble from abroad, as may be seen by their
words, in Ioh. 11.48. When they say, If we let him thus alone, all men will
believe in him, and the Romans will come, and take away both our place, and
all the nation. Thus you see, that some of them through ignorance, some through
malice, and some through fear did reject Christ; but all of them through their
own corruptions, and naughty natures: and none of them for any just cause that
was found in Christ himself.

But yet, as Daniels enemies did pick out matter against him, in regard of his
religion: for the which they should have commended him, and not have condemned
him, as they did: so these enemies of Christ have drawn occasions of dislike
against him from sundry things, for the which they should rather have liked
him. In number they were 4. The first was his base estate, who came of mean
parents, and who lived in this world, as a poor simple man. As the Israelites
said, when they rejected Rehoboa^ for their king: What portion have we in
David? we have none inheritance in the house of Ishai: to your tents o Israel,
now see to thine own house David. 1. King. 12.16. As if they should say, Why?
Ishai was but an husbandman, and David was but a shepherd; we will not be
subject to so base kindred, nor suffer such a fool as Rehoboam of their blood,
to reign over us. So these said: Is not this the carpenter, Mary's son, the
brother of James, and Ioses, and of Judah and Simon? and are not his sisters
here with us? and they were offended in him. Mark. 6.3. The second was his
familiarity and fellowship with sinners, and with those that were publicanes.
As they rejected John the Baptist for his strangeness and austerity of life,
because he came neither eating nor drinking, and said of him, He has a devil;
so they despised Christ for the contrary, because he came eating and drinking,
and said of him: Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend unto
publicanes and sinners. Math. 11.17. etc. The third was his faithfulness in
the discharge of his calling, in speaking the truth, and in reproving of men
for their sins. As the Prophets, and Apostles, lost their lives for this, so
did he leese his life for the same; the people still hating him for it, until
they had nailed him unto the cross. Mat. 21. and 26. and John 18. and 10. The
fourth and last was his strong confidence in God, and his sure trust in him. As
David was flouted at by his adversaries for his trusting in God, chiefly then,
when God did seem to forsake him, and left him in some troubles, they crying
out unto him, and saying: Where is thy God? Psalm. 42.3. and 10. So these did
floute and mock Christ, chiefly in his troubles, for his resting upon his
Father, and his good belief in him, breaking out into these words, saying: He
trusted in the Lord let him deliver him, let him save him, seeing he loves
him. Psalm 22.8.

From hence, Ioh. 15.20. when he says: The servant is not greater then his
master; if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. The
Scripture is full of testimonies for the confirmation of this doctrine, but I
will press only two or three. Paul writing unto Timothy, and making mention
of his own persecutions and afflictions, which came unto him at Antiochia, at
Iconium, and at Lystri, (lest Timothy or others might think, that they might
be free from all) he does plainly avouch, that all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, in 2. Tim. 3.12. In like manner when he
and Bernabas came again to these cities now repeated, of Antioch, Iconium, and
Lystri, whom before they had taught the right way of salvation, to confirm the
disciples hearts, and to exhort them to continue in the faith; they told them,
that they must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. Act.
14.22. Finally Christ himself, who is truth it self, does teach us in Math.
10.22. that we shall be hated of all men for his names sake; and that those
that are of our own household, and kindred shall be our enemies, verse. 36.37.
And that we shall be here in this world, as sheep in the mids of wolves,
verse. 16.

But what is the reason of this? who has not spared his own Son to redeem
them. Romans 8.32. Secondly, because they are peaceable, and do offer wrong unto
none; In the mount of the Lord there is no hurt done. Isay 11.9. They turn
their spears and swords into mattockes and sithes. Isay 2.4. Yea they go like
sheep to the slaughter house. Psalm 44.22. Thirdly, because they are
profitable unto the world, and do bring great commodity to them; as Laban fared
the better for Jacobs sake. Genesis 30.27. Patiphar for Joseph's sake. Genesis 39.5.
All the Israelites for Moses sake. Exodus 32.14. Zoar for Lots sake. Genesis 19.21.
and the Mariners for Paul's sake, Acts. 27.24. Fourthly, because they are
adorned with most rare and excellent gifts. Ephesians. 1.3. Fifthly, because they
are attended upon by the most glorious Angels of heaven. Math. 18.10. Lastly,
because they are the children of the Almighty, and the apparent heirs of all
the world. Romans 8.16.17. and Heb. 1.14. In regard of all these things, a man
may well demand and ask: Why the world should hate and persecute them? But the
answer is, for these causes. First, because they are not of their number and
fellowship, being not men of this world as they be; according to the words of
our Savior in Ioh. 15.19. If you were of the world, the world would love you,
but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Secondly, because they are not like them in
their ways and conuersations, doing as they do, but will be more holy and
just, then they are; according to the words of Peter, in 1. Pet. 4.4. Wherein
it seems to them strange, that ye run not with them unto the same excess
of riot, therefore speak they evil of you, which shall give accounts to him,
that is ready to judge quick and dead. Thirdly, because they reprove them for
their evil ways, and do judge and condemn their opinions and doings, which
they cannot endure to have judged and condemned by others; according to that in
Saint John Chap. 3.20. For every man that evil does, hates the light, neither
comes to light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But being once reproved,
they cannot but persecute them that do reprove them, as Herod did John the
Baptist, whom he did behead, because he told him, that it was not lawful for
him to have his brothers wife, Mark. 6.18. and as the Jews did Stephen the
Deacon, whom they did stone to death, because he told them their faults. Acts
7.58. Fourthly, because they are in greater favor with God, then they are, and
do receive larger gifts of sanctification and holiness from him, then they do;
according to that in Genesis 4.4. and 5. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to
his offering, but unto Kain and to his offering he had no regard: wherefore Kain
was exceeding wroth, and his countenance fell down: and as it is in 1. Ioh.
3.12. he slew his brother, because his own works were evil, and his brothers
good. So that as Joseph's brethren could not endure, that old father Jacob
should love him more then themselves: and as the Princes of Babel could not
digest Daniels favor with the king, above themselves; so cannot the world
endure that the God of heaven should respect his Saints before themselves,
albeit they do each day blaspheme his holy name, and will be no day obedient
unto him. Fifthly, because they are, for the most part of them, poor and base
persons, as our Savior does intimate, in Math. 11.25. where he does resemble
them unto babes. And as the Apostle does teach us, in 1. Cor. 1.26. etc.
showing, that God has not chosen many wise men after the flesh, nor many
mighty, nor many noble, but the foolish, the weak, and the vile, and such as
are despised in this world, that all the glory might be his own. For the world
does see, that these cannot enrich them, nor countenance them, nor advance them
to places of honor and dignity; but will rather be a burden and a shame unto
them, and therefore they have them in great contempt and disdain: and does
take them for the very off-scum of the earth. 1. Cor. 4.13. Lastly, because
they have some infirmities, and a few of them now and then do break out into
great and heinous offenses, as into adultery, murder, theft, or the like, as
Noah, Lot, David, Solomon, and others have done. For the world upon this does
condemn them all, saying, that they are hypocrites, and that there is no
goodness in them. As I may rejoice in speaking of the other causes of their
hatred, so I may mourn and sament, while I make mention of this.

But to pass the causes, and to come to the uses of the doctrine, world lie in
wickedness, as John does say. 1. Ioh. 5.19. They would never thus contemn the
Saints of God, as they do, seeing they have no just cause for the same, but
many reasons to the contrary, as was noted before. Surely the world is not
worthy of them, as it is in Heb. 11.38. Yet like blind wretches, and wicked
cast-awaies, they despise them, who yet are their stay and safety: for take
away once the godly out of the world, the world would quickly come to ruin and
destruction. The Sun would give no more light, the earth no more corn, the
sea no more fish, the heavens no more birds, the beasts of the field no more
meat, and the creatures in general throughout the world no more obedience
unto man. For if they do their service now unwillingly, while the godly are
living (whose servants by good right and interest they are) and do sigh and
groan (in their kind) to be loosed from this burden of their bondage, as it is
in Romans 8.19. etc. doubtless they will refuse altogether to do any service
unto the wicked, when they are dead and gone. The world therefore in resisting
Gods children, may fitly be compared to a moath, that fretteth in pieces the
same cloth, wherein she is bred; or to a certain worm or canker, that
corrodeth and eats through the heart of the tree, that nourishes her: or
unto a man, that stands upon a bough in the top of a tree, where there is
no more, and yet with an axe choppeth it off, and therewithal falls down
with it, and breaks his neck.

Secondly, out of this we may learn, strange thing were happened unto us;
acording to Peter's words in 1. Pet. 4.12.13. who says: Dearly beloved, think
it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is among you to prove you, as
though some strange thing were come unto you. But roioyce in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear ye may be
glad and rejoice. It is no new thing, this is an old fashion of the world,
which it had from the beginning. It was thus in Adams house, in Noah's house,
and in Abraham's house, the most ancient houses of all the world. For in Adams
house, Cain hated and slew his own brother Abel. Genesis 4.8. In Noah's house, Cham
scorned and derided his own father, that did beget him. Genesis 9.22. and in
Abraham's house, Ismael flouted and reproched his natural brother, in whom all
the nations of the earth were to be blessed. Genesis 21.9. Wherefore beloved
brethren, be not you grieved, when any of you are troubled and molested in the
world for the Lords sake. Complain not, as some do, who say, There was never
any man so crossed as I am. Think not, that you bear a burden alone by your
selves: the dear Saints of God, the Prophets, and Apostles, together with the
holy Martyrs, and others, are your companions therein. You drink of none other
cup then they have done, or your sweet master Christ Jesus before you has
done. Comfort your selves with these things.

Finally, let this serve to instruct you, that as you must be patient and quiet
when troubles do come, and not fret or murmr against either God or man for
the same; so you must look for troubles and persecutions while you are here in
this world, and not cry peace unto your selves, as the wicked do: you must
think with your selves, that you shall have enemies in all places, and such as
will be your foes in every corner. For this is a rule of the Lords, which never
shall be broken, that the seed of the serpent will always be enemies unto the
seed of the woman, according to these words: I will also put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, in Genesis 3.15. As Christ
your Lord and master had enemies of all sorts, even more in number then the
hairs of his head; so must you make your reckoning (if you will be like to
Christ in holiness and righteousness) to have adversaries of all sorts,
wheresoever you shall live or dwell. Either Ismael with his flowting tongue, or
Esau with his bloody hand, shall wound and persecute you; for he that is borne
after the flesh will always persecute him, that is borne after the Spirit.
Gal. 4.29. And surely as the life of Christ was a warfare upon earth, so must
your lives that are Christians, be a warfare upon earth. Here we live in a sea
of troubles; the sea is the world, the waves are calamities, the Church is the
ship, the anchor is hope, the sails are love, the Saints are passengers, the
haven is heaven, and Christ is our Pilot. Now when the sea can continue without
waves, the ship without tossings, and passengers not be sick upon the water,
then shall the Church of God be without trials, but not before. And as for this
voyage, we begin it (or at the least should begin it) so soon as we are borne,
and we must sail on till our dying day. Therefore, I beseech you brethren,
promise unto your selves no security in this world, but look still for
enemies; and when you have slain a Bear look for a Lion; and when you have
killed the Lion, look for a Goliath; and when you have overcome Goliath, look
for a Saul; and when Saul is wounded to death, look for the Philistines, etc.
that is, when you have overcome one trouble or vanquished one enemy, look
still for an other trouble, and for an other enemy, and that until you die,
and the spirit does return to God that gave it.

Thus far of the first point, now follows the second.
In the fourth verse and so forward unto the end of the ninth verse, is showed
how this opposition, which was made against the Lord and his Anointed, came to
none effect, but was withstood and brought to nothing, through the powerful
working of the Almighty, the enemies that made the opposition being brought to
shame and confusion. How true this was in respect of David the figure, the 2.
book of Samuel does declare, with the beginning of the first book of the
Kings. For in these two books we find these three things. First, that he did
enjoy his kingdom unto his dying day, and that he did end his lise quietly and
in peace in his bed. 1. Kings 2.10. Secondly, that the Lord his God (who
dwells in heaven) did help him from time to time in all his troubles against
his enemies. 2. Samuel 22.1. etc. Thirdly, that his enemies who did thus resist
him, were vanquished and slain. Abner he was slain by Ioab. 2. Sam. 3.27. and
Ish-bosheth his masters Saul's son (for whom he did sight) was murdered by
two of his servants in his own house, as he lay upon his bed in his
bedchamber, 2. Sam 4.7. The Iebusites, they were punished and smitten by Ioab,
2. Sam. 5.8. and 1. Chro. 11.8. The Philistines, and other outlandish nations,
they were many of them put to the sword, and the residue were made tributaries
to David, 2. Sam. 5. and 8. Chap. Absalom he was hanged by the hair of the
head on an Oak in the wood, as he was pursuing after his father, and there he
was slain. 2. Sam. 18.9.14. And Sheba the son of Bichri, he was beheaded in
Abel by the persuasion of a woman, and his head cast over the wall unto Ioab.
2. Sam. 20.22. Thus all David's enemies ended their days in deserved
punishments.

But now for Christ, there may be some doubt, whether all things fell out
aright, according to the text here concerning him, considering that his
adversaries seemed to have the upper hand of him, in that they put him to
death, and brought him to a shameful end; and that he himself did cry out and
say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Math. 27.46. Notwithstanding
both these things, every matter is true, which is reported here of him. For
first and foremost, it is evident (howsoever he uttered these words in his
agony, and bitter passion, through the consternation of his mind, which was
now much disturbed, through the intolerable burden, which God his Father did
lay upon him for the sins of mankind) that God had not forsaken him, but was
always present with him for his good; first, by the sending of an Angel unto
him in his great heaviness, for his comfort. Luke 22.43. secondly, by his
hearing of him at all times, yea even in those things which he feared. Heb.
5.7. And lastly, by his advancing of him from the grave unto the highest
heavens, and the universal regiment of all the world. Ephesians. 1.20. etc.

Secondly, it is apparent, that howsoever they did murder him, yet they had not
the victory over him, but he rather the victory over them. First, by his rising
again from the dead. Secondly, by his sitting at the right hand of his Father.
Thirdly, by his dwelling with his Church, upon the face of the earth, unto the
end of the world. And lastly, by his triumphing over his enemies eue^ while he
did hang upon the cross; as it is well observed by the Apostle, in Col. 2.15.
when he says: And has spoiled the Principallities, and Powers, and has made
a show of them openly, and has triumphed oner them in the same cross. But if
you will not give credit to these things, and so be persuaded by these reasons,
mark what he himself (who is truth it self. Ioh. 14.6.) has said touching
this matter, in Ioh. 16.33. Where you shall find him uttering these words unto
his disciples, saying: In the world ye shall have affliction, but be of a
goodcomfort, I have overcome the world. Then as we are conquerours, yea more
then conquerours, when we do suffer for the name of Christ, and do leese our
lives for the defense of his truth, as it is in Romans 8.36.37. so was Christ a
conqueror, yea more then a conqueror, when he died for us, and by his death
did destroy him, that had the power of death. Heb. 2.14. and so through his
sufferings entered into his glory. Luke 24.26. he being for that cause exalted
above all the creatures, and receiving a name, above every name, that at his
name every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things inearth, and
things under the earth. Phil. 2.9. etc.

Thirdly, and lastly, it is manifest, that his adversaries were overthrown,
and that most of them came to fearful ends. First, by the civil war, that
arose up amongst themselves, which continued a long time, and brought many
thousands to most desperate ends. Secondly, by the grievous famine, that was in
the midst of them, that consumed many of them, and caused the parents to eat
their own children, and one friend to devour another. Thirdly, by the total
destruction of their glorious Temple, and famous city of Jerusalem, with all
the inhabitants thereof, by Vespasian and Titus the Emperors of Rome.
Fourthly, by the lasting infamy of a cursed name upon their whole nation, in
that they are reproched throughout all the world, and counted the worst people
that are, according to our proverb: He is as bad as a Jew. Finally, by the
woeful plagues (not to speak here any thing of the torments of hell, which is
the worst of all) which God has sent down immediately from heaven upon some of
them in particular, as upon Herod, Pontius Pilate, and others. For Herod (to
pass over all the rest, and to make him an instance for all) was thus plagued.
First, he had a most scorching and burning fever, by which he was inflamed
exceedingly, as well in the inward parts, as in the outward. Secondly, there
was in him an insatiable desire of food, which could not be abated or be
remoned away by all the meat and drink, which he did ranonously devour in
great abundance. Thirdly, he had the bloody flixe. Fourthly, he had the
colicke. Fifthly, he had the gout in his seete. Sixthly, his privy members did
so swell and rot, that worms did breed in the same. And lastly, he was from
the top of the head unto the sole of the foot, so corrupt and rotten, that
there came such a stink from him, that no person could well endure it; and so
in this woeful manner he ended his life, and gave up the ghost.

Having thus seen the truth of all matters, and found every thing agreeable to
the words of the text, let us now descend unto the doctrine, David and Christ
had: yet they shall not prevail against us, but we shall prenaile against
them, do they what they can; as David and Christ did. Israel in Egypt was
cruelly handled, but yet the more the Egyptians did vex them the more they
multiplied and grew, as it is in Exodus 3.12. And when they had done all the
spite that they could do against them, yet at the last they were delivered out
of their hands; they themselves being oftentimes plagued by the Almighty for
their sakes, and in the end most fearfully drowned in the red sea, as it is
apparent in the 14. Chap. of the same book. Mention is made of a great
battle, that was fought between Christ and the devil, and their armies, in
the Revelation, Chap. 12.7, etc. But (if you mark the sequel thereof) you
shall find that Christ and his side had the victory. For as it is witnessed of
the Dragon (who is the devil) and his Angels (who are his soldiers) that they
prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven in the 8. verse
of that Chapter: so it is recorded to the glory and comfort of all those, who
take Christ's part, that they overcame the devil (the accuser of Gods children)
by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, in the 11. verse.
thereof, But (to omit other testimonies and examples, whereof the holy
Scripture is full and frequent in this case) let the words of our Savior
Christ suffice us at this time: He tells us in Math. 16.18. that the gates of
hell (whereby is meant all the power and force thereof) shall not overcome his
Church, or be able to overthrow such, as do depend upon him by a true and
justifying faith. And in the 7. Chapter of the same book toward the latter
end thereof, he does show the stablenesse of those that do belong to the Lord,
and have a care both to hear the word of God, and also to do it, by a notable
comparison, wherein he does resemble them to an house, that is built upon a
rock, which cannot be cast down by any tempest of weather whatsoever, but
does stand always still, and cannot fall. A thing never to be thought of
enough, it is so full of comfort and consolation unto every godly soul,
chiefly unto him that is afflicted here in this world.

But what might the reason thereof be, may a man say, that thus the godly
should always prevail, and be never overthrown by their enemies, but
overcome them rather? Experience does teach us, that they are fewer in number,
then the wicked are: that they are weaker for strength and power: that they are
more simple for wit and policy: and that they are more careless for diligence
and watchfulnes, then their adversaries be. How comes it then to pass, that
they have the upper hand?

The Prophet Isay does declare it unto us in the 8. Chapter of his Prophecy,
and the 10. verse thereof: he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor
sleep. Psalm 121.4. Lastly, he is happier then all, to have good success in
all his enterprises. For he does prosper still in all things which he does take
in hand, and none can resist a thought of his: yea the very word that goes out
of his mouth, does accomplish that which he will, and prosper in the thing,
whereunto he does send it, Isay 55.11. In war all these four things are
respected in a captain, that will still overcome. First, that he be strong.
Secondly, that he be wise. Thirdly, that he be diligent. And lastly, that he be
fortunate. For the victory goes not always with the strong, nor always with
the wise, nor always with the diligent, nor always with the fortunate, but
sometimes with the one of them, and sometimes with the other. But look where
all four do concur together, there is always the victory. And therefore
seeing all of them are in God, it is no marvel, though those, whose battles
he does fight, do always overcome, and get the victory.

Here I would gladly come to the use of the doctrine, Revelation, and in other
places of the holy Scripture besides. And thousand examples every where do
demonstrate the same daily unto us. For we do behold still with our own eyes,
and hear with our own ears, that the godly have the worst end of the staff
(as it is in our adage) and that the wicked do bear sway and dominion over
them. How then is it true which has been spoken, that do the ungodly what
they can, yet the righteous shall still prevail against them, as here David
and Christ did?

The answer hereunto may easily be collected out of Paul's words, Chap. of his
Epistle to the Romans, and the latter end thereof, (which were touched before)
where he does declare, that though we be killed all day long, and be counted
as sheep for the slaughter, yet we be notwithstanding that, even then, and
therein conquerours, yea more then conquerours, through him that loves us.
Howsoever this may seem a parodoxe to flesh and blood, and be as a riddle unto
some of Gods own children themselves: yet it is an aphorism in true Divinity,
and a clear point to them, whose eyes are opened to behold the mysteries of
the Almighty, and to see the deep things of the Lord. For I pray tell me, is
not he a conqueror, yea more then a conqueror, that does so subdue his
enemy, that he can no more rise up against him? A man may vanquish his enemy,
and beat him clean out of the field; yet afterward he may gather a power
against him again, and put him to the worst. But here Satan, the world, and
all our enemies are so beaten down, and trodden under foot by all such as
suffer and die for the truth, that they can never assault them any more, or
stir (as it were) either tongue or hand again to do them any hurt. For they
go immediately upon that their death and passion to heaven, and unto all that
happiness, which is provided there for them, as John does show, in Revel.
14.13. saying: Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord: even so says the
Spirit, for they rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

It is good for us to know this,

Again, from hence we learn, even so many of us as do truly serve the Lord,
and fear him from our hearts, that there is no cause, why we should fear man,
or what he can do against us; because the victory shall always go on our
side, and not against us. Oh we may rejoice and be glad, as it is required of
us in Zeph. 3.14. etc. and in 1. Pet. 3.14. which places you may read at your
leisure. Fear not (beloved) but be of a good comfort; though you have enemies
in every corner, yet be not discouraged; you shall have the conquest, and the
Lord your God shall deliver you out of all your troubles, according to David's
saying in Psalm. 34.19. when he says, Great are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord delivers him out of them all. He is wise, he does know how to do
it; and he is omnipotent, he is able for to do it: and as for his willingness,
he is ready at all times to accomplish it, as just occasion shall require it.
Wherefore be (I say) of a good comfort, and fear not, but trust in the Lord,
and commit your ways unto him, and he shall bring all things to pass
according to your own hearts desire in the end. He that delivered Noah from
the flood, Lot from Sodom, Jacob from Esau, Joseph from Potiphar, Moses from
Pharaoh, Israel from Egypt, Elijah from Ahab, Elisha from the Syrians, Daniel
from the Lions, the three children from the fire, Peter from Herod, Mordecay
from Haman, and here Christ and David from all sorts of enemies, he, even he,
will deliver you from all troubles. If you say, that your enemies are many, and
that the whole world is against you: I will say again to you with Elisha the
Prophet, and Hezekiah the king, that there are more with us, then are against
us. 2. Kings. 6.16. and 2. Chron. 32.7. For God and all the host of heaven is
for us. If you say again, that your enemies are wise and politic, and that
they are able to ouer-reach you by their craft and cunning, considering you are
but simple and innocent like doves: I will answer you with the Apostle, that
the foolishness of our God, who is on our side, is wiser then their best
wisdom (1. Cor. 1.25. and that he will destroy their wisdom, and bring
their understanding to naught, (1. Cor. 1.19.) to do us good. If you say in
the third place, that your enemies have so hemmed you in, and compassed you
about, that it is impossible for you to escape them: I will answer you with
the Angel Gabriel, that with God shall nothing be impossible. Luke 1.37. And
with the three children, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that God both can and
will deliver you. Dan. 3.17. When they say, Behold our God, whom we serve, is
able to deliver us, from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of
thine hand o King. If you say lastly, that your enemies have already taken you,
and do put you daily unto death: I will answer you with Paul, in Romans 8.37.
(which place was touched before) and with John in Revel. 12.11. That by this
means you do overcome your enemies most of all. For when you resist thus unto
blood, and die for the truth, you give your enemies such an overthrow that they
never rise up against you any more; and as for your selves, you enter presently
into heaven, the only place which you strive for. Even as he has the victory
most in this world, who does enter into the city, and take all the spoil
thereof, and does so confound his adversaries, that they can never stir any
more against him. In consideration of all which things, cleave fast, I beseech
you, unto the Lord, and fear no danger or peril; but rejoice in the Lord and
be glad, always fighting for the crown of righteousness, which shall be
given unto every one, who does with patience wait for the appearing of our
Lord Jesus, and love the same.

Now to the third point.
As wisdom calls upon men for repentance and amendment of life, in Prou.
1.22.23. saying: O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishness? and the
scornful take their pleasure in scorning, and the fools hate knowledge?
Turn you at my correction. Lo I will power out my mind unto you, and make you
understand my words: So does the Lord here, in the three last verses of this
Psalm, call upon men for the like repentance and amendment of life; saying: Be
wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, etc. to the end
of the Psalm.

Wherehence shortly we gather this doctrine, Paul teach us of him, in Romans 2.4.
saying: Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
suffering, not knowing, that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance? So much does Peter teach us of him, in 2. Pet. 3.9. saying: The
Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is
patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come
to repentance. So much does Joel teach us of him; in Joel. 2.13. saying: And
rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. So much finally does God himself teach us of
himself. in Ezech. 33.11. saying: As I live says the Lord God, I desire not
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live.

But what is the reason of this? David's words in Psalm 145.9. and the Prophet
Ieremies, in Lament. 3.2. For as the one of them does extol the mercies of God
above all things; so the other of them does declare, that they are the cause
why he does not consume us accordingly as our sins do deserve.

Wherefore learn out of this, For my thoughts (says God) are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord: For as the heavens
are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and my
thoughts above your thoughts. Esaias. 55.8.9. If treason and insurrection be
once made against the chief governor of any land, the parties offending
therein are apprehended, and according to law they are executed, as traitors
and rebels: and all this is but well, and according to justice and equity,
without which, no commonwealth can stand or flourish. But yet with God it is
not so: though that we do daily make insurrection against him, and commit high
treason against his person by blaspheming his holy name, and by trampling his
divine statutes and ordinances under our feet; yet he does spare us, and not
consume us according to our wicked deserts; and as one most desirous to have us
saved, and to become blessed, he does cry unto us for a turning and amendment
of life. Oh, who can extol this goodness of the Lord sufficiently? shall we
rebel against him, and provoke him to his face? and yet will he come and
entreat us to be reconciled unto him? Doubtless if one does but offend us
some two or three times in some matters, that do concern our credit and
profit, so that we grow infamous, or poor thereby; we can never soundly and
thoroughly endure that party again, as we ought to do: and though he should
come unto us himself to ask us forgiveness, yet we should hardly ever
receive him to love and favor again within our hearts; so close would his
wrong and injury cleave unto us. We see that when the Samaritans refused to
receive Christ into one of their cities for a nights lodging, James and John
two of his disciples, were by and by inflamed with great choler and wrath, and
they would needs have their master be revenged upon the^ for it, saying unto
him after this sort: Lord, will thou that we command that fire come down from
heaven, and consume the^, even as Eliah did? Luke 9.54. But as for our God, we
see here, how patient he is, in putting up great rebellions and treasons, and
in calling upon the rebels and traitors themselves for amendment of life, that
so they may be saved.

Learn we therefore in the next place, that though we do sin and offend, yet
there is mercy in the Lord to forgive us. For where sin does abound, there
grace does more then abound, says the Apostle, in Romans 5.20. David does speak
most excellently of this matter, in Psalm 103. etc. saying: The Lord is full
of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness. He has not
dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities;
for as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our sins from us; as a father has compassion on his children, so
has the Lord compassion on them that fear him. And lest that any should doubt
of the pardon of his sins, mark what God himself does say, in Isay 1.18.
Come now (says he) and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be made as white as snow; though they were
red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. And surely if God does here call upon
these traitors and rebels to forsake their sins, with an intent and purpose
to save them, if they will so do; then may you not doubt, but that he will
receive every repenting sinner that does come unto him, and forgive him all his
transgressions, be they never so many, when he does ask pardon for them, and
heartily forsake them. Wherefore though you have sinned greatly against the
Lord, and have trespassed even against heaven, and his Majesty with the
prodigal son; yet despair not, but with the prodigal son return unto
him, and know that you shall find mercy at his hands, as he did: and as David
did, and as Solomon did, and as Peter did, and as Paul did, and as many more
besides them did, whose sins were great and heinous. For God has said it, who
cannot lie. Yea he has sworn it, and bound it with an oath, that he does not
desire the death of the wicked, but that he should turn and live, as you heard
before out of Ezech. 33.11.

Lastly, from hence observe this use, men from their evil ways, that so they
may not perish, but be saved. In all our plagues and judgments, and in all our
woes and calamities, whether in this world, or in the world to come, the Lord
may always say unto us, as it is in Hosea 13.8. O Israel, one has destroyed
thee, but in me is thy help. For the Lord does take (as it were) great pains
to make us good. What could I have done more (says the Lord) to my Vineyard,
that I have not done unto it? Isay. 5.4. Wherefore accuse God (I beseech you)
at no time, if any destruction does happen unto you, but lay the whole blame
thereof upon your own selves, whose hearts are hard, and will not repent. For
God does desire (you see) your welfare, and not your destruction. And so at
the last, we are come to the end of the general view of the whole Psalm.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. verse. 1. Why do the heathen rage, and the people murmr in vain?


THE Prophet intending to speak of Christ, and of his blessed and gracious
government, he does begin with the conspiracy and opposition, that is made
against the same. And whereas there are two sorts of persons that do rebel,
the Commons, and the Nobles; he makes his entrance with the Commons, and
afterward he comes to the Nobles. The Commons, though all of them did conspire
and agree in the maine point of rebellion, yet they were divided amongst
themselves. Some of them were open enemies, and such as did break out by
violence and outrage into tumults and unlawful insurrections. Others were more
close and secret, murmuring in their hearts against his government, and
grudging to do service unto him, as unto their Lord and King. And though all
of them did thus band themselves against him, and use means, as it were, to be
rid from his subjection; yet all was in vain, they could not accomplish their
purpose, but their endeavors came to naught. In regard whereof the Prophet does
wonder, that ever they should be so mad and foolish, as thus to attempt such
impossible things, and such matters too, that if they were brought to pass,
yet would not be commodious or beneficial unto them. For what commodity or
benefit should they get, by being loosed from the kingdom of Christ? Surely, as
much as an horse does by an heavy burden, as it is in our proverb. For this
cause the Prophet speaking of their conspiracy, he does not note it out simply
in a plain narration, but he does declare it by way of admiration, in a
demanded question, saying: Why do the heathen rage, and the people murmr in
vain?

The sum then of this verse is the conspiracy or rebellion of the Commons or
meaner sort of people, Why do the heathen rage (says the Prophet) and why do
the people murmr in vain? By heathen, here some do understand the Gentles,
and by people, the Jews. But we may better take them for all the enemies
(chiefly of the common and meaner sort) which either David or Christ had,
without any such distinction made betwixt the words, or to be observed in
regard of them. First, because the Hebrew words here used, called Goijm and
Leummim, and the Greek words, as they are translated in Acts 4.25. named Ethne
and Laoi, are promiscuously or indifferently used for any nation or people
whatsoever, and the one of them is oftentimes put for the other. Secondly,
because the deeds here ascribed unto them in single and apart, were jointly
and mixtly found in them both. For the Gentles did not only rage, or the Jews
only murmr, but both Gentles and Jews did rage and murmr, as we have
heard already in part, and may hereafter hear more. But to leave this
observation touching that conceipted distinction, mark you here a true
distinction. The enemies of our Savior (as we may see here) were of two sorts.
Some of them were violent and furious, breaking out into outrages, and open
sedition: and others of them were more secret and hidden, inwardly repining in
their souls, and outwardly muttering or whispering against him by their words.
The words which are used here in the Hebrew tongue, and those also, which are
used of the Apostles in the Greek tongue, in Chap. 4.25. (where the same
sentence is delivered) do make this most plain and evident. For the first of
the Hebrew words, called Rageshu, coming of Ragash, does signify to make a
tumult, and to gather together an assembly; and the other of them named Iehegu,
arising from the root Hagah, does import to meditate upon, to mutter, and to
speak tam ore quam cord, as well by the mouth, as by the heart. So in like
manner the former of the Greek words, called, Ephruaxan, does signify to make
a noise, or to rage, properly as the horse does, which does rush violently with
great braying into the battle: and the latter of them, named Emeletesan, does
import to meditate upon, to care for, and to exercise ones self in a thing. So
that they were tumultuous ragers, and plodding murmurers.

Thus you see shortly what they did. The verity whereof may be seen in the
story of the Evangelists. For they with one consent make mention of both these
their facts: but let us see it in a few examples. For the first, they raged
against Christ, and met together in a tumultuous manner, when they were filled
with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of Nazareth, and led him to the
edge of the hill, whereon Nazareth was built, to cast him down headlong, and
there to break his neck. Luke 4.28.29. Likewise they raged against him, and
met together in a tumultuous manner, when they came in a great multitude with
swords and staves to apprehend him, and to carry him to the officers, such as
the high Priest and others were. Math. 26.47. But to omit other times, they
raged against him, and met together in a tumultuous manner, when they cried out
to Pilate saying. Crucify him, crucify him: and when they did spit in his
face, strike him with their fists, set a crown of thorns upon his head,
flowted him to his face, and offered other notorious villainies unto him. Math.
27.22. etc. For the second, they murmured and muttered against Christ, when he
sat at meat in Matthewes house, and did eat there with Publicanes and
sinners. Math. 9.15. Also they murmured and muttered against him, when he
healed the sick man of the palsy, and said unto him: Son be of good comfort,
thy sins are forgiven thee. Luke 5.21. Likewise they murmured and muttered
against him, when he did heal and cure diseased people on the Sabbath day.
Math. 12.14. Finally (to pass over other times) they murmured and muttered
against him, when he said, that he was the bread that came down from heaven,
which if any did eat he should not perish, but have life everlasting. Ioh.
6.41.60.61.

As thus you have heard, what they did, so now hear what was the event of
their doing. All was in vain, but in vain, says the Prophet, by which word
he does signify that all their endeavor was to no purpose. For a thing is
said to be in vain, which cannot be brought to pass, but shall lack his
effect. In Hebrew the word is in the singular number, called Rijk, and it does
import a vacuitie or emptiness, and such a vanity of things as have no
substance in them, no more then a dry pit has water, or an empty house has
stuff, But in Greek the word is of the plural number termed Kena, and in
signification is all one with the former, saving only, that this does show
more fully as it were by the plurality of it, that all the things which they
did meditate upon in their hearts, and murmuringly mutter forth with their
tongues, were frustrated and brought to nothing, being in this respect like
unto sick men's dreams, which have no truth or verity in them. Here might many
things be observed. As first, that raging in a tumultuous manner, and murmuring
(though) in a secret sort, are diseases and sores evermore to be found among
the common people, and the meaner of the world. Secondly, that by raging and
murmuring resistance is made against the Lord and his Anointed. Thirdly, that
all attempts which are made against the Almighty, and those whom he does set
up, whether by the one of these means, or by the other, shall be broken and
come to naught. Fourthly, that the multitude and vulgar sort, are always
enemies to the wise and gracious government of our God. And lastly, that
raging and murmuring themselves are two notorious evils, which are always to
be abandoned by the holy and blessed Saints of the most High, who do purpose
truly to serve the Lord, and to go to heaven. But as a man entering into a
shop, where is great variety of wares, will buy only that, which is necessary
for himself and his uses, and let the rest alone: Or as a man sitting at a
table, where are sundry dishes, will in wisdom feed only on them, which
will agree with his body best, and do him most good; and not meddle of the
rest: So let us stand upon those points alone, which are most commodious for
us, and may turn to our greatest good; and let pass the rest. And they are in
number the two last; which also are intended most (if not only) by the Spirit
of God in the text it self; unless it be the third, respecting the vanity of
all such attempts, as shall be made against the Lord, whereof we have spoken
already in the general view of the whole Psalm, and so are not now again to
speak thereof at this time.

First then, in that the heathen do thus rage, and the people do thus murmr
against Christ and his kingdom, as we have heard, we gather this doctrine,
Acts of the Apostles, or cast our eyes upon the conversation of the whole race
of mankind, we shall easily find this to be most true and certain. Noah found
it so, when for all his preaching in sixscore years together, he could not
convert any unto the Lord, but they would (notwithstanding his preaching)
continue in their sins, till the flood came and drowned them all. 1 Pet.
3.20. Lot found it so, when he vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with
the unlawful deeds and unclean conversation of the Sodomities. 2. Pet.
2.7.8. chiefly then, when they compassed his house about from all the quarters
of the city, both young and old, with murdering hearts, to kill those men (or
rather Angels) that came to lodge with him. Genesis 19.4. etc. Aaron found it so,
when all the Israelites fell to idolatry, and compelled him to make them a
golden calfe, to worship it; or as they termed it, Gods, to go before them.
Exodus 32.1. Isay found it so, when he said of the whole people of Israel that
they were a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked,
corrupt children; that they had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the Holy one of
Israel against them, yea they were gone backward, and that there was nothing
found in them, from the sole of the foot unto the top of the head, but wounds
and swelling, and sores full of corruption. Isay 1.4. etc. Jeremy found it so,
when he said of the same people, that they were a wicked people, and that they
did refuse to hear the word of God, but would walk after the stubbornness of
their own heart, and walk after other gods to serve them and to worship them.
Ier. 13.10. David found it so, when he said of all mankind, that they were all
of them gone out of the way, that they were all corrupt, and that there was
wone that did good, no not one. Psalm 14.3. Finally (to omit almost infinite
examples) Paul and Silas found it so, when they were at Philippy a chief city
in Macedonia, where all were set against them both people and governors; and
did not only beat them sore with rods, but they cast them also into prison,
and commanded the jailer to keep them surely there from all escaping away.
Acts 16.22.23.

Hitherto you have heard what the people do, Isay 1.3. they cannot but do as
Paul did in the time of his ignorance, even oppose themselves against the
Almighty: or those of whom Christ does say, that they shall think, they do God
good service, in putting his Saints to death, Ioh. 16.2. For this cause the
Lord does make his moan for the foolishness and ignorance of his people, as
of the wel-spring of all their rebellions against him, in Ier. 4.22. in these
words. For my people is foolish, they have not known me: they are foolish
children, and have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do
well they have no knowledge. The second is their impatiency, or angry
waywardness, who cannot wait upon the Lord with any patience, or bear any
cross quietly. For this does carry them away to horrible rebellions, as we may
see by daily experience, and by the example of the children of Israel in the
wilderness; who being angry for their crosses, and impatient of thirst, of
hunger, and other calamities which fell upon them, they broke out into
murmuring, and blasphemous speeches against God, and into open rebellion and
insurrection against Moses and Aaron their governors, insomuch as they had
stoned them to death, had not God by an outstretched arm preserved the^. Numb.
14.10. The third is their wilfulness or obstinacy. For they being, with
Narcissus, in love with themselves, and doting upon their own ways, will not
hearken unto the charmer, charm he never so sweetly, as appears by Christ's
speech, in Math. 11.17.18.19. But as Jeremy does well observe of them, in Chap.
5.3. They make their faces harder then a stone, and do refuse to return. In
regard whereof the Lord sending forth his servant Ezechiel to preach unto his
people, he tells him, that they will not hear him, and that because they are
impudent children, and stiffe-hearted. Ezech. 2.4. The fourth and last, is
their unbelief or unfaithfulness. For as Christ does well observe of his own
Disciples, that they were dull of heart and slow to believe, Luke 24.25: So
they distrusting God, and not relying upon him with a steadfast faith, do depart
away from him, and commit grievous abominations against him, according to that
in Ier. 5.23. But this people has an unfaithful and rebellious heart: they
are departed and gone. So then these four vices reigning amongst them do (like
a violent stream) carry them to all kind of rebellions.

The causes of their rebellion being thus touched; Luke 12.32. when he says,
Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom. But the flock of the devil is a great flock, according to that in
Revel. 20.8. Where his army, that he gathered together against the Saints of
God, out of the four quarters of the earth, even Gog and Magog, is compared to
the sands of the sea for number. Oh weigh this well, and with a religious
heart, and let neither Popery tell you of multitude, which they make to be a
mark of Gods Church; nor the carnal Gospeller of the generality of the world,
which they make to be the rule of their lives; but ever look for truth and
goodness in the smallest number. For many according to Christ's words, do go in
at the wide gate, and broad way, that leads to destruction; and but few at
the straight gate, and narrow way, that leads unto life. Math. 7.13.14.

Secondly, here we may learn, that we must not care for the love and liking of
the world, nor hang upon the multitude for their applause and favor; for they
are against the Lord, and not for him. Surely as they are most unconstant in
their ways, turning upon every small occasion (like the weather-cocke at the
blast of the wind) this day one being a man with them, to morrow a beast; this
day none better with them, to morrow none worse; this day a god with them, to
morrow a devil; as we may see by their dealing toward Christ and Paul: So
their love and favor must needs be bent toward the worst, seeing they
themselves are bad, and do oppose themselves against the Almighty. Remember
always what Christ said unto his Disciples about this matter: If ye were of
the world, (says he, in Ioh. 15.19.) the world would love his own: but
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Wherefore as they that run at tilt look to
the judges what they say, and not what the vulgar people say: so I beseech you,
look you ever what your judge in heaven does allow, or approve; and care not
what the world, and the people thereof, do think or say.

Thirdly, here we may learn, that the multitude, and the common people will be
enemies unto you, and labor to resist you, whenever you shall go about to
serve the Lord aright. If you shall once begin to seek Christ, and to come
unto him, they shall stand in your way to hinder you, as they did stand in
Zacheus way when he went forth to see Christ. Luke 19.3. If you be once in his
presence, and do begin to call upon him for mercy and help, they will rebuke
you, as they did the poor blind man, who cried unto him, saying: Jesus the Son
of David, have mercy on me Luke 18.39. If you be sick or dead in your sins and
trespasses, and Christ does begin to come home to the houses of your souls, to
heal you, and to raise you up from the death of your sins; they will stop his
passage and entrance in, if they can, as they did, when Christ came to the
Rulers house to heal his daughter that was sick, yea dead, when he came Math.
9.23. But as Christ turned them there out of doors, saying, Get you hence: so
must you shake them all off, and not communicate with flesh and blood in the
matters of your God. But do as Abraham did: when he sacrificed to God, the
fowls of the heaven fell on the carkeises, which he had prepared for the
sacrifice, but he drove them away, Genesis 15.11. So if any do begin to molest
you, when you are going about any spiritual sacrifice, resist them, and drive
them away, saying with Christ unto Peter: Avoid satan. Math. 16.23.

Lastly, here we may learn, to take heed of the people, and in any case not
to do as they do. For seeing that they do rebel against the Lord; and the
whole world (as John does say 1. Ioh. 5.19.) does lie in wickedness: we must
not follow them, nor go after their ways, to provoke the holy one of Israel
against us, as they do. Fashion not your selves (says Paul) like unto this
world, but be ye changed by the renewing of your minds, that you may prove
what is the good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect. Romans 12.2. The
number and multitude must not move us. For what says the Lord? Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline
after many, and overthrow the truth. Exodus 23.2. Wherefore do, I beseech you, as
Wisdom does counsel us for to do: If sinners do entice us to go with them,
let us not walk in the way with them, but refrain our feet from their paths.
Prou. 1.15. And, as Paul does require of us, let us not be companions with
them, nor have any fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
let us rather reprove them. Ephesians. 5.7.11.

Hitherto of the first point. Now follows the second.
In that this their rebellion was wrought by raging and murmuring, and these
were the chief heads thereof, with a note of great infamy, or reprobation,
who were subject unto it. And thirdly, by his severe punishing of them, who
were guilty in it. If we peruse the word, we shall find many places condemning
the same, but I will press two or three alone. Do all things (says Paul, in
Phil. 2.14.) without murmuring and reasonings. And again, writing to the
Corinthians, in 1. Cor. 10.10. he says, Neither murmr ye, as some of them
also murmured (making mention there of the Israelites) and were destroyed of
the destroyer. Likewise Peter well agreeing with him, says, in 1. Pet. 4.9. Be
ye harborous one to another without murmuring. If we search the Scriptures we
shall find again, that murmurers therein are brought in as the leawdest and
vilest people that be. Jude in his Epistle, speaking of ungodly persons, who
are a stain unto true religion, even of such as were ordained of old unto
eternal condemnation, as appears in the 4. Verse. of that Epistle, does
amongst other things set them out by this mark, that they are murmures and
complainers, walking after their own lusts, as it is in the 16. verse thereof.
Whereby we see that God does brand them with the note of reprobation, as I said
before: In like manner, as Kain is recorded to be a murderer, a runnagate, a
vagabond, and a damned wretch, who was a murmurer, and one that did repine and
grudge, that God should respect his brother Abel above himself. Genesis 4.5. etc.
So are all the Israelites, who did so often murmr and grudge against the Lord
and Moses his servant in the wilderness, reputed for most vile and notorious
sinners, and that by God himself, in these words; Forty years have I
contended with this generation, and said, They are a people that err in heart,
for they have not known my ways. Wherefore I swear in my wrath, saying:
suerly they shall not enter into my rest. Psalm. 95.10.11. Lastly, if we
carefully observe the story of sacred Oracles, we shall find that most heavy
plagues and judgments have been excuted upon offenders in this respect. But to
touch one or two, it is not unknown, that though Miriam were an excellent
woman, and one of great account amongst all the people of God; yet the Lord did
not spare her, but did strike her with the Leprosy (a cursed and an odious
disease) for her murmuring against Moses. Numb. 12.10. Again, it is apparent
that though God made choice of Israel, to be his people before all the nations
of the world, and did carry them, as it were, in his bosom, as a mother does
carry her child in her bosom; yet he did destroy many thousands of them by the
Amalekites and the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain of their wandering,
for their murmuring and repining; yea and more then that, he debarred them all
from entering into Caanan, that came out of Egypt, except two, viz. Iosuah and
Caleh, as we may see at large in the 14. Chap. of Numbers. But yet his hand
staid not there. For besides all that, he cast most of them down to hell, and
would not suffer them to come to heaven (which is the plague of all plagues,
and the heauiest judgment that can be) as the Apostle does observe, in the 3.
and 4. Chapters of his Epistle to the Hebrews.

As thus you hear that murmuring is a sin, we may see in those murmurers,
(and many others) who were mentioned before. Wherefore when Moses went about to
draw the people from their murmuring, he wills them to rebel no more; as though
to murmr and to rebel were all one. Numb. 14.9. And when God does reprove
them, he does demand, How long they will provoke him, and how long it will be
yer they do believe him? in the 11. verse of the same Chapter: as though there
were no difference between murmuring, and provoking of God, or not believing
in him. So that then if it be an abomination before the Lord to condemn the
innocent in our thoughts, and to rebel against the governors of the land, it
is apparent and evident, that murmuring must needs be a great sin, seeing it
has these two great evils in it; the one of judging amiss of the Lord; the
other of rebelling against his majesty. But to pass the causes, let us come to
the uses. They are in number two.

The first of them shows the great impiety of our land; Noli me tangere,
which many too rashly and without wisdom do venture often to touch. God make
them wiser, and more staid in their proceedings.) We have these murmurers
amongst us. First the Papists; they murmr, because they cannot have their
religion established, or their liberty to use their consciences as they would.
Secondly, the Brownists (or the Separatists, as they call themselves:) they
murmr, because they cannot have our Church reformed according to their
plat-forme. Thirdly, the loyal subjects, they murmr, because the good and
wholesome statutes of our land for justice and piety, lie dead without
execution. Lastly, (not to touch the government of the Church, in regard
whereof there are too many murmurings on every side) every estate almost does
murmr one against another, as the rich against the poor, and the poor
against the rich, and the like; and there is no man almost that is contented
with his place, and with those things which do happen unto him here in this
life, but he does murmr against God the disposer of all things, and that
because he is oftentimes crossed, and cannot have his will fulfilled, as he
would. In regard of all which we see what a leaprous disease has ouer-spread
it self upon the whole nation, and the people of our land; the Lord herein be
merciful unto us, and give us grace to repent, and to amend this evil of
ours, that so we may cease from murmuring, and fall to praying, and provoke
him no more to wrath after this manner, as we have done.

But to come to the second use, Psalm. 37.5. But this is, you may say, a work
of all works; o for Gods love, teach us how to do it: for we are willing to do
it, but we know not how to do it. Mark then these rules, which do follow. For
if you shall observe them carefully, and lay them up deeply in the bottom of
your hearts, they shall be as good Triacle or Mithridate to do you good, and a
sound antidote to expel the rancknesse of this poison of murmuring, whenever
any cross or affliction does fall upon you.

First, you must know and mark, that God has a working in all things, and
that crosses and calamities do as well come from him, as blessings and
benefits, according to the words of Amos, saying, Shall there be evil in the
city, and the Lord has not done it? (he means the evil of punishment, and
not the evil of sin; because God is not the author of this, as James does
teach, but he is of the other.) For this should quiet our minds, and make us
dumb, according to David's words in Psalm. 39.9. when he says, I should have
been dumb, and not have opened my mouth, because thou did it, speaking there
to God.

Secondly, you must know and mark, that as God does all things, so God has an
absolute power over all his creatures to do with them what he will himself,
and not what shall seem good unto the creatures themselves, as Paul does teach
us in Romans 9.20.21. saying: O man, who art thou, which pleadest against God?
shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
has not the potter power over the clay to make of the same lump one vessel
to honor, and another unto dishonor? For this should quiet our minds and
make us dumb, according to Elies words in 1. Sam. 3.18. when he says, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

Thirdly, you must know and mark, that as God does all things, and has
absolute power over all his creatures to do with them as he will, so God does
wrong none, or offer injury unto any, as man does; but all his works are just
and righteous, even when he does strike, as well as when he does bless, as
Daniel does acknowledge of him in Dan. 9.14. saying: For the Lord our God is
righteous in all his works which he does. For this should quiet our minds and
make us dumb, according to Jobs example, in Job. 1.21. when he says, Naked
came I into this world, and naked shall I return again; the Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away; O blessed be the name of God. And in all this did
not Job sin (says the text) nor charge God foolishly; as considering herein
with himself, that God dealt but justly and uprightly with him in taking that
from him, which before he had bestowed upon him.

Fourthly, you must know and mark, that as God does all things, has absolute
power to do what he will, and all his works are just and righteous, so every
man is so sinful, that his transgressions and sins do deserve far greater
plagues and judgments then any that God does lay upon men here in this world,
as David does instruct us, saying: The Lord has not dealt with us after our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, in Psalm. 103.10. For this
should quiet our minds, and make us dumb, according to Jobs words in Job
39.37. when he says, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my
hand upon my mouth. Does a man require of us but ten shillings, when we do owe
him an hundredth pounds? or does an officer give us but one stripe, when by a
just and merciful law he may give us forty? then we have no cause in the
world to murmr against them for it, but to thank them. So beloved, seeing
that God does but lightly touch us with his finger, when he may press us down
with his whole hand; and does but fatherly chastise us with a few stripes here,
when he might cast us down into hell, and there keep us in insufferable
torments for evermore; shall we murmr and grudge against him for this his
dealing? no, no, we must not do so, but like good and faithful children we
must bless his glorious name most heartily for it, and cry our with Jeremy,
saying, It is the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not. Lament. 3.22.

Fifthly, you must know and mark, that as God does deal more favorably with
us, then we do deserve, he sparing us, as a father does his child; so he does
never lay any more upon us, who are his children, then we can bear, as the
Apostle does show in 1. Cor. 10.13. saying: God is faithful, which will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you be able to bear, but will even give
the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to bear it. For this should
quiet our minds, and make us dumb, according to the example of Christ: who,
being heard of his Father in the thing which he feared, Heb. 5.7. went to his
death and passion without all murmuring, quiet, and dumb, as a sheep is
before the shearer. Esaias 53.7.

Sixthly, you must know and mark, that as God will proportion out our burden
according to our strength and ability to bear it, so he will turn all those
crosses and burdens, which he does lay upon us, to our best in the end, as
Paul does well observe in Romans 8.28. saying: Also we know that all things work
together for the best unto them, that love God, even to them that are called of
his purpose. For this should quiet our minds, and make us dumb. For we do love
and like those things which turn to our profit, and we do rejoice in them
greatly. He is a mad man, that being either sick or lame will fret and chafe
at the Physician and Surgion, when they come unto him with undoubted remedies
to make him well within some day or two. So not much better are we, if we
storm and fret at those things, which the Lord does lay upon us, considering
that they shall turn to our good and comfort. But happily you perceive not how
this may be, that afflictions should turn to our best. Mark it then, they do
it two ways; one way by pulling us from our sins, and causing us to be more
holy, as you may see in Heb. 12.10.11. where the Apostle does say, that God
does chastise us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness;
and that though no chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous; yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto
them, which are thereby exercised. Which to be most true, we may see by the
examples of Manasses and the prodigal son, both which could never be tamed,
till misery came upon them; but then they began to relent and to return to
the Lord: as also by David's testimony of himself, who says, Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy word. And again, It is good for
me, that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. Psalm. 119.67.
and 71. The other way is by increasing our glory in the heavens above, as the
Apostle S. Paul does declare in 2. Cor. 4.17. saying, For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent,
and an eternal weight of glory.

Seventhly, you must know and mark, that as you r crosses and calamities shall
be beneficial unto you, and turn to your best; so they shall not continue
still, but shall have an end; as David does instruct us in Psalm. 125.3. saying,
For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, lest the
righteous put forth their hand unto wickedness. And again he does say, that
weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30.5. For
this should quiet our minds, and make us dumb. For if apprentices shall hold
out in their hard labor, and course fare, for seven years together or more,
and all that time shall be serviceable unto their masters without open
murmuring and repining, because they see that their bondage will not last for
ever, but after these years are exspired will have an end; much more should we
bridle our affections, and possess our souls in patience, ceassing from all
murmuring and repining whatsoever, considering that we see and know that our
afflictions will have an end, and not continue for ever.

Lastly, you must know and mark, that all our murmuring will do us no good,
but procure much hurt, and more woe unto us. For God will deal with us, as we
are wont to deal with our children; the more that they storm and rage against
us, the more stripes we give them, and the less countenance we show unto them;
but when they do submit themselves, and cry us mercy, then we stay our hand,
and take the rod, and burn it. So is it with God, the more we fret and chafe
against him, the more he does beat us, and the sourer he does look upon us:
but when we strike upon the thigh, and come with the prodigal son, to
confess our fault, and to leave the same, all his anger is turned strait into
love and favor; and then the fat calfe is not good enough for us, unless we
have a sweet kiss, and other beauenly joys provided for us besides that. For
this should quiet our minds, and make us dumb. For what wise man will do that,
which cannot hurt another, but will greatly hurt himself? Remember we here
what Seneca writes of Caesar, who having appointed a great feast for his
Nobles and friends of all degrees, and it falling out that the day was so
extreme foul, as nothing could be done, he being highly displeased at it, in
extreme madness willed all them that had bows, to shoot up their arrows at
Jupiter (whom the heathen took for a chief god) in defiance of him, for that
foul weather. Which when they accordingly did, their arrows lighted short of
heaven, and fell down upon their own heads, and hurt a number of them very
sore. Even so do our murmuring and muttering words, either for this or for that
which God sends, not hurt him, but wound our selves both deeply and
dangerously. Wherefore (to conclude this point) in consideration of all these
things now rehearsed, take heed of murmuring, avoid it, and refrain from it.
Do you neither murmr against the Ministers of the word, nor against the
Magistrates of the land, nor against him that sits upon the throne, who is the
breath of us all; (for to murmr against any of these, is to murmr against
God himself, because all of them have their calling from God, and do supply
his room and place:) nor against any work or word of the Almighty, whether
you be in adversity or in prosperity; but be quiet, and wait upon the Lord,
praying always for the redress of things that are amiss, but never murmuring
for any thing. And so I pass from the acts of the people, and come to the
Prophets wondering at the same.

He does demand and ask the question, saying, Why do the heathen rage, and the
people murmr in vain? And this he does by way of admiration, as wondering at
them for this their so doing. Sometimes we ask a question, when we doubt of a
matter or know it not. So the Apostles asked of Christ, why he did speak to
the multitude in parables. Matthew. 13.10. Sometimes we ask a question, when we
know a thing our selves, and would gladly teach it to another. So one of the
Elders whom John saw standing about the throne of God, asked of John, what they
were, and wherehence they came, which stood before the throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their hands. Revel. 7.13.
Sometimes we ask the question for neither of these ends, but to tempt or to
entrap. So the Herodians asked Christ, whether it were lawful to give tribute
to Caesar or no. Math. 22.17. Sometimes we ask a question, when we would
check or reprove one for some thing, which is either spoken or done amiss. So
God asked of Caine, where his brother Abel was. Genesis 4.9. Sometimes we ask a
question, when we would express a thing with the greater force and vehemence.
So Paul asked of the Romans, how they that were dead to sin, should yet live
therein, Romans 6.2. Sometimes we ask a question, when we would stop his mouth
that does propose unnecessary or unpleasing matters unto us. So Christ asked
the chief Priests and Elders of the people, whether the baptism of John were
from heaven, or from men. Math. 21.25. Sometimes, lastly, we ask a question,
when we marvel or wonder at a matter. So David asked what man was, that God
did so regard him, and extol him above the rest of his creatures. Psalm. 8.4.
Thus you see, that questions are proposed upon sundry considerations, and for
diverse ends. But the end why the Prophet here does propose this question is
for wondrings sake; for he saw such madness and foolishness in the heathen
and people for their raging and murmuring against the Lord, that he could not
but marvel and wonder at the same. If a man should attempt a thing, that is
either impossible to be done, as to carry a Church upon his back; or else which
being done, will be altogether hurtful unto him, as to kick his heels
against sharp needles; we should wonder and marvel at him much for it, and
think that he were mad, and out of his wits. So was it with the Prophet in
this case; he saw first, that they went about a thing impossble, and that which
could never be brought to pass; for who can remove the Lord out of his throne?
or displace him out of his kingdom? none, no not all the inhabitants of the
world. Again, he saw in the second place, that as this was impossible, so it
was a thing altogether unprofitable for them, and most hurtful in every
respect. For whether we respect David or Christ, they could not have the like
king again in all the world. For as it is recorded of David, that he was a man
according to Gods own heart, and that he executed judgment and justice unto
all his people, as it is in 2. Sam. 8.15. so it is chronicled of Christ, that
he was the very ingraued form of his Fathers person; and that the scepter of
his kingdom was ascepter of righteousness, he loving righteousness, and
hating iniquity. Heb. 1.2.8.9. And as though this were not a commendations
great enough of him, that he should reign as a king and prophet, and execute
judgment and justice in the earth, mark what the Lord does add further to
this, in Ier 23.6. when he says: In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely; and this is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord
our righteousness: that so thereby we might know, that all those are in a most
happy estate, who are under him, and his dominion. In regard of both which
things, you may see, that the Prophet might well wonder and marvel (as here he
does) at their rebellion. Whereout shortly observe this doctrine, Esaias, cap.
59. v. 16. that God himself did wonder at the dealing of the world, that there
was no man found in it, that would offer himself to help the Church, in these
words: And when he saw, that there was no man, he wondered that none would offer
himself.

But what may the reason of this be, touch the Lords anointed (no not though
the had bin persecuted to the death, as David in a manner was by Saul;) and
daily experiences, by the which they did see, that all their plots from time to
time were evermore in vain, and did still turn to their own ruin and
destruction.

Wherefore seeing the acts of the people are acts so far void of reason and
understanding, Esaias in the like case, when he took him by the hand, and taught
him, that he should not walk in the way of the people, saying: Say ye not a
confederacy to al them, to whom this people says a confederacy, neither fear
you their fear, nor be afraid of them, but sanctify the Lord of hosts, and
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. Esaias 8.11.12.13. And so I
shut up this point in a few words, and make an end.

THE THIRD SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. VER. 2. and 3. The Kings of the earth band themselves, and the
Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and against his Christ.

Let us break their bands, and cast their cords from us.


Having spoken in the first verse of the Commons, and the meaner people of the
world, he comes now in these two verses to speak of the Nobles, and the great
States of the world. Though the former did rebel against Christ, and his
kingdom, yet happily these (as a man might think) will not. For these are wise,
and religious, and see what is good for themselves. But out alas! they do it as
well as the former; they have the like treacherous and rebellious hearts within
them. For they band themselves together with all their power and strength. But
yet there is some difference betwixt them. For these go (as it were) warily to
work, and are very circumspect in their ways: they take deliberation and
time, they have their meetings and consultations, they lay their heads
together, and take advice what is best to be done. But in the end they conclude
upon this: That they will be subject no longer to Christ, and his kingdom, nor
suffer themselves to be bridled any more by his laws; which they accounted to
be an intolerable burden, and such bands and cords as were not in any case to
be endured, but to be broken asunder, and to be cast behind their backs, like
dung and filthiness, which they could not abide to look on. And whereas good
subjects should provoke one the other unto all dutiful obedience and loyal
subjection unto their dread Sovereign, they (as apert and open enemies) do
encourage one the other unto plain and manifest treason and rebellion, saying:
Come, let us break their bands, and cast their cords behind us.

In sum then you have nothing else to remember,

Touching the first of them, which does concern their deeds, we will observe
this method in handling the same, that first we will see the meaning of the
words, then the truth of the story, and lastly the use and benefit, that we
may make thereof. The meaning of the words stands thus. By Kings are
understood such as were in highest place and authority amongst men; and by
Princes, such as were next them for rule and government over the people: but by
them both, are understood all persons whatsoever of chief place and state for
this world, by the figure called Synecdoche, when some sorts or kinds are put
for all. Howsoever these are here said to band themselves, and to be assembled
together, but in Acts chap. 4. verse. 26. they are said to assemble, and to come
together; the reading is somewhat diverse, but yet it is all one in sense. For
the meaning is nothing else but this, that they joined hand and head together
in power and counsel against the Lord and his Christ. Where by the name of the
Lord, you must understand the Almighty, even the first person in the Trinity,
God the Father: and by the name of his Christ, first David, whom God did
anoint king of Israel. Then secondly, Jesus, the son of the Virgin Mary,
whom the same God did anoint king over his Church. For against both of them
was this conspiracy made. The word in the Hebrew tongue, called Meshihho
coming of Mashahh to anoint; and the word in the Greek tongue, called tou
Christou autou, coming of chrio, to anoint, do signify his Anointed. And
seeing that both David and Jesus were anointed by God the Father, either of
them may be noted out by this word; and be called His Anointed, or his Christ,
which is all one. For anointed or Christ is all one in sense, though not in
sound of words in our English tongue.

Thus you see in few words the meaning of the place, how that the great states
or chief men of the world bid band themselves wholly against David, whom the
Lord had chosen to be the King of Israel, and against our Savior Jesus Christ,
whom he had chosen to be the governor of his Church, and the only ruler
thereof. But yet before we come to see the verity of this matter (which is to
be touched in the next place) a question here may be moved, and a man may ask,
how these men did join hand and head together against the Lord himself? For
can any (like the Giants) make war against the Almighty? Yes. Many have done
it, and do daily still do it. For all those are said to war against the Lord
himself, who do oppose themselves against his will and pleasure, and withstand
such matters as do tend to his glory, and the good of his Saints; but chiefly
those, that do resist the higher powers, and rebel against such as the
Almighty has set over them, to be their rulers and governors, either in the
Church or Commonwealth. As we may se by the words of the Lord to Samuel, when
Israel would have a king, in 1. Sam. 8.7. where the Lord does say unto him,
Hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto thee: for they
have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign
over them. As we may see by the words of our Savior to his Apostles in Luke
10.16. when he says unto them, He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that has
sent me. As lastly we may see by Paul's words to the Romans, in Romans 13.2. when
he says, Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of
God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment. Wherefore in
that they did resist David and Christ, whom the Lord had set up, it is
apparent, that they did resist the Lord himself. Oh that all traitors and
rebels did well consider of this point, and lay it near unto their souls. For
our own parts let us look unto it: always remembering what the Lord does say,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

But to pass this matter, and to come to the truth of the story, that we may
see how true every thing is which is here reported; and not to stand upon David
the figure, (whose story you may read at large in the first book of Samuel,
where you shall find both Kings and Princes, as well domestical as foreign,
banding and assembling themselves against him,) it is apparent by the record of
all the Evangelists, that as the whole body and Commons of Israel were set
against our Savior Jesus Christ; so were the States of the land, and the
chief men of place therein, most deadly foes and enemies unto him. As they
banded themselves together, to make their faction and side strong against him:
so they had their often assemblies, and meetings for counsel and advice, which
way to bring him unto his death. Herod and Pontius Pilate (two kings as it were
amongst them) though they did jar and disagree betwixt themselves; yet now
they could join together against Christ, and become friends: as we may see in
Luke 23.12. in these words: And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends
together, for before they were enemies one unto the other. Here is the banding
of the Kings of the earth together, when these two agree in one (like good
friends) who were before at ods, and do assemble together at Jerusalem against
our sweet Savior the Lords Anointed. For now at this time both of them were
at Jerusalem, and so as well together in place, as in heart, as it is in the 7
verse of the same chapter of Luke. But for their consulting together, and the
meeting of their Princes in assemblies for counsel and advice against him,
there are many places in the Evangelists declaring the same, but I will touch
only two at this time. The one of them is in John, the 11 chapter, and 47
verse, with some others following. For there we find, that after Christ had
raised up Lazarus from the dead, the high Priests and Pharisees (who were the
chief rulers of the people, and as Princes among them) gathered a Council,
and assembled as it were in a Parliament against him, plodding and devising
what were best to do unto him; and, as it is in verse 53 of the same chapter,
from that day forth consulting together, to put him to death. The other of them
is in Math. 26.30. where we read, that the chief Priests, and the Scribes,
and the Elders of the people, assembled together into the hall of the high
Priest, called Caiaphas, and consulted how they might take him by subtlety and
kill him. In regard of all which things now shortly touched, you see that this
is most true, which is here recorded, namely, that the Kings of the earth
banded themselves, and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and
his Anointed. The which thing the faithful (that lived after Christ was
ascended into heaven, and were eyewitnesses of those things which were done
unto him) do in their prayer to God acknowledge and confess, saying: For
doubtless against thine holy Son Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentles and the people of Israel, gathered
themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. Acts 4.27.28.

Having thus showed the meaning of the text, and confirmed the truth thereof,
let us now come to the use and benefit, which we may make of the same. Out of
it we may gather two principal doctrines. One from the persons rebelling: the
other from the manner of their rebellion. Out of the persons rebelling we
collect this doctrine, Esaias does show, when he does call the Princes of Judah
and of Jerusalem the Princes of Sodom. Esaias 1.10. for Sodom was a city so
wicked, and the Princes thereof so leude and filthy, that God could not spare
them, but for their abominations he brought down fire and brimstone from
heaven, and consumed them all, as we find in the 19 chapter of Genesis. This
Jeremy does show, when he says, I will get me to the great men, and will
speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment
of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.
Ier. 5.5. This Hosea does show, when he says, They are all hot as an oven, and
have devoured their Judges, all their kings are fallen; there is none among
them that calls unto me, says the Lord. Hos. 7.7. This Amaziah (though a
wicked man) does show, when he said to Amos the Lords Prophet: O thou Seer, go
fly thou away into the land of Judah, and there eat thy bread, and prophecy
there, but prophecy no more at Bethel; for it is the kings Chapel, and it is
the kings Court. Amos 7.11.12. This the story of the Acts of the Apostles does
show, when they were apprehended, cast into prison, beaten, and put to death by
Herod, by the high Priests, and other officers and states men for government,
as we may see in the 4.5.12. and other chapters of the same book. This the
complaint of the Church does show, when she does say, The watchmen that went
about the city found me, they smote me and wounded me, the watchmen of the
walls took away my veil from me. Cant. 5.7. for by watchmen here are meant the
chief rulers of the Church, who should watch over her for her good, and not
thus persecute her and wound her, as they did. This the story of the ten
persecutions does show, when Nero, Domitian, Traian, Antonie, Seuerus,
Maximinus, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian and Dioclesian, most bloody Emperors of
Rome, did make havoc of the Church of God, and persecute to the death such as
did call upon his holy name. This, lastly, the example of all ages does show,
and daily experience with men of our time, when we with our own eyes do see,
and with our own ears do hear, what bloody things are decreed in the Church
of Rome, in Spain, and in other places, against true Protestants, and the
sincere servants of the Lord, even by them that are in the highest rooms, and
do bear the chiefest sway amongst men in those dominions.

But how may this come to pass, part and duty, to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their lives, they being evermore seruent in the
spirit, and most zealous of all good works. For the more kind and bountiful
that any is unto us, the more loving and obedient should we be again unto him.
But through their corruptions, it is far otherwise with them. For these
things make them the worse, and not the better, and (like a violent flood) they
carry them to all kind of abominations.

First, because they make them proud and arrogant in their hearts; for pride is
the root of all evil: as it cast the Angels out of heaven, Adam out of
paradise, Nabuchadnezzar out of his kingdom; so it does still deceive men and
make them rebel against the Almighty. The wicked man (says David) is so
proud, that he seeks not for God, he thinks always, there is no God. Psalm.
10.4. And the Lord says to Edom (who was a bitter enemy to him and his
people) The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the
clefts of the rocks, whose habitation is high, that says in his heart, Who
shall bring me down to the ground? Obadiah verse 3.

Secondly, because they make them riotous and licentious in their lives. For
intemperancy of body, and abundance of fleshly pleasures, do cause them to
forget the Lord, and to spurn against him, that made them. But he (says God)
that should have been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel: thou
art fat (speaking to Israel) thou art gross, thou art laden with fatness:
therefore he forsook God, that made him, and regarded not the strong God of
his salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Again you know, it is said of the voluptuous man
in the parable that though others made their excuses for not coming unto the
feast, whereunto they were bidden, yet he made none, but said peremptorily, I
have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. Luke 14.20. declaring there by
that the pleasures of this life are most forcible means to withdraw us from
the Lord, and from all such duries as do belong unto him; as also from our own
eternal happiness, which is in the heavens above.

Thirdly, because they make them most stiff and obstinate against the most
holy, and powerful ministry of the word. For the contempt of the word is the
very leprosy of the soul, and the killing plague of the body. Wherewith
(says David) shall a young man redress his way? In taking heed thereto
according to thy word. Psalm. 119.9. And the wise men (as Jeremy says) are
ashamed, they are afraid, and taken. Lo, they have rejected the word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Ier. 8.9. So that without the word, there
is no goodness in men. Yet they say, when faithful messengers come to them,
as Moses came unto Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and
let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Exodus 5.2.
What (say they) shall these command us? and shall we do according to their
sayings? No, no, but down with them, down with them, let them not live, but
die: or, as it is in Jeremy chap. 18.18. Come, and let us imagine some device
against them; for the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from
the wise, nor the word from the Prophet: come, and let us smite them with the
tongue, and let us not give heed to any of their words.

Fourthly, because they make them to prosper, and to carry out all matters for
this world, according to their own hearts desire. For prosperity and good
success in our ways does harden man's heart exceedingly against the Lord, and
all holy proceedings. His ways (says David, speaking of the wicked unto God)
always prosper, thy judgments are high over his sight, therefore defieth he all
his enemies, Psalm. 10.5. And we find in Mal. 3.14.15. that many did refuse to
serve the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and chose rather to be lewd and
wicked; because (as they said) the proud were blessed, and they which wrought
wickedness were set up, and such as tempted God were delivered.

Fifthly, because they make them to have a false opinion of themselves, as if
they were in good case, and were in the high favor of God, when it is nothing
so. For this false persuasion of theirs does rock them fast asleep in their
sins, and so bind the cords of their iniquity, that they can hardly ever be
broken again. Surely as they say in their hearts, they shall never be moved, nor
be in danger, as it is in Ps. 10.6. or as it is in Ps. 49.11. They think their
houses, and their habitations shall continue for ever, even from generation to
generation, and call their lands by their names: So this does cause them not to
return unto the Lord, but to go on still in their sins against him, as we may
see in Jeremy, chap. 5.12. in these words: They have denied the Lord, and said,
It is not he, neither shall the plague come upon us, neither shall we see sword
or famine, and as it may also be collected out of Chapter 7. ver. 4. where the
Lord says unto Israel, who thought themselves dear unto the Almighty, and
free from all plagues in that respect, Trust not in lying words, saying: The
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord.

Lastly, because they make them to be attended upon by many flatterers, who
will smooth them on in their sins; and to be accompanied by such, as will
give unto them wicked counsel, as the young men did unto Rehoboam, when he
caused ten tribes to revolt from him. For flattery and evil counsel are the
bane of all good manners, and forcible spurs to drive men forward to all
wickedness. For, as Paul does say, Evil words corrupt good manners 1. Cor.
15.33. so the Lord does testify, that flattering teachers, and evil
counselors, do strengthen the hands of the wicked, that they cannot return
from their wickedness, in ser. 23.14.

Thus you have six reasons in particular of their rebellion and conspiracy;
The first is the pride of their hearts, who are puffed up with their estate, and
swollen (like a blown bladder) with the vain wind of their outward pomp. The
second, is the intemperancie of their lives, who live in all kind of excess
for diet, apparel, and other worldly pleasures most sweet and delightful
unto the flesh. The third, is the contempt of the word, who meditate but
seldom upon the law of God, and come but now and then to the place, where it
is soundly and impartially divided. The fourth, is the prosperity of their
ways, who flourish like the Bay tree, and are not in trouble as other men, or
plagued as they be, but do live at ease, are strong and lusty, and have more
then heart can wish. The fifth, is the false persuasion which they have of
themselves, who think that they shall continue still in their flourishing
estate, and never see any woe or misery. The sixth and last, is the flattering
and wicked counsel which they receive from others, who gladly accept of that
which is spoken in their praise, or agrees well with the vile inclination of
their hearts. But the general reason of all, is the corruption of their
souls, and the deprauitie of their crooked nature, who turn that into poison
unto themselves, like the spider, which they should convert into honey with the
Be.

But to leave the reasons, Cor. 1.26. when he says: For brethren you see your
calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called. And therefore, I beseech you brethren, look well to this
point, conform not your selves to the religion of great States, nor walk after
the manners of the wealthy men of the world; but be you followers alone of Jesus
Christ, and become holy, as God your Father is holy, in all manner of
conversation; and so you shall not be fighters against the Almighty, as these
Giants are, but be faithful and obedient unto him to your own good, and
everlasting happiness.

The second is this, that if we will join with the Lord, and take part with
him, we must look for great enemies to arise up against us, as well as small
ones. Ye shall be brought (says our Savior Christ unto his Disciples, in
Matthew. 10.18.) to the governors and kings for mysake, in witness to them and
to the Gentles. So must we look to be brought before such; and when such
matters do fall out, we must not be discouraged, as though some new thing had
happened unto us: but be well contented therewith, knowing that it has been so
from the beginning, and shall be so still to the end of the world. As Ahab was
set against Eliah, Saul against David, Haman against Mordecay, the Princes of
Babel against Daniel, Herod against John the Baptist, the high Priests and
Elders of the people against the Apostles, and Pharaoh with his Princes of
Egypt against Israel: so must Gods children think, that some great States,
and mighty men of this world, will set themselves against them at all times,
and that they shall never be free from their oppositions, but shall still be
molested by them to the end. Oh think upon this well, and make a good use of
it for your selves. For praemoniti, praemuniti, forewarned, fore-armed,
according to Christ's words in Ioh. 16.1. These things have I said unto you,
that ye should not be offended.

The third is, that every one of us, who are more wealthy then others, and have
greater places of dignity then they have, should look most warily to our
selves, that our wealth and places do nor steal away our hearts from God,
according to Paul's words in 1. Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall. For you see, we stand in a slipperie place: and if
others do fall round about us, as we see and hear they do, pray we heartily to
the Lord, that he would keep us; and let us watch and be sober, always
walking faithfully in our callings, and humbling our selves to the very dust
before the Lord our maker. Remember we still, what Paul does write unto Timothy
in 1. Tim. 6.17.18.19. and let us follow the same. Charge them (says he) that
are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not
in uncertain riches, but in the living God, (which gives us abundantly all
things to enjoy;) that they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to
distribute and communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life. If men travel
in those places where others before them have suffered shipwreck, or do fight
with those enemies, who have always conquered others, they are very fearful,
and circumspect, lest they should miscarry. So should it be with us in this
case. Because we see others led away captives to sin by their outward pomp
and state, and do behold but a few rich men truly fearing the Lord, we should
upon the due consideration thereof walk wisely and circumspectly, redeeming
the time, and working out our salvation with fear and trembling.

The fourth and last is, that we should both pray and rejoice in the behalf of
our governors, and the highest powers of our land. For seeing all generally do
fall, and become enemies to the Lord, that are in those places of eminency
far above others; and yet they do stand, and are faithful embracers of the
truth: we have great cause to bless the name of our God for it, and to pray
unto him for a continuance of the same; that so they may never shrink back,
but grow better and better, until they come to the perfection of all goodness
in the heavens above, and there enjoy all those beatitudes, which are provided
for them in that celestial place. Doubtless there is no nation in the world
so much beholding unto God in this respect, as we of England are. As once we
did say, We have an excellent Queen, so we may now say, We have an excellent
King. His estate is most dangerous, yet (blessed be our God) he does stand and
maintain the truth of the Gospel, as he ought to do. He is like a goodly
blazing torch set upon the top of a mountain, which there does give light, and
not go out, do all the winds of the heaven against it what they can. Strange
would the spectacle be, if such a matter were visible to our eye. I doubt not,
but all of us would stand wondering, if we should see a candle burning on the
top of our houses in a windy and tempestuous night, and yet never go out,
before it be burnt to the very end of it. So may we wonder at his standing, and
at the Lords mercy in upholding him, he is so assaulted on every side, and set
upon by the contrary blasts of sundry oppositions. I pray you, let us always
pray unto the Lord for him, and beseech him most earnestly upon the knees of
our souls, that he would always keep him in his fear, that he may never
fall, but abide evermore in his holy integrity amongst us: but beware we, that
we never forget our duty unto him, but remain always faithful and loving
unto him unto the end. And so I pass from this first doctrine, and come unto
the second.

Out of the manner of their rebellion and conspiracy, in that they did band
themselves, and sit in Council against the Lord and his Anointed, Omri, when
cruel and wicked statutes were made against the Lord and his people, as may be
gathered out of Micha, chap. 6.16. Secondly, in the days of Ahab, when all the
men of Izreel, even the Elders and governors thereof, the Nobles and others did
assemble together, and pronounce death against innocent Naboth for his
vineyards sake, which he had before denied unto the king. 1. King. 21.8. etc,
Thirdly, in the days of Jeroboam, when he took counsel, and made two calves
of gold for divine worship, the one whereof he set in Bethel, and the other in
Dan. 1. King 12.28.29. Lastly, in the days of Nabuchadnezzar (to pass over
others) when a golden image was set up in the plain of Dura, in the province
of Babel, for all men to worship, under pain of extreme punishment, even to be
cast into the midst of an hot fiery furnace. Dan. 3.1, etc. This you may see by
those Councels which were held in the time of the new Testament in the days of
our Savior and his Apostles. For in them, the Jews did not only
excommunicate all those that did confess Christ, Ioh. 9.22. and forbid the
Apostles to preach any more in his name, Act. 4.18. but they did also in their
solemn Councels condemn him to death. Math. 26.66. and so caused the Lord of
glory to be crucified. Lastly, this you may see by those Councels which were
held since that time until our days, as by the Council which was held at
Antioch, when Athanasius was condemned, and the Arrian heresy approved: by the
Council held at Ephesus when Eutyches heresy was allowed: by the Council
held at Neocasarea, when second marriage was forbidden: by the Council held at
Nice, when it was concluded, that in holy Churches the images of Saints should
be worshipped: by the Council at Constance, when they were excommunicated that
did receive the Sacrament in both kinds: and (to let go others) by the Council
held at London, when in the days of Queen Mary open idolatry was commanded
and established by law.

Well then, you see this is a matter most clear and evident, that assemblies
and Councels are as well against the Lord, as for the Lord. But what may the
reasons thereof be, will you say? They are in number these two. The one is,
ways, according to the quality of their crooked and perverse nature, from
whence it does proceed. The other is, because the godly themselves, who have
also their Councels and Assemblies, are not perfectly holy, but many
imperfections do still remain in them, while they are here in this world;
according to the tenor of the whole Scripture, and that saying of Paul to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 13.9. etc. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part,
and so forth. For they failing through these their imperfections, sometimes in
judgment, for want of a discerning and understanding spirit; and sometimes in
affection, through the predominant passions of the soul, which are not yet
rectified according to the word; it must needs be, that now and then they err
and miss, and establish such matters as have no sanctity or holiness
inherent in them. For this is a most sure ground both in divinity, and in
philosophy, that as the cause is, such is the effect; and therefore seeing the
cause here is bad, the effect cannot be good, but be bad also.

It is good for us to think on this point, Rome, that Councels may err and be
deceived. They hold, they cannot; and for this wicked assertion of theirs, they
abuse certain places of holy Scripture, as that in Acts 15.28. It seemed good
to us and the holy Ghost; that in Math. 28.20. I am with you to the end of the
world; and that in Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. So then thus
they argue. Councels are never without the Spirit of God, therefore can they
not err. A silly argument, as though the Spirit of God were at their
commandment, or were tied to places and persons; or being present did lead
men into all truth, as it did the Apostles, whose preachings and decrees are
now, and were then, the rules of our faith and manners. Tush, Councels are now
and then without the Spirit of God, as consisting either only of wicked
persons, or of a mixed number, both good and bad, whereof the greater part is
the worse; as theirs also seemed to be at Rome under John the 23, when there
appeared a great Owl, which stared and outfaced the Pope; who blushed at the
matter, and fuming rose up, and departed; and when others whispered one in
another ear, saying. That the spirit appeared in the likeness of an Owl.
And as Councels are without the Spirit often, so when they naue it, they have
it not in fullness or perfection, as we touched before, and therefore does not
keep them from all error or mistaking, but they may err notwithstanding the
presence of the Spirit, which is within them. Let this suffice for the
confutation of the Papists.

In the second place we may here learn, that seeing there are Councels and
Parliaments held as well against the Lord as for the Lord, that we must not
rashly approve of all things, which are established and decreed by Councels and
Parliaments, but we must first examine them, whether they be agreeable to the
word of God or no. Try all things (says Paul in 1. These. 5.21.) and hold fast
that which is good. The like counsel John does give us, saying: Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, for many false
Prophets are gone out into the world. 1. Ioh. 4.1. And thus the Beroeans did;
for when Paul and Silas came, and preached amongst them, they received the word
with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so or no, as they taught them. Acts 17.11. So also did the Ephesians. For
when some came unto them, and said that they were Apostles, who indeed were
not, they examined them, and found them liers. Revel. 2.2. And so lastly must
we our selves do; for we must not build our faith upon men, who may deceive us,
but upon the word of God, which cannot deceive us. Any thing that is agreeable
to the same, we must receive; and whatsoever is contrary unto it we must reject
and cast away, saying with the Apostles, We ought rather to obey God then man.
Acts 5.29.

In the third and last place, from this, that Councels and Assemblies are as
well against the Lord, as for the Lord, we may learn: that we must not be too
rash either in judgment or in speech against the governors of our land, for
that they do condemn conuenticles, and all other unlawful assemblies. It is a
thing to be wished, that all meetings were for God, and the advancement of his
glory: and it would be a thing very profitable, if Christians did come
together (chiefly the Ministers of the word) for holy conference in good
matters, that they might help one the other by their mutual says, and other
blessed gifts, wherewith they do abound in great abundance. But yet seeing many
inconueruences oftentimes do come by Assemblies, and that there are meetings as
well against the Lord, as for the Lord; by traitors, by Papists, by
Anabaptists, by thieves, by other malefactors, who are enimtes both to God, and
the good estate of our land: let us not be discontented overmuch, though our
meetings be somewhat restrained by law, neither let us repine in our hearts
against our governors for the same: but let us know that they had some good
reason for that which they have done, and that we our selves (who are faithful
to God, and loyal to our King) may take liberty enough in the fear of God,
to provoke to love and to good works, and to be mutual helps one unto the
other in all duties of true Christianity, if we will our selves.

Their words do now follow to be handled, wherein consider first how they do
stir up and provoke one the other to their naughtiness; then the thing it
self, which they would do, and gladly bring to pass, as being the very issue
of their whole counsel and consultation, and the maine point wherein their
rebellion and treason stood. In the handling of these I will be succinct and
short, but chiefly in the first. For that I will but only touch, and away. It
is expressed in this word, Come, come, say they, let us break their bands, and
cast their cords behind us. In which we see the guise and property of the
world; the wicked have a Come as well as the godly, but far differing from
theirs. For the godly have their Come, as a word of encouragement to religion
and the exercises thereof; as when they say: O come, and let us sing unto the
Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of his salvation: or as it is in
Esaias 2.3. Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. For the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. But the wickeds Come, is to conspiracy and treason, as here we may
see: in which they are more diligent, then the children of light are in their
good: for their bodies meet, their heads meet, their hearts meet, and both
outward and inward they are earnest in evil, the encourage one the other
therein as much as may be, and they have their come always for all their
plots. Such a come we read of against blessed Jeremy: Come (said the wicked)
and let us. imagine a device against Jeremy, let us smite him with the tongue,
and not give credit to any of his words. Ier. 18.18. Such another have
ruffians, and thieves, and swaggering fellows in the book of the Proverbs:
Come, and cast in thy lot with ours, for we will have all but one purse, etc.
Prou. 1.11. etc. Such another has the harlot to the young man: Come, let us
take our fill of love until the morning, let us take our pleasure in
dalliance; for mine husband is not at home, he is gone aiourney far off, etc.
Prou. 7.18. etc. But to such cursed comes let us never hearken, according to
the good counsel which Wisdom does give us in the Proverbs, and namely in
the first chapter, and 15 verse thereof, saying, My son, walk not thou in
the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path: and let us ever remember
what the Psalm says, Blessed is the man, that does not walk in the counsel
of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the
scornful; but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he
meditate day and night. Psalm. 1.1.2. And so I pass from this point of their
wicked and devilish exhortation, and come to the thing it self, whereunto it
is bent; only entreating you by the way, that you would learn by their
example to be more zealous and earnest in your holy religion then now you are.
For shall they exhort one the other, and whet on each man his brother to wicked
abominations, and to dreadful rebellion and treason? and shall not we much
more provoke one the other to love, and to all good works, that we may be
faithful servants unto God, and loyal subjects unto our King? Yes, yes,
beloved, it is our duty so to do; otherwise these persons may rise up in
judgment hereafter against us. Wherefore let us stir up one the other to
goodness, and to all holy duties whatsoever, saying: Come, let us honor all
men, love brotherly fellowship; fear God, honor the King, and do in all
points, as it does become us, etc.

The substance and matter of their exhortation, if you mark the text, is to
cast off all obedience to the just and holy laws of the Lord and his
Anointed. For their words are these: Let us break their bands, and cast their
cords behind us. A devilish conclusion, and a wicked resolution, you see it
is. What! could they in all their consultations find no better matter then
this, to agree upon? was this the only issue of all their labors? Alas, alas,
we see what man is: he is a very beast by his own knowledge, as it is in
Jeremy 10.14. and as Paul does show, he is an enemy unto God his maker. Romans
5.10. But let us examine this point a little. As all good rulers have their
laws and statutes, for the better government of their people; so God has his
laws and his statutes, which he does give unto his people for them to observe
and keep, that so they might not live according to their own phansies and
pleasures, but according to his will and pleasure, they evermore avoiding those
things which he has condemned, and performing those things which he has
commanded.

But behold here, these men scorn those laws and statutes, and refuse
altogether to be obedient unto them. They would cast them off for ever, and
break them all to pieces, if they could. And because they would make all
things odious in respect of the Lord and his Anointed (whether David or
Christ,) and very plausible and colorable in regard of themselves, they forge
a very gross and palpable comparison; for they do compare themselves, as it
were, to certain beasts and unreasonable creatures; and these laws and
statutes of the Lord published by David and Christ, unto certain bands and
cords; insinuating thereby, that they are no better used, then the very beasts
of the field, or other unreasonable creatures, that must be tied fast with
bands and cords, for fear of hurting people, or wandering abroad, whither they
should not. For as these beasts are bridled and restrained by their bonds and
cords, so were they by these laws and statutes, so that they could not do what
they would do. In regard whereof they go now about to be loosed from this
bondage and subjection, which was in their opinion altogether intolerable, and
not to be borne or suffered any longer. Wherefore their meaning in these words,
when they say, Let us break their bands, and cast their cords behind us, is
nothing else but this, Let us observe and keep their laws and statutes no
more, nor be any longer subject and obedient unto them or their authority.

Out of this we may collect two doctrines, obedient thereunto, according to the
example of these men. The other is, that when men do resist the law of God, and
oppose themselves against the same, then do they rebel against God himself,
and become traitors unto him, as these were; for this is noted as the maine
point, wherein their treason stood, in that they did thus reject the laws and
statutes of the Almighty, and withstand the same to the uttermost that they
could. On these two, let us stand a little.

The first is, Jeremy 7.23. etc. when the Lord says by his servant there: But
this thing commanded I them, saying: Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and
ye shall be my people; and walk ye in all the ways which I commanded you,
that it may be well unto you. But they would not obey nor incline their ear,
but went after the counsels and the stubburnnesse of their wicked heart, and
went backward, and not forward. Since the day that your fathers came up out of
the land of Egypt, unto this day, I have even sent unto you all my servants
and Prophets, rising up early every day, and sending them; yet would they not
hear me, nor incline their ear, but hardened the neck, and did worse then
their fathers. As thus Israel dealt, so deal all men at all times, we find it
so still by daily experience, as well as by andient records. So that a good man
may cry out, and say, as it is in the same prophecy of Jeremy, Chap. 6. verse
10. Unto whom shall I speak, and admonish, that they may hear? behold their
ears are uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; behold, the word of the Lord
is unto them as a reproach, they have no delight in it.

But what is the reason of this? as God said to Israel, What iniquity have
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked
after vanity, and are become vain? Jeremy 2.5. so may we say to these men;
What iniquity have they found in the laws and statutes of the Lord, that they
do so spurn at them? or what evil is lurking in them, that they do so reject
them? What? are they not just and upright? Yes, as we may see by Deuteronomy. 4.8.
where Moses says: And what nation is so great, that has ordinances and laws
so righteous, as all this law, which I set before you this day? What! are they
not good and profitable? Yes, as we may see by sundry places of divine Writ,
and namely by the testimony of David in Psalm. 19.11. when he says, that in
keeping of them there is great reward. What! are they not, lastly, easy and
pleasant? Yes, as we may see by Christ's own words in Math. 11.30. when he
says, For my yoke is easy, and my burden light: and by the saying of David,
who reports them to be sweeter unto him then the honey, or the honey comb. Psalm.
19.10. How chance then are they rejected? and for what cause are they so cast
off? The causes thereof are these. First, because they are contrary to their
natures, and to all the affections of their souls, which are wholly bent
against them; in so much as Wisdom her self is an enmity unto them, as Paul
does teach us in Romans 8.7. saying, Because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
For they cannot love or like that, by any means, which does cross their
natures, and control the affections of their hearts; that is even death to
them.

Secondly, because they condemn their sins, which are sweet, and profitable
unto them; and threaten eternal judgments against them for them. For they
cannot endure to hear of their faults, and of Gods curses belonging unto them
for the same.

Thirdly, because they are not accustomed to them. For we like not of things
which we never used, and they are tedious and burden some unto us, as a new
strait doublet is to a child which never wore any before; according to David's
saying, when he had Saul's harness on his back: I cannot go with these, for I
am not accustomed. 1. Sam. 17.39.

Lastly, because they are unable for to observe and to keep them, as wanting
Christ to help them, and the spirit of the Lord to assist them. For we grieve
and murmr against all those, which require impossible things at our hands,
and we abhor the burden which we cannot carry or safely undergo.

The reasons of this doctrine thus touched, Adams fall. He is not a little
maimed, or hurt in some parts of his soul or body alone, but he is wholly
corrupted, and made a deadly enemy unto his maker. Some there are, that do
extol man too highly: they say, that he is like a boy of a sprack wit, that
wants but a good master to instruct him; or a fair white paper, that needs
nothing but a writing to be set in it. But here we see it is otherwise: for as
man is ignorant of the law of God, so he is a stark enemy unto it; he will
not be subject to the commandments of God, nor be obedient unto them. Surely
every man by nature is dead in his sins and trespasses, as Paul did observe
of the Ephesians, in Ephesians. 2.1. and no man, unless he be borne again, can
think well of the law of the Lord, and yield up cheerful obedience thereunto.

Secondly, here we may behold the great difference, that is between the wicked
and the godly. For as the wicked do abhor the laws of God, saying: Come, let
us break their bands, and cast their cords behind us; so the godly do love the
laws of God, saying: Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. Mica. 4.2. And the reasons thereof are these. First,
because they see they come from God their sweet Savior, and do tend to their
eternal good: for we cannot but love that which does come from him whom we
love best, and of whom we are loved most, especially, when we know, that he
will send us nothing, which is hurtful, but good, as we judge of God, and that
according to his own word in Romans 8.29. Secondly, because they know, that the
curse thereof shall never take hold of them, in as much as Christ was made a
curse for them. Thirdly, because they are made easy, and pleasant unto them,
as by use and custom (they exercising themselves therein day and night,) so
chiefly by the regeneration of the holy spirit of God, who does assist them,
and make them powerful unto good works. Lastly, because they bring with them
great rewards, and honors at the last, even joys that are unspeakable, and
riches without all end for number and continuance. For as this made Jacob to
serve seven years for Rahel, and Moses to leave Pharaohs court, and to endure
much trouble in the wilderness, even the reward, that they did look for: so
does this excellent reward, which does attend upon the obseruers of Gods
commandments, make us evermore to regard them, and to have a care to observe
and to keep them. More might be spoken of this difference that is betwixt the
godly and the wicked, but this is enough.

The other doctrine (collected out of the text) is this,

The use hereof stands chiefly in two things: There is a generation (says
Agur in Prou. 30.12.) that are pure in their own conceits, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness. We are of that number; for we think too well of
our selves. Who is there almost that does count himself a rebel and a tray
tor against his God? yet all of us are such; for we break his commandments
still, and will not be ruled by his statutes and ordinances, but we follow the
imaginations of our own hearts, and do what seem good in our own eyes. For
these things we must strike upon the thighs and repent, and learn to do so no
more.

Secondly, it should awaken us up, and be a sharp spur in our sides to keep
us always running in the commandments of our God. Oh beloved brethren, how
careful should we be both to know the laws of our God, and also to keep
them, considering that otherwise we do but rebel and commit treason against
our sweet and loving God? Shall we rise up against him that has made us?
against him that has redeemed us? against him that has sanctified us? against
him that does daily prescrue us? and against him in one word, that will
glorify us hereafter in the heavens! No, no, far be this from our souls;
yet this we must needs do, unless we endeavor carefully to keep his
commandments. And therefore, I beseech you, look to them; Let them be a
lantern to your feet, and a light to your paths. Let them be your
counselors, and the men of your law; and whatsoever you think, desire, speak
or do, think all, desire all, speak all, and do all according to the rule and
direction thereof, that so you may not be rebels and traitors unto the Lord,
but be his saithfull servants and true subjects unto your lives end. Amen.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. VER. 4.5. and 6. But he that dwells in the heavens shall laugh: the
Lord shall have them in derision.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure, saying:

Even I have set my king upon Zion mine holy Mountain.


HItherto the Prophet has showed, who did rebel against the Lord, and his
Anointed. Now he does begin to declare, what the Lord, and his Anointed are,
against whom they do so rebel. The Lord is set out in these three verses, and
his Anointed in the three next. The scope and drift in the description of them
both, is one and the self same, and it stands in two points. The one is to
show, that all the opposition or resistance that is made against them is in
vain, and to no purpose. The other is to declare, that those that do make the
opposition, or resistance, are in most woeful and wretched case, and such as
cannot escape most fearful and unrecoverable judgments; unless they do in
time prevent the same, by true and hearty repentance or amendment of life, in
turning unto them, and in becoming faithful and loyal subjects unto them, as
they ought to be. This is the sum of all these verses, but at this time we
are to stand upon the three former alone.

The Prophet going about to describe the Lord, even the Father in the godhead,
or the first Person in the Trinity, notes him out first of all by his place or
abode; which is not upon the earth, where his enemies may come at him, but in
the heavens, where they cannot come near unto him, so that all their power,
(...) malice intended against him can do him no harm. The which thing the
Almighty does see full well; for he is not afraid of them, but as a man that is
careless of his enemy, whom he knows cannot hurt him, does nothing but laugh
and deride at him, so does he laugh and deride at them: he has them in
derision, and so shall have them still in derision. This were enough to dismay
them, if there were any grace in them. But yet this is not all. For as man is
offended with those that rise up against him, and does withal punish them
according to their deserts, if it lie in his power to do it; so is the Lord
offended with them, and in his appointed time, he will plague them. His wrath
is greatly kindled against them, and his hand shall be stretched out in a most
woeful manner to torment them. Then at that time shall they know with a seeling
and tormenting soul, what he is, against whom they are risen up; for God shall
then disclose it unto them, saying: I have set my king upon Zion mine holy
mountain. He took not this honor unto himself, to be the head and ruler of
my people, neither was he advanced to this throne of government by any humane
authority, or created wight; but I, even I that am the Lord, whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain, placed him in his room, and made him to be the
supreme governor of my people: how then durst you rebel against him? or lift up
either tongue or hand, to speak or do any thing which might be contrary unto
him?

The sum of these three verses is nothing else but a description of the Lord
(or the first person in the godhead) against whom the former treason or
rebellion was wrought. Antithesis that is made betwixt him and his adversaries:
First, they are many, but he is but one: Secondly, they are on the earth, but
he is in heaven: Thirdly, they rage, murmr, band and consult; but he laughs
and smiles. Fourthly, they intend an overthrow to him, but he prepares plagues
for them. Lastly, they say, Come, let us break their bands, and cast their
cords behind us: but he says, I have set my king upon Zion mine holy
mountain. So here is God against man, and heaven against earth. Judge you now,
who shall have the victory. But to the parts, the Lord here is described out
two manner of ways. The one is in regard of that which his enemies do to him.
The other is of that which he will do to them. In the former of these, consider
the place where he is, then his deriding or laughing at his enemies: both which
do show, that all their forces can do him no harm, but shall be frustrated
and be brought to naught. First, because he is out of their reach, he being in
heaven, and they upon the earth. Then secondly, because he does not fear, as
men do, who are in some perilous danger, and too weak for their adversaries,
but does laugh and deride at them, as we are wont to do, when we are merry and
sure of safety, and do see how to frustrate all such devices as are intended
against us. This is set down in the fourth verse, as the other part is in the
two next verses following.

But he that is in heaven (says the Prophet) does laugh. Here I will stand a
little upon the several members, and afterward conioyne them both together, in
pressing the doctrine and use of the place. God here (you see) is not plainly
named, but he is see out by a certain periphrasis, or circumlocution, even by
one that dwells, or as others read it, by one that sits in heaven; the
Hebrew word Iosheb affoordeth either of them; for it comes of Iashab, which
signifies indifferently to dwell, or to sit, as also to stay and to abide in a
place. Howsoever, it is a notable description of God, whereby the Prophet
means to show, that his enemies are not able to do him any hurt, or mighty
enough to stand against him that is so far above them. For as it is evermore
a great advantage in war, to have the upper and higher place in fighting
against the adversary (as to be on a hill, when he is below on a valley) so is
it impossible for those who are upon the earth, to reach them with any blows or
strokes, that are in heaven. For betwixt these 2 places (heaven and earth) as
the Astronomers do conjecture, there are seven score and eighteen thousand,
four hundredth, and sixty three miles. And what arrow or shot of gun can fly
so far?

But here it may be demanded, Jeremy 23.24. where he tells us, that he does
fill both the heaven and the earth. And this you must hold, as a ground
infallible, that he is in all places; for as Solomon does confess of him in 1.
King. 8.27. that the heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to
contain him: so David does teach us in Psalm. 139.7. etc. that he is every
where, as well in the sea and earth and other places, as in the heavens
themselves. And the manner how he is thus in all places, is well expressed in
an old verse, which is this, Est Deus essenter, praesenter, vbique potenter,
That is: God is every where by his essence, by his presence, and by his power.
By his essence or divine being, because it is he that immediately works al
things, both in heaven and earth. For we live and move and have our being in
him, as it is in Acts. 17.28. By his presence, because he sees and beholds
all things, and every matter is naked and open to his eyes, as those are to
ours, that stand in our presence before us, as it is in Heb. 4.13. By his
power, because he does sustain and hold up all the creatures in the whole
world, their strength and virtue being nothing else but as a small portion,
flowing from that welspring of all fullness, which is in him, as it is in Hebr.
1.3. and Math. 4.4. So that by this it is apparent, that God is not tied up in
the heavens, as having nothing to do here upon the earth or sea, as Atheists
and Epicures judge, who think that all things do fall out by the course of
nature, chance, fortune (as they call it) and the policy of man. You see that
he is in all places; he is present with us wheresoever we be: he does consider
of all our works: he does know our sitting down, and our rising up: he does
understand our thoughts a far off: he does compass our paths, and he is
accustomed to all our ways, as we may see most excellently in the beginning of
that 139. Psalm, which was quoted before. And therefore every man should take
heed, how he does converse and live here in this pilgrimage before him. But yet
he is said rather to be in heaven, then in the earth or in any other place many
times in the word, and that for two causes. The one is, because he is most
glorious there, and fullest of all honor and dignity; that being the throne
of his Majesty, whereas the earth is but his footstool, Esaias 66.1. The other
is, because there he does manifest himself, as most of all, and in the
greatest splendencie that may be, so immediately, and not by means (whether
ordinary, or extraordinary) as he does here in this world, as may be seen at
large in the 21. Chapter of the Revelations, and other places of the Scripture
besides. But the chief end wherefore he is here said in our text which is in
hand, to be in heaven, is to note the unableness of his enemies to do him
hurt, or to prevail against him. Other ends there are of this saying
elsewhere, but this is the only and principal end of it here, and it is
excellent for that purpose, as was observed before.

But to come to the other member, as God is said to sit or dwell in heaven, so
he is said withal, to laugh and to make a mock or derision of them. But he
that dwells in heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. Some
read this in the present tense, saying, But he that dwells in heaven does
laugh, the Lord has the^ in derision; or does deride the^. But we may take it
as it is translated in the future tense; for so it is in the Hebrew text. A man
may laugh at the first; but weep after; and a man may make a derision of his
enemy at the beginning, but come to ruin and destruction himself at the
ending. But it shall not be so with God: he shall laugh both at the first, and
at the last, and make a mock of his adversaries as well at the ending as at
the beginning. And therefore I think, the holy Ghost did of purpose rather
express his mind in the future tense, then in the present tense: not to deny a
present act, but to include the continuance of it, as though God did not only
do it now, but should do it still. His meaning is, that the Lord does not fear
the conspiracies and rebellion of his enemies, which were mentioned in the
three first verses of this Psalm, and that he makes no account or reckning of
them, but does so lightly respect them, as matters that he both will and can
dash all to pieces, when it pleases him. For here in this verse and the next
verse following is a figure, called Anthropopatheia, which is, when things are
spoken of God according to man, and as his capacity is able to comprehend. For
we must not take the words literally, but figuratively; for to speak properly,
God does not laugh, nor make a derision of any; only man does this, but he
does it not. And therefore I say, the words are to be taken figuratively, as
they also are which are ascribed unto wisdom in the latter end of the first
Chapter of the Proverbs, when Solomon tells us, that she will laugh at the
destruction of the wicked, and mock when their fear comes. If some foolish
hare-braind youth of no strength or skill, should send a challenge unto some
wise discreet captain of great valor and experience in warfare; the captain
would but laugh at him, and make a game-stocke of him, as knowing that he can
do him no harm, but will easily without any ado be ouerthrown by him. So after
the same manner, that we might know that the Lord fears none of his enemies, as
such as can do him no hurt, but that he can easily at his pleasure bring all
their devices to naught, and overcome them when he will, he is said here (after
the manner of men) to laugh at them, and to have them in derision. God then
laughes at his enemies, not because he does like of them, or of their attempts
against him, as we do oftentimes laugh at such things as please us well; but
because he cares not for them, and does see that all their plots are in vain
which are intended against him.

But why is this doubled, may you say? for what cause does the Prophet tell us
of one thing thing twice? First, he says, that God shall laugh at them: then
after that he says again, that he shall have them in derision: For seeing to
laugh at one, and to have him in derision is all one, and the one of them does
not differ from the other in sense and meaning, the question may be well
moved, why the Prophet should use them both, and not content himself with one
of them alone? The answer is this, that he did it, the better to note out the
certainty and assuredness of the thing whereof he does speak. For as Pharaohs
dreams were doubled, the one of the kine, the other of the corn, because the
thing which he saw in his dreams, was established by God, and God did hasten
to perform it; as it is in Genesis 41.32. So the Prophet here does double his
words, because the matter whereof he makes mention, is most certain and sure,
and such as he would have no man to doubt thereof. And for this purpose (you
know) do we our selves oftentimes double our sayings, and therefore it is as
much in effect, as if he had said: But he that dwells in the heaven shall
laugh, yea I say again, the Lord shall laugh, and have them in derision; doubt
not of it, but believe it, for it is a thing most certain and true, as heaven
it self. The consideration whereof should make us be afraid to do any thing
against the Lord. For of all things we do abhor this most, to be made a
laughing stock and a may game to our adversaries. The Saints do complain of
it in the 44. psalm. The Prophet Esaias in the 8. chapter of his prophecy.
David in the 22. psalm. And Paul in the 4 chapter of his 1. epistle to the
Corinthians. And surely if this be tart and irksome unto Gods own children,
how shall the wicked be able to bear it? Yet here we see, that God does make
a sport at all his adversaries, and does laugh and deride at them. Oh let the
due regard of this phrase or manner of speech, stay us always from all
rebellion against him, and cause us to be upright in our ways. For shall we
be a laughter and derision unto the Almighty? No, no, beware we of that.

But to leave the several members (whereon many things might be observed, if
need did so require) and to conioyne them together as they ought to be, out of
them we gather this doctrine: Isay in the 8 chapter of his prophecy, and the
9. and 10 verses thereof, when he says; Gather together on heaps o ye people,
and ye shall be broken to pieces, and hearken ye of far countries: Gird
your selves, and you shall be broken in pieces: gird your selves, and you
shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to
naught: pronounce a decree, yet shall it not stand: for God is with us. The
second is in the 33. Psalm, and the 10. and 11. verses thereof, where the
Prophet David says: The Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen, and
brings to naught the devices of the people. The counsel of the Lord shall
stand for ever, and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages. The third
and last is the 12. chapter of the Revelations, and the 7. and 8 verses
thereof, where John says: And there was a battle in heaven, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. But
they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. Thus you
see that nothing can stand against the Lord, but all does come to naught that
is raised up against him.

And the reason thereof is this, partly because he is wiser then all, seeing
which way to prevent his enemies, and to bring his own purpose to pass; and
partly because he is stronger then all, being able to do whatsoever he will,
both in heaven and earth, according to Paul's words in 1. Cor. 1.25. when he
says: For the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God
is stronger then men.

The use of this doctrine is manifold,

The second is, to pull us back from all such matters as do tend any manner
of way against the Lord. For let us assure our own souls, that if we attempt
any such thing, we shall have no good success therein, but our endeavors
shall be brought to naught. I beseech you remember what Gamaliel said, and
follow his counsel which he gave unto the Jews when they strove against the
Apostles, and went about to hinder all preaching in the name of Christ. Men of
Israel (says he) take heed to your selves, what you intend to do, touching
these men: refrain your selves from them, and let them alone. For if this
counsel, or this work, be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of
God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be found even sighters against God, as it
is in Acts 5, 35, etc.

But some may say: the Lord himself. Ans. Let no man be deceived. For we do
all of us war against him many ways, and as in general, when we do
violate and break his statutes, refusing to do that which he has commanded
us for to do: so in particular we do it four manner of ways, The one is when
we oppose our selves against the Magistrates of the common wealth, whom he
has set over us for to rule and govern us For to resist them is to resist God
himself, as Paul does show in Romans 13.1.2. Another is when we do oppose our
selves against the Ministers of the Church, whom he has raised up to teach and
instruct us. For to resist them is to resist God himself, as Christ has
taught us in Luke 10.16. The third is when we do oppose our selves against the
word of God, and such heavenly ordinances of his as he has bestowed upon men
for his own worship, and the salvation of man's soul. For to resist them is to
resist God himself, as Gamaliel does insinuate in the place of the Acts.
before quoted. The fourth and last is, when we do oppose our selves against
the children of God, and the members of lesus Christ. For to resist them is to
resist God himself, as Zecharie does declare, in Zech. 2.8. All these ways do
men in every place almost lift up themselves against the Lord: but beware we
that we join not with them therein; but let us carry our selves holy and
reverently in all these respects, as we ought to do: otherwise we shall be
crossed in our purposes, and pay most dearly for it at the last.

The third and last is to comfort us, who have such a strong and wise God on
our side, that nothing can prevail against him. It is a great comfort unto a
man to serve such a master as will always take his part, and see him wronged
by no man: but then especially is his heart exhilerated with much joy and
alacrity, when he does understand that none is able to make his part good with
his master, but he does always prevail against all. What a consolation then
and joy of spirit ought it to be unto us, seeing our master and Lord whom we
serve, is not only omnipote^t in himself, being stronger then all, but also so
loving to us, that he does always take our part, and so assist us from time
to time, that we shall still overcome our foes, and not be vanquished by them?
Oh let us ponder often on this point. For it will be a good cordial medicine
unto us in all diseases whatsoever, and it will revive us like Aqua vitae or
rosa Solis when we are ready to faint or sink.

Hitherto you have heard a description of the Lord in regard of that which his
enemies do to him. Now you must mark how he is described in respect of that
which he will do to them. And that is also two manner of ways, the one is by
his works, the other is by his words: by his works in the first verse, and by
his words in the fixth verse. His works contain his anger against them, and
the effects thereof, which are fearful plagues tormenting them. The speech is
allegorical and drawn from man, as was touched before: for the Prophet does
speak of God according to man, and as he is well able to conceive of him: not
that there is any passion of choler or anger in God, as there is in man (for he
is free from all passions whatsoever;) but the meaning is, that God was much
offended with them for their rebellion, and so are displeased with them for it.
And whereas man is angry and wrathful, he will strike and lay on, and take
revenge upon such as do offend him: so the Lord would be revenged upon them,
and plague them according to their deserts, as being highly offended with them
for their evil ways and rebellion against him. Then shall he speak unto
them in his wrath (says the Prophet) and vex them in his soar displeasure.
That is, over and besides his former deriding of them, or laughing at them, he
shall be exceeding much offended with them, and in his soar displeasure against
them he shall confound them, and and bring such judgments upon them, that they
shall be vexed with the cruel pain and remediless grief thereof. So then
here is set down how the Lord takes the matter at his enemies hands, and how
they shall speed for the same; though he does laugh, yet he is angry, and much
offended with them for it; and though they be many and great ones, yet they
shall not escape unpunished, but be plagued according to their wretched ways.
For Gods speaking here unto them is not by word of mouth, but by stroke of
hand. Sometimes he speaks by word of mouth unto men, as he did heretofore by
his Prophets and Apostles, and as he does still unto us by the holy
Scriptures, and the faithful expositors thereof. Otherwhiles again he speaks
to men by the strokes of his hand, as ever he has done, and daily does, when
he does punish them for their sins, and lay some judgments upon them for
their iniquities. Of this manner of speaking does Elihu make mention in Job,
cap. 33. verse. 14. and so forward, where he does show, that God does not only
speak to men by dreams and visions of the night, pulling them as it were by
the ears, and leaving even in their minds an impression of those great
punishments which hang over their heads, to this end, that he might warn and
teach them, to lay aside those things which they were intended to do, and that
he might for bid them to continue in their wicked enterprises: but also when
man will not take heed by these warnings, he goes on the second time to speak
unto him by his strokes and judgments, in laying some grievous sickness
upon his body, whereby he is brought as it were to deaths door, being daily
tormented with grievous pain, even as he lies on his bed, and being so
changed through leanness, and the rage of his disease, that he is rather like
to them that lie in the grave, then to any of the living.

Now after this manner is the word here to be taken, as the circumstance of the
place does show, and as the words following do declare. And the word also here
used in the Hebrew tongue, called Iedabber, coming of the root Dabar, does
signify as well to destroy (as some judge) as to speak. So that a man may
translate it (if he will) after this sort: Then shall he destroy them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. But howsoever, you see the sense
and meaning is all one, and that the Prophet does intend no other thing hereby,
but to show, that they shall be overthrown, and come to some fearful ends,
that did so rise up against the Lord and his Anointed, as you heard in the
beginning of this Psalm. And that this also did fall out accordingly, and in
the same manner, as the text does here speak, was at large delivered unto you
in my first lecture upon this Psalm, when I did run over the whole body
thereof at once together: and therefore I will not now stand upon it again,
but refer you only unto that which was then spoken, hoping that you have it
in good remembrance still to your sweet comfort and holy instruction.

The doctrine of the place at this time to be considered, is this, be
confounded by the breath of the Almighty for their rebellion against him, even
as the enemies of David and Christ here were for their resisting of him. Surely
as they came to fearful ends; so shall those that rise up from time to time
against Gods children, they, even they also, shall come to fearful ends. The
Lord that is at their right hand, shall wound Kings in the day of his wrath, he
shall be judge among the heathen, he shall fill and with dead bodies, and smite
the head over great countries, as it is in Psalm. 110.5.6. You know what God
does says to Edom. For thy cruelty (says he) against thy brother Jacob, shame
shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever. Obadiah verse. 10. You
know what God does say of Moah, and of the children of Ammon. I have heard
(says he) the reproach of Moab, and therebukes of the children of Ammon,
whereby they vpbraided my people, and magnified themselves against their
borders. Therefore as I live, says the Lord God of hoasts, the God of Israel,
Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorah: even the
breding of nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation; the residue of
my folk shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached, and
magnified themselves against the Lord of hoasts people, in Zeph. 2.8.9.10. You
know what God does say to Abraham. I will also (says he) bless them that
bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, in Genesis 12.3. And what he says to
his whole people of Israel. Behold (says he) I will bruise all that afflict
thee, so that none shall be spared, in Zeph. 3.19. Lastly you know (to
pretermit other places) what God does to that huge army of Gog and Magog, that
compasses the Saints and holy city about, spoken of in Revel. 20.9. But fire
(says the text there) came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. To
this we might add many examples, if need did so require: as that of Egypt,
who were plagued with ten several plagues from heaven, one coming after
another, and in the end were drowned (the most of them) in the red sea, for
setting themselves against the Lords people the children of Israel. As that of
Haman, who lost all his dignity, and the great honor which he had, and in the
end was hanged upon a gallows, for seeking the overthrow of Mordecay, and
those of the Jews as did belong to the Lord. As lastly that (with diverse
others) of the whole nation of the Jews themselves, who were sundry times
plagued by God from heaven, and by men from the earth, and in the end came to
the woefullest calamity, as ever pen did put to paper, for killing the
Prophets from time to time, and for murdering Christ, and such as did
appertain unto him. So that whereas they cried out and said: His blood be upon
us and our children, as it is in Math. 27.25. his blood indeed fell upon them;
for they were so punished for it, that they were murdered most of them at the
destruction of Jerusalem, their blood running about the streets like a river of
water; and they are now to this day in great contempt amongst all nations; as
many thousands of them also do lie boiling in hell, and there shall remain in
their torments for it, for evermore. O misery of all miseries! Great was their
calamity, when their city was besieged, at what time they were driven to eat
the leather of their shoes, the leather of their girdles, the leather of their
bucklers, and targets, the dung of their stables, and in the end their very
children. Woeful was their case, when they began to issue out, compelled with
famine, when they were still taken and crucified upon crosses, and gibbets set
up before the walls, that they which were within might see them, and give over,
but yet they would not: five hundred a day were thus hanged up, till there were
neither trees to be gotten, nor any more space left to set them in. Fearful
was their estate, when certain of them, getting meat for compassion sake in
the camp of the enimes, were yet so persecuted with the anger of God, that
when they hoped their lives were in some safety, sudde^ly in the night by the
bloody soldiers (imagining that sure they had Gold and Jewels within them,
which they had swallowed to convey them for their use) were miserably flaine,
and slit up, their bowels taked in for that which happily was not there, to the
number of two thousand in one night. Pitiful was their condition, when there
was a desire to know the number of dead carcasses carried out of the city, for
want of burial, to be thrown into the ditches, as dung upon the earth; but
the number was numberless, and no way to know it certainly, but out of one
gate the keeper had noted to be carried out an hundred and fifty thousand dead
bodies. Who can speak or hear of these matters, almost with dry eyes? But yet
this is not the worst, for the damnation of their souls and bodies in hell
does go far beyond it, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore.
Alas, alas, our hearts may break out into drops of blood, to think upon that
their misery. For first, their pain there is intolerable, far worse then
the burning of any fire with us, let it be a thousand times hotter then it is.
Secondly it is eternal, and everlasting, never to have any end, like that fire
which does always burn, and can never be quenched. And thirdly it is
continual without any intermission or ease coming betwixt it, they lying in
torments every day, and every night, and not having so much as one minute of an
hour in a million of years to rest in. Thus does God speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

The reason hereof is this, David does tell us in the 5. and 11. Psalms, that
the foolish shall not stand in the Lords sight, nor him that speaks lies, but
shall be destroyed; and that upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and
brimstone, and stormy tempest, this is the portion of their cup: so he does
teach us withal, what is the cause thereof, in the same places, namely this,
because he is not a God that loves wickedness nor iniquity, neither shall
evil dwell with him; but he is one that loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity, and such as work the same. The places above quoted do touch this
matter, and show the particular sin, for which these judgments come. But yet
a man may ask and say: Why is God so much moved for the wrongs that are
offered to his children: Wherefore does the sin committed against them, so
stir him to wrath, and indignation against the offenders therein? Cannot he
be quiet whilst he himself is not touched? and so lightly pass over the
matter? No, no, he cannot in any sort. For if you touch them once, you touch
him. He that touches you (says Zechariah to Gods children, in Zech. 2.8.
touches the apple of his eye. I trow, if a man take in your eyes, you will set
him further, if you can, and teach him what it is to meddle with that tender
member, that is so dear unto you. So does the Lord deal with these: because
his children are dear and precious unto him, he cannot see them wronged, but
must needs take their parts, and be revenged upon their adversaries for such
abuses as they do offer unto them. Because thou wast precious in my sight
(says the Lord to Israel) and thou wast honorable, and I loved theee,
therefore will I give man for thee, and people for thy sake, as it is in Esaias
43.4. And as though this were not enough, the Prophet Nahum does tell us, That
he is jealous over his people, that he reserueth wrath for his enemies, that he
will take vengeance on his adversaries, and make an utter destruction of them,
coming like a fire unto them, as unto thorns folden one in another, and as
unto drunkards in their drunkenness: so that they shall be devoured as stubble
fully dried. Nahum 1.2.9.10. This is the cause and reason, wherefore the Lord
does so take on; in regard whereof Christ said unto Paul, when he did molest
and trouble such as did believe in him, Saul, Saul, Why do thou persecute me?
as it is in Acts 9.4. taking that to be done to himself, which was done to
them.

Wherefore out of this place we may learn, What do you imagine (says Nahum
the Prophet) against the Lord? he will make an utter destruction, affliction
shall not rise up the second time. Chap. 1.9. Because the Lord will destroy
those that imagine evil against his people, therefore the Prophet does think
it to be mere foolishness and madness to attempt any thing against them, and
good wisdom to be quiet, and to let them alone. One reason we had before for
this, which is, our not prevailing against the^; but this is more strong and
forcible then that. For all men by nature do desire most their ease and safety,
but here is a thing which will bring woe and destruction unto us: it will take
away our ease and safety clean, and plunge us into a sea of miseries, vexing
our souls whiles we are here, and tormenting both body, and soul, when we are
gone from hence. And therefore, I beseech you (brethren) in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved us, and given his life for our sakes, let
there be none amongst us which do wish evil unto Zion, but let us love all
those which do fear the Lord: if no other thing can move us to it, yet let
Gods judgments which otherwise will fall upon us, bring us unto it. O
remember, it is no sporting matter, to make a jest and sport of Gods child:
neither is it a small matter to offer wrongs and injuries unto him, but thus to
do is an heinous offense, and a very dangerous matter to al those that do it.
If Meroz must be cursed, and all the inhabitants thereof, because they came not
forth to help Gods people against their enemies (as indeed they must be
cursed, according to the words of the Angel in Judges, Chap. 5. verse. 23:) And
if they must depart from Christ, and be cast into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his Angels, who do not feed the hungry, cloth the naked,
visit the sick, and do good to those that are his Disciples and do believe in
him, (as they must indeed depart from him, and go to that fearful place, as
we may see by Matthew, Chapter 25. verse 41, etc.) How much more shall they be
cursed, that do resist the people of God? and how much more shall they depart
from Christ, and be cast into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
Angels, who do rob the faithful Disciples of Christ, and offer violence and
wrong unto them? Oh think on this, ye that forget God, lest he come and tear
you in pieces, before you be aware, and there be none to help you.

But to proceed on, here in the second place we may learn to be quiet and
patient, when we are molested and troubled by the wicked; we need not then to
fret and chafe as many are wont to do, but to be mild, as Christ was, and to
commit all unto God, as he did; according to Peter's words in his first Epistle,
the 2, chapter and 23. verse thereof, with some others following; where he does
labor to draw men to the imitation of our Savior in his suffering, that as
he, when he was reviled, reviled not again, and when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed all to him, that judges righteously: so should
they do, bearing every thing patiently, and referring it unto him that judges
justly without any acceptance of persons. For seeing that God will revenge our
quarrels, and plague our enemies to the uttermost, we our selves may be silent
and dumb, and neither move hand or tongue against them. Wherefore let us do
as Paul does advise us for to do, in Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved (says he)
avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for it is written, vengeance
is mine: and I will repay, says the Lord. If any do abuse us, deride us, or
offer any wrong and injury unto us, let us not storm and fret thereat, but let
us possess our souls with patience, remembering with our selves always, that
we have a sweet and gracious God in heaven, who does behold what is done unto
us, and who will also in due time be avenged upon our adversaries for it, when
they shall mourn and lament, and we on the contrary side shall laugh and
rejoice. That is a most comfortable saying which is in the 7 Chapter of the
Prophecy of Micha, in the eigth, ninth, and tenth verses, when he says,
Rejoice not against me, o mine enemy; though I fall, I shall arise, etc. I
pray, read the place at your leisure, and peruse it well.

And so I come unto the last use, which we are to make of this place, and that
is, a duty which is to be performed of us. For it does become us upon this to
rejoice and to break out into praises to extol the Lord, who does so fight
our battles, and discomfite the enemy before us, in such a fearful manner,
that he is wholly overthrown, and can have no rest, but lies in continual
grief, and vexation of mind. O Judah (says the Prophet Nahum, Chapter 1.15.)
keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows, for the wicked shall no more
pass through thee, he is utterly cut off. And Zephany says: Rejoice o
daughter Zion, be ye joyful o Israel, be glad and rejoice with all thy heart,
o daughter Jerusalem. The Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out
thine enemy, the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou
shall see no more evil. Both which places (you see) do declare, that we must
rejoice, and triumph in our songs of praise unto the Lord, when he does
overcome our enemies, and beat them down before us: And hereof we have many
worthy examples in the holy Scriptures, I will touch only a few of them. Moses
and those which came out of Egypt with him did the same, when the Lord had
destroyed their enemies the Egyptians, and had drowned the^ all in the red
sea, as we may see at large in Exodus 15.1. etc. Deborah and those which were
with her and on her side, did the same, when the Lord had overthrown their
adversaries the Canaanites, and had destroyed Sisera their chief captain, and
all his chariots, and all his host with the edge of the sword, as it is in
Judges 5.1. etc. The good and holy women who lived in the days of Saul and
David, did the same, when the Lord had confounded the Philistines their foes,
and had brought an horrible slaughter upon them, and upon their chief
champion, that great and blasphemous Goliath, that defied the host of Israel,
and railed upon the God thereof, as it is evident in 1. Sam. 18.6.7. Finally,
Hester and Mordecay with their people, and such of the Jews as lived in their
times, did the same, when the Lord had strengthened them against their
opposites, and had brought an utter ruin unto their chief adversary Haman
the cursed Amalekite, as appears in Ester 9.17. etc. So, even so, beloved,
let us deal from time to time, whenever the Lord does give us a victory over
our adversaries, and bring just and deserved plagues upon them, let us bless
his holy name for the same, and rejoice greatly before him in that behalf. And
so far of Gods works. Now let us come to his words.

I have set my King upon Zion mine holy mountain. These are not the words of
the Prophet, but of God himself sitting in judgment, and taking revenge upon
his adversaries, that rebel against him and his anointed. Not that God shall
when he does strike them, utter these words in plain terms, and sound of
voice unto the^, as we do utter words, when we beat such as have offended us;
but the meaning is, that they shall by their plagues and sore judgments
executed upon them, feel and perceive this to be so, as plainly and as
evidently, as if they heard the Lord speaking from heaven unto the^ by word of
mouth. His destroying and confou^ding of them shall cry like a shril voice in
their ears, that it was he himself and no created wight, even he himself
that is the God of Gods, and the Lord of hoasts, that did set up David to be
King of Israel, and Christ his Son to be King of his Church, whom they had so
rebelliously resisted, and labored to have displaced out of their thrones.
Here is a great Emphasis, and it is as much as if he had said: What? shall I set
up a King? and will you, o ye rebels go about to put him down? How dare you do
this? What? shall I place one over my people, and make him to be their Lord and
chief governor, and will you, ye traitors, refuse to yield obedience unto him,
and join hand and head together to overthrow him, and to remove him out of his
kingdom? O impiety never heard of! O wickedness most intolerable! Know you,
know you, that for this cause I cannot bear with you, but I must needs speak
to you in my wrath, and vex you in my sore displeasure, as now I do.

By Zion here, his holy mountain, the kingdom of Israel is understood, if we
refer it unto David; but if we refer it unto Christ, the Church is meant
thereby. Zion was the city of David, and the place where his Court was usually
held and kept, as it is in 2. Sam. 7.7. But here it is put figuratively for the
whole kingdom of Israel, whereof that was a chief and principal part. And it
is termed withal, the holy mountain of God, because it stood on high upon a
mountain or hill, where the Lord did manifest his holiness unto his people,
as by the presence of his arc which was there, so also by the exercises of
pure religion which were held in the Tabernacle and Temple, that were built in
that place, and feared upon that mountain or hill. Thus literally this place
is to be referred unto David, and it is true of him, that God did set him up as
King over this kingdom of Israel, as we may see in 1. Sam. 16.12, 13. But
sacramentally, and after a spiritual manner these thing are to be referred unto
Christ and his Church. For Zion also was a type thereof, as we may see in Esaias
2.3. and in Heb. 12.22. And Christ we know, was chosen of his Father to be the
head and King thereof, as anon, by Gods grace, shall more fully appear. And
as the earthly Zion was termed the mountain of Gods holiness, so may this
heavenly. Zion well bear that appellation or name. For I. it is most like unto
a mountain: then 2. the Lord does manifest his holiness more there then in
any other place. It is most like a mountain in 3. respects. First, for the
exaltation and supereminencie of it: for as a mountain is an high place above
other places, so the Church of God is exalted above other congregations; and
that for Gods delight in it, and most excellent blessings upon it, which are
either present, or to come. Secondly, for the manifestation and aptness of it:
for as a mountain is in open sight and view of all men: so the Church of God
stands in the eie-sight of all persons, and every man's eye is bent to mark
diligently what they do, as his ear is open to listen to that which they
speak. Thirdly, for the strength and stablenesse of it: for as a mountain is
a strong thing and immovable: so the Church of God is so strong and
invincible, that all the powers of the world, and of hell below cannot
overthrow it, but it shall remain firm and stable (notwithstanding the same)
for evermore. I beseech you by the way, make use of all these things. By the
first, look upon your honor and great aduancements, whereunto you are exalted
above all others. As Solomon says in the Proverbs 31, 29: Many daughters have
done virtuously: but thou surmountest them all: so you may say, Many
congregations in the world are exalted on high; but we (the true Church) are
lifted up above them all. By the second, be moved to have an holy care of your
lives, that you may walk circu^spectly at all times in the ways of godliness,
and that your light may so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. And by the third and last,
be secretly comforted, and grow to a full resolution, that nothing shall be
able to separate you from the love of your God, but that you shall remain
firm and stable in his favor for evermore.

Now for the other point, as the Church is like to a mountain, so it is holy,
as the mountain Zion was. First, for the Lords being in it, who is holiness
it self: for though he be in all the world, yet he is more especially in his
Church then in any other place besides, according to that in Psalm. 68.16. and
48.1.2. Secondly, for the holy exercises of religion, and the goodly works of
Gods worship which are found therein: for there is prayer, singing of Psalms,
reading and preaching of the word, receiving of the Sacraments, and the like;
all which are works of holiness and purity. Lastly, for the sanctification of
men and women, which are therein: for they are not profane and licentious, as
in other places, but they are sanctified and made holy by the blood of Christ,
and the working of the Spirit. Our of these things also, gather some short
notes as we go along. Let the first of the^ make you rejoice and be glad, that
you have so good a God, that though he be full of majesty and glory, yet he is
content to come home to your houses, and to dwell in the chambers of your
souls, and there to quiet himself in your love and to rejoice over you with
joy, as Zephany does speak in Zeph. 3.17. As Elizabeth said, when the virgin
Mary came to her: Whence comes this to me, that the mother of my Lord should
come to me? Luke. 1.43. so may we say at the Lords coming to us: What a favor
and dignity is this, that the Lord of heaven and earth should thus come to us?
Let the second of them stir you up to frequent holy exercises, and to throng
to the house of prayer, and to such places where the Lord is rightly
worshipped. As the nations say in Mich. 4.2. Come, and let us go up to the
mou^tain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob: so let us say,
Come, and let us go to the Church and congregation of God, to prayer, to the
preaching of the word, and to other holy exercises of pure and holy religion.
Let the third and last of them admonish you of that purity and holiness which
ought to be in you, that so you may never give rest unto your eyes until you
see your selves washed from your sins by the blood of Christ, and made holy in
some part by the sanctification of Gods spirit, whereby you may be able to go
boldly unto the throne of grace to receive mercy, and to find grace to help in
time of need. That as Paul did say of the Corinthians when they were changed
from bad to good: And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of God, as it is in 1. Cor. 6.11. so may you say of your selves: And
such were we our selves once, even bad and most wicked persons; but blessed be
God we are now changed, and made better: our sins are washed away by the
blood of Christ, and the spirit of God has begun to renew us in some good part.

Leaving these things for the meaning of the words, and some short annotations
upon the same, let us now come to the maine doctrine of the place, and in few
words it is nothing else but this, John, Chapter 6. verse 27. Where he does
endeavor to draw men from a greedy hunting after the food of the body, unto a
careful seeking for the food of their souls: saying, Labor not for the
meat which perishes, but for the meat that endures unto everlasting life,
which the Son of man shall give you, for him has God the Father sealed. He
has chosen him for this purpose, and set his mark and seal upon him, as
designing him over this work and business, which is to be performed alone by
him, and none else. And this also he does prove in the fourth chapter of the
Gospel according to Saint Luke, by a testimony out of Esaias, chap. 61.1. etc.
where the calling of the Messiah is excellently and at large set out unto us.
But the Apostle Saint Paul (not to stand upon other places) does make this
point most clear and evident unto all persons, in the first chapter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians, beginning at the twentieth verse thereof and so
forward, and in the second chapter of his Epistle to the Philippians in the
ninth verse thereof, with others following. For in both these places you shall
find, that as Christ is exalted above all the creatures in the world, and made
the supreme head of the Church, both warring in earth, and triumphing in
heaven; so he was raised up hereunto by God his Father, he making him thus the
universal governor of all the world. So that look what the Author to the
Hebrews said of Christ in regard of his Priesthood, that he took not to
himself that honor to be made the high Priest, but he that said unto him,
Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee, gave it him. Heb. 5.5. So may we say
here of him in regard of his kingdom, that he took not this honor to
himself, to be made the supreme King of the Church, but God that sits in
the heavens, and has his enemies in derision, gave it unto him: but somewhat
more of this hereafter when we come unto the 8. verse of this Psalm.

John saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, but only the
Lion which is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, as it is in Reu. 5.1.
etc. So no creature was found fit for this office, whether in the heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, save Jesus Christ our sweet Savior, and the blessed
Son of God; and therefore God his Father did make choice of him before all
others. But why was he fittest for this office, may you further say? For two
causes, the one is in regard of his Person; the other of his qualities
belonging unto his Person. For his Person, because he is not only man, as many
others are, but also God, as none else besides him is, and thereby is made able
to weald such a great and mighty kingdom as he has. Otherwise it is
impossible that he should rule his people according to his will, and subdue his
enemies, to make them his footstool, considering that they are Principallities
and powers, and the greatest Potentates of this world. For what man or Angel
is able to overcome all the devils in hell rushing upon him at once together?
and to withstand the whole army of mankind, assaulting him together with them,
with their whole power and force? Surely none: he must be a God that must do
it. And therefore was Christ chosen for this purpose, who is a God, as well as
man, for his qualities belonging unto his Person, because he is endued with
most singular gifts and graces fit for government. Iethro in his counsel to
Moses, required but four things in a Governor, namely, courage, the fear of
God, true dealing, and the hating of covetousness, as we may see in Exodus 1 S
21. But here in Christ (the chief governor of all) we shall find as many
more; for besides these four, you shall have in him four more, namely,
wisdom, diligence, bounty, and love. So that in number there are eight. The
first is courage, for he fears no man, as being the Lord of Lords, and the God
of Gods, according to his name, which is written on his garment and thighs, in
Reu. 19.16. The second is the fear of God, for he reverenced his Father, and
was obedient unto him, even unto the very death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. The
third is justice or true dealing, for the Scepter of his kingdom, is a Scepter
of righteousness, and he himself is one loving righteousness, and hating
iniquity, Heb. 8.1.9. The fourth is, hating covetousness, for he never
received any bribes or recompense for all the cures he did, but he became
poor, that he might make us rich. 2. Cor. 8.9. The fifth is wisdom, for in him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2.3. The sixth is
diligence, for he was so painful, that he traveled from place to place to
do good, and left his own food to go about his Fathers business, Ioh. 4.34
And he is brought in by John in the Revelations, Chapter 1.13 standing in the
midst of the seven Candlestickes (which are the seven Churches) and there
busily occupied in governing them, as a man is, when his garment is about him,
and trust up with some girdle, that it may not trouble or hinder him in the
execution of his business. The seventh is, bountifulness or liberality, for
he does not impouerish his subjects, by exacting of them grievous subsidies and
taxes, but he does greatly enrich them, by bestowing large gifts and benefits
upon them. Ephe. 4.7.8. etc. The last is, love or mercy, for he does bear that
kind affection toward his people, that all their miseries do touch him, Heb.
4.15. and for to do the^ good he was content to die for them, Ephe. 5.2.25.
Where all these things do concur and meet together, there is a party well
qualified for government. A man may be courageous, yet not fearing God; if
fearing God, yet not dealing truly; if dealing truly, yet not hating
covetousness; if hating covetousness, yet not wise; if wise, yet not
diligent; if diligent, yet not bountiful; if bountiful, yet not loving; if
loving, yet not courageous. But where shall all these be found together? Surely
in none, but in Christ Jesus: for in him they are in the highest degree of
perfection, and therefore did the Lord make choice of him before all others to
go in and out before his people, and to be the Head or governor of his Church.

Here we must take heed of some abuses, Philippians. True it is, that he is
inferior to his Father in respect of his humane nature, and as he is man; but
not otherwise as he is God, and of the same substance or being, which he has
together with the Father from all eternity. Again, whereas he is made King,
this is done in respect of both his natures together, as he is God-man, and
Man-God; and not simply in respect of one of them alone; for so to affirm of
either of them, were absurd, if not blasphemous.

But leaving the abuses, the true uses are these. First, hereby we may learn
to reverence Christ the more, because he is established in his throne by his
Father, For if David were pricked in heart only for cutting of Saul's garment,
who was a wicked man, and his deadly enemy too, because he was the Lords
anointed; with what reverence and care should we carry our selves toward
Christ Jesus our Savior, who is holiness and righteousness it self, and one
that loves us well? seeing the Lord has anointed him, and made him to be our
King. But alas, our carriage is such toward him, as if he had usurped this
place unto himself by tyranny, or were set up in his throne by some created
authority: but let us look to ourselves, and amend this our fault.

In the second place here we may learn, that seeing God has set up his Son
in his kingdom, he will still defend him and aid him in the same, as also
bring fearful judgments upon all such as shall go about to resist him. And
this is the chiefest end wherefore this sentence is here alleged, and
therefore let all men take heed what they do; and let all those know also who
are in lawful authority, that so long as they carry themselves worthy of their
places, the Lord will always stand about them for their defense and
protection, as here he did about his Son Christ, and blessed David, the King.

Lastly, here we may learn by the example of Christ, that it is not good to
run into a calling, but to stay until the Lord does place us in the same, A
great complaint is made in Jeremy by the Lord against men in this respect, that
they did run before that he did send them, as we may see at large in the 23.
chapter of Jeremy. But beware we that we do not the like. For shall Christ
that had the Spirit of God without all measure, stay and wait his Fathers
leisure? and shall we mortal and sinful creatures, who have not the Spirit
almost in any measure, yet run and go before our commission is drawn out
and sealed by the Almighty? More things might be spoken upon these matters, but
let these short observations minister an occasion unto you, to contemplate more
at large upon these points.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. VER. 7.8. and 9. I will declare the decree: that is, the Lord has
said unto me, Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee.

Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession.

Thou shall crush them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.


IN the former verses mention was made of God the Father, whose majesty and
power was excellently set out, for the confounding of such wicked adversaries,
as did rise up against him. But now these verses do entreat of God the Son,
who is also most lively described in the same, by a certain invincible power
and majesty, as being one sufficient to overthrow all such resistance as is
made against him. And that his enemies might be daunted the more, as his
friends receive the greater joy and consolation, he comes in himself speaking
and uttering his voice unto them, declaring plainly amongst them all, what is
the very decree and ordinance of God his Father concerning him and his
kingdom; the sum and substance whereof he tells them is this: The Lord, the
great God of heaven, who has created all things, and who does continually
preserve the same, he, even he, said to me, Thou art my son, yea my natural
and only son, most dear and precious unto me. Thy works, which thou do
continually, in working strange and admirable miracles do show, that I have
begotten thee: but chiefly that day is an argument thereof unto all the world,
wherein thou did arise from the grave, and return again from death unto
life. And because thou art so near unto me, and one on whom I have set my
whole delight and pleasure, ask of me, what thou will, and thou shall have it,
I will not say, to the half of my kingdom, but to all my kingdom: if thou
shall ask the whole, I will bestow it upon thee; yea I will give thee all
power both in heaven and in earth, and thou shall reign, not in a small
compass alone, but in a most spacious and large circuit, even throughout all
the world from the one end thereof unto the other. And whereas there are many
rebels and traitors, that do daily rise up against thee, thou shall not take
pity and compassion upon them to forgive them, but thou shall punish them
thoroughly according to their deserts; with thy scepter, or mace of iron,
wherewith thou art armed, thou shall destroy them. And herein deal thou with
them, as the potter does with his vessel; as he does dash that all to pieces,
when it is once broken, and serviceable for no use; so do thou so confound
them, that they may lie still in their miseries, and never have any hope to
recover themselves again, or to repair such ruinous breaches as thou do
bring upon them. Thus runs the paraphrase of this place. Wherein you have
nothing else to remember in sum,

The person that does publish the description, is Christ himself, expressed in
these words, I will declare the decree, or rather, as it is in the Hebrew text,
I will speak or declure according to the decree and ordinance, El hhok. There
are certain decrees and ordinances established by God touching the person of
Christ and his government: Now according to these will Christ speak, and not
otherwise. You must not here conceive that some other person is brought in
speaking, but that it is Christ himself, and none else but he. True it is,
that David did utter them as he was a type and figure of Christ, but Christ
himself as he was the body and truth, and so the words are properly and in
truth it self to be referred unto him. Behold, he takes upon him (as it were)
the part of a faithful Prophet, to make known his Fathers will unto mankind,
in respect of himself, and his ways. I beseech you, mark diligently how he
does it. It is not according to his own fancy (as we often speak,) but it is
according to his Fathers own decree and appointment, without all deceit or
fraudulent dealing whatsoever; there is no adding, nor detracting, no chopping
or changing found in him, but all things are faithfully delivered according to
the truth it self. A worthy thing to be thought often on, and evermore to be
had in good remembrance by all sorts of persons, but chiefly by the Ministers
of the Word, who ought to be faithful in their offices, as Christ was in his;
and not to make merchandise of the word of God, but as of sincerity, and as of
God in the sight of God, to speak in Christ Jesus; as the Apostle Saint Paul
does speak in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, the second chapter and
the last verse thereof. At all times should men look most carefully to this:
but much more now in these corrupt and rotten days of ours, wherein the Lords
ordinances are beazelled, and his most sacred Oracles turned up and down, like
a nose made of wax, as pleases the wicked humor of many a sinful man: but
beware we, beware we of such cursed and satanicall dealing. If we speak at any
time, let us speak with all reverence, as does become them, who utter the
words of a mighty God, and according to the truth it self, and not otherwise.
So shall health be unto our navel, and marrow unto our bones, when others are
perplexed with intolerable woe and pain. I might have made a long discourse
of this matter, as being a very fit subject to be stood upon in our licentious
times; but thus shortly I pass it over, as intending only to stand most upon
those points, which are most intended by the Spirit of God himself, and not to
do, as many are wont to do, upon every small occasion, to wander abroad from my
text in hand.

Two questions here may be moved; the one is, whether Christ did thus publish
the decree and appointment of his Father, touching himself, and his kingdom,
as here he does say, he would do. The other is, for what causes he would do the
same, and for what end and purpose. Touching the former of these two, we find
in the story of the Evangelists, that he did do it, according to the tenor of
the text here in hand. For they do show, how he did consesse and declare
abroad, that he was the Son of God, that all judgment was committed unto him
by his Father, that he was a king, that all power was given unto him in heaven
and earth, that he was the Messiah or Anointed, whereof Esaias did speak in the
61. chapter of his Prophecy, and the beginning thereof: that he was the bread
that came down from heaven, and the party whom his Father had sealed, for the
bringing of everlasting life unto mankind. These and the like things do they
report of him, as you may see by John, the 5.6. and 18. chapters thereof. By
Luke the 4. the 22. and 23. chapters: and by Math: 16.21.26. and 27. chapters
thereof. Read these places (I pray) at your ley sure, and acknowledge the
truth of this point Now for the other, Christ might do it for many causes.
First, that he might bring men into the greater and more willing subjection
unto him, according to the speech of the householder in Math. 21.37. But last of
all he sent unto them his own Son, saying: They will reverence my Son.
Secondly, that he might leave men without all excuse, and make them unable to
answer for themselves at the day of judgment, if they did not obey him, and do
according to his commandments: according to his own saying in John, chapter
15. and verse 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have
had sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin. Lastly, that he might
comfort and strengthen them that did rely upon him, against the rage and surie
of the world, as also against the malice and power of Satan himself,
according to that which is in John, chapter 16. verse 33. These things have I
spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye shall have
affliction, but be of a good comfort, I have overcome the world.

Having thus in few words answered these questions, which tend to the clearing
of the text, and the confirmation of that truth, which is included therein; let
us now come to the maine doctrine of the place. And that in few words stands
thus, namely, that it is the part and duty of men in authority, to stand upon
such gifts and callings as God has bestowed upon them, according unto the
example of Christ here. For as he did the same, so must we do it, by virtue of
his commandment in Math. 11.29. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me for I am
meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. So did
Moses, when he came unto the children of Israel, to deliver them out of their
bondage, and stood before Pharaoh the King of Egypt to crave leave for a free
passage for them. For he did not only make it known unto them all, how God
had called him to this work and business by word of mouth alone, declaring
what matters had passed betwixt him and God; but also by works and deeds,
doing strange and admirable miracles daily in their sight, as we may see at
large in Exodus from the latter end of the fourth chapter thereof, and so
forward for many chapters together. So did David, when Michall his wife did
mock him, for dancing in a linen Ephod before the Ark of the Lord. It was
(says he in 2. Sam. 6.21. before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy
father (for she was Saul's daughter) and all his house, and commanded me to be
ruler over the people of the Lord, even over Israel, and therefore will I play
before the Lord. So did Amos, when Amasiah the Priest of Bethell went about to
persuade him to fly away out of the land of Israel unto the land of Judah, and
there to eat his bread, and to prophecy, but not to prophecy any more at
Bethell, where was the kings chapel, and the kings court. Then answered Amos
and said to Amasia, I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son, but I was
a heardman, and a gatherer of wild figs; and the Lord took me, as I followed
the flock, and the Lord said unto me, God, prophecy unto my people Israel,
etc. Wherein you see he does stand stoutly upon his calling, and does press it
well to stop such a caytifes mouth, as that Amaziah was. This is in the 7.
chapter of Amos his Prophecy, and the 12. verse thereof, with some others
following. So in a word did all the Prophets from time to time, as is apparent
in their prophesies.

This was a common phrase or style with them: The burden of the Lord, or, Thus
says the Lord of hoasts: or, The word of the Lord came to me. As Jeremy says:
The words of the Lord that came to Jeremy the Prophet, in Jeremy 47.1. As Hosea
says, The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri, Hos. 1.1.
As Joel says, The word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel. Io.
1.1. As Jonah says, The word of the Lord came also to Jonah the son of
Amittai, Jonah 1.1. And as Micha says (to omit the rest) The word of the Lord,
that came to Micha the Morashite. But in the new Testament Paul is very
frequent in this matter: he does press his calling oftentimes, and stands
very stoutly upon the same, to the defiance of all his enemies, and to the
comfort of all such as did cleave fast unto Jesus Christ, and such doctrine, as
he did deliver unto them in his name. But amongst all other places I commend
unto you at this time only three: the first is in the 26 Chap. of the Acts of
the Apostles, where he did answer for himself before Agrippa the King. The
second is in his second Epistle to the Corinthians and eleauenth Chapter,
wherein he does make a comparison betwixt himself and other Apostles, and does
prefer himself before them all. The third is in his Epistle to the
Galathians and the beginning thereof; where he proves, that his doctrine, which
he had taught the Galathians, was not humane, but divine, he being taught the
same by the revelation of Jesus Christ, who called him immediately from heaven
to be an Apostle, and so had his office not from man, but from God, as also his
Gospel, or the doctrine which he taught them. Thus you see good men from time
to time, have stood upon their places and callings.

And the reasons also wherefore men should do it, are these.

Secondly, that all persons may be left without excuse, and have their mouths
stopped, if they shall rebel and disobey; for then they cannot plead
ignorance, and say, We knew not that they came from God, or had lawful
authority committed unto their charge, to do those things which they took
upon them for to do. As God does make himself known by the visible creatures
of the world, to leave all mankind without all excuse, which will not fear and
worship him: so the same God will have men to go in his name unto others, and
to make known their authority and callings, that if they will not obey, they
may be left tongue-tide (as we say) and without any answer for themselves; as
we may see in Ezechiel, Chapter 2. verses 4.5.6. Say unto them: Thus says the
Lord God; but surely they will not hear, neither indeed will they cease, for
they are a rebellious house; yet shall they know that there has been a Prophet
among them.

Thirdly, that they might approve and justify themselves in their ways, and
stop the malignant tongues of their aduersasaries, who are ready wrongfully
to accuse them, as if they usurped their places, and did things without lawful
authority from above. For as Zidikijah smote the Prophet Michaiah on the
cheek, and said, When went the Spirit of the Lord from me, to speak unto
thee? as it is in 1. Kings 22.24. so from time to time do many arise up to
impeach the credit of those whom God has raised up, and to make the world
believe, that the Lord did never bestow those places of dignity upon the^,
which they do challenge unto themselves. For as Paul and the rest of the
Apostles together with the Prophets and others, found this oftentimes too true
(as we say) in regard of themselves: so Jude does show in his Epistle and
eighth verse thereof, that there are many wicked dreamers, that do despise
government, and speak evil of them that are in authority.

Lastly, that they might put courage into their own hearts, and with due care
and conscience go about the works of their callings, not fearing what man can
do against them, but looking always upon God, who placed them in their rooms,
and who will never fail them, unless they be wanting unto themselves therein.
For as the Spirit of God came down upon Cornelius and his friends whiles Peter
was speaking unto them, as it is in Acts 10.44. so whiles they do meditate
upon their places, and are pressing the same unto others in a zeal toward
God, and in a care to do them good, a certain heavenly courage, and boldness
from above comes down into their souls, whereby they are made more stout and
valiant, then ever they were before, and do become in this respect like unto
the fire, when it is blown with the bellows, that does burn more and more.
So that here are four reasons to move men to respect their callings, and to
stand fast in the defense thereof, whereof two of them do concern others, and
the other two themselves.

By this we are taught, Jeremy, that many did run, whom he did never send;
and making mention of Kings in some other place, he does say, that they did
reign, but not by him. And surely daily experience does teach us, that many of
them do usurp that authority to themselves (as Athalia the Queen did, of whom
you may read in 2. Chron. 22. and 23. chapters thereof) whom the Lord did
never establish in their throne by his kind and loving approbation. But here it
may be demanded, how a man may know, whether his office or calling be from God
or no, that so he may stand stoutly upon the same, and labor with all care and
conscience to discharge it in the fear of the Lord? The answer is, that ye
may know it by four things. The first is by his mind, with the which he did
enter into it. The second is by his ability, whereby he is enabled to discharge
it. The third is by the liking of the people, by whom he is approved for it.
And the fourth and last is by his success, whereby he does prosper and do good
in it. For if he shall find these four things in himself; first that he
entered into his calling not with a corrupt mind, as for honor, praise, gain,
or the like; but with a single heart and desire to glorify God and to do good
to his people. Secondly, that he has graces and gifts sufficient for to
discharge those duties which are required at his hands. Thirdly, that he be
approved of the Church or common wealth, wherein he does live, they outwardly
bestowing this calling upon him. And lastly, be assisted from time to time by
the gracious hand of the Almighty, to have good success in his calling, and to
prosper therein; doubtless then he has his calling and office from God
himself, and not from man alone.

Secondly, by this, we are taught to judge charitably of all such as do speak
largely now and then of their own gifts, and those places wherein the Lord
has set them. For here we may see, a man may do it with a good soul, and
discharge but an honest and godly duty in so doing it. True it is as Solomon
does say in Prou. 27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth,
a stranger and not thine own lips. For is not seemly for a man to praise
himself; but yet a man may stand upon his calling, and publish abroad such
gifts as the Lord has bestowed upon him. For this is not to praise himself,
but rather to praise the Lord, and to bring honor unto his name. Yea the case
may so stand, as we may see by Paul's words in the 11. Chap. of his 2 Epistle to
the Corinthians, as in other places also, that a man may praise himself with
his own mouth, and set out his gifts and graces to the uttermost, and yet be
no transgressor of Salomons precept therein. For Salamon there does mean such
a praising of our selves, wherein we aim chiefly at our own glory: but there
is another praising of our selves, wherein we have not so much an eye to our
selves, as unto the Lord and his honor, and the good of all such as do belong
unto him. Now if any shall praise himself after this sort, we are to think
reverently of him, and not to censure him, as a proud and vain glorious person
for it, no more then we do humble and blessed Paul, who did the like.

Lastly, by this, we are taught, what we our selves should do, in these wicked
and unbridled days of ours, wherein many ungodly persons do take upon them, to
condemn us much, and to lay slanderous things to our charge, whereof we are
clear and innocent. The Brownists (or Separatists, as they call themselves) to
make instance in one point alone, do accuse us, as if we were no true Church of
God here in England, and as if our Ministers were no Ministers of God, but
rather the Ministers of Antichrist, the arch and chief enemy of God. But we
must not let them go on thus still, with their vile and slandering speeches
against us, but display unto them their abominations, who do so unchristianly,
and beyond all the bounds of holy charity, condemn us: and prove, that we are
the Lords own inheritance, and the people whom he has chosen unto himself,
to have his holy name called upon amongst us, and that our Ministers are his
true and faithful servants, and such whom he has sent forth, and does take
his delight and pleasure in. Easily might these matters be confirmed, if we
were to enter into any congresse with them about the same; but now at this time
we have other matters in hand: yet I will press one argument, and so leave
them. It stands thus: Wheresoever the word of God is so preached, and the
Sacraments so celebrated, that by their means a true and sound conversion is
wrought in the hearts of men toward the Lord Almighty, that they do believe in
him aright, and walk with careful souls in the paths of his commandments to
bring honor unto his name, and to attain blessedness for themselves, there
(there I say) is the true Church of God, and there also are his faithful and
trusty Ministers. But here in England with us, the word of God is so preached,
and the Sacraments so celebrated, that by their means a true and sound
conversion is wrought in the hearts of men toward the Lord Almighty, that they
do believe in him aright, and walk with careful souls in the paths of his
commandments to bring honor unto his name, and to attain blessedness for
themselves. Therefore here in England is the true Church of God, and here also
are his faithful and his trusty Ministers. When they shall answer this
argument, I will frame some more for them to work upon: but I think that will
never be; for they cannot answer, it is so strong and invincible, and a knot
so hard twisted, that they cannot by any means unloose it.

Thus far the publishing of Gods decree has stretched it self. Now let us
come to the parts whereof it does consist, and they are in number two; the one
does respect the person of Christ, the other his office or kingly power. His
person in the seventh verse, and his office or kingly power in the eighth and
ninth. For his person remember two things; the first is, whose Son he is: the
second, how it is proved, that he is his Son. He is the Son of God, this is
set down in these words; That is, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
Son. For by the name Lord, here, God the Father, the first Person in the
Trinity is understood: he said unto Christ, Thou art my Son. He said it also
unto David, as unto the type and figure, for he was also Gods Son by
creation, as also more chiefly by adoption. But yet this was chiefly spoken by
God the Father unto Christ, as unto the body and truth it self. But how is
Christ his Son, may you say? The answer is, not by creation, as all are, nor by
adoption as many are; but by nature as none is: whereupon he is called his
only begotten Son oftentimes in the word, and namely in Ioh. 3.16. where our
Savior does tell us, that God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. So that the^ out of this place we may learn this doctrine,
This is my wel-beloued Son in whom I am well pleased, as it is in Math. 3.17.
and Math. 17.5. And Paul speaking of him: does say, That he is a God over all,
to be blessed for ever, in Romans 9.5. John also writing his story, does ascribe
as much unto him in the entrance thereof: saying, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God. The Scripture is full
of many testimonies in this behalf, but I will pass them all over, as knowing
that this is an article of your faith, and a matter nothing doubted of amongst
you. For I do persuade my self, that all of us do hold and believe that
Christ is God, and the natural and only begotten Son of the Almighty. But
yet peradventure you see not clearly the reasons, why he is such an one, and
therefore I will shortly touch them, and lay them down before your view and
consideration. In number they are these.

First, must be always a proportion between the sin of man, and the
punishment of his sin, else justice has not her full stroke and working.

Secondly, that he might be able in man's nature and name to fulfill the whole
law of God, and every jot and point thereof, and not to fail in any; that so
we thereby might live, and have a free passage into heaven, to reign with God
there in happiness for ever, according to the tenor of the law, Do this, and
thou shall live. For no mortal man is able to do this. Surely (says Solomon
in Eccles. 7.22.) there is no just man in the earth, that does good, and
sins not. And as John does say: If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and there is no truth in us. 1. Ioh. 1.8. So James does say, that
in many things we sin all. Iam. 3.2. including himself and all the faithful
whatsoever within the compass of this his speech.

Thirdly, that he might be able to bestow virtue and worthiness enough upon
his short sufferings and obedience, that they might be available for the
salvation of all the elect, and be as much in the acceptance of God, as if the
elect themselves had suffered in their own persons eternally, and had been
obedient unto the Almighty in all points of his law for evermore.

Lastly, that he might be able to ouermatch the devil and all other
adversaries, that are against us, to deliver us out of their hands, being
delivered to preserve us from them, while we are here in this world; and being
preserved to bestow upon us eternal life in the world to come, when we shall
reign with him in happiness, for evermore. For no creature can do these
things but God himself alone. And therefore it was necessary, that the Savior
of the world should be God, as well as man.

The consideration whereof may teach us, Samosatenians, affirming him to be a
bare man alone; or Arrians and Seruetians, gainesaying his coessentiall and
coeternall deity; or Lucians, Porphyrians, Atheists, or whatsoever else, that
do withstand his divine nature, and will not have him in any case to be a God.

Secondly, out of it we may learn, to have Christ in great regard, and
veneration, adoring and worshipping him, as well as the Father, and the holy
Spirit; considering that he is God, as well as they. Though we must not worship
him, in regard of his humane nature, yet we must do it in regard of his
godhead, or divine nature. For in that respect all reverence and honor must be
yielded unto him, and every knee must bow unto him in heaven and in earth. The
very Angels themselves are not to be exempted from this service, but they must
perform it unto him, as well as others, according to that which is quoted by
the Author to the Hebrews in Chap. 1. ver. 6. when he says, Let all the
Angels of God worship him. Children of Noblemen and Princes heirs here in this
world are had in great account, and reputation with all men, they are the very
speech and wonder of the world, and every man must bow and beck to them. But
yet alas, Christ Jesus our Savior, who is the Son of God, and the heir of
all the world, yea God himself, is little regarded by most; for there are few
that do talk of him, and fewer that do bow and beck to him, as they ought to
do. The Lord be merciful unto us in this respect, and make us better, that so
hereafter we may honor him, as it does become us, and serve him in holiness
and righteousness, all the days of our lives.

Lastly, out of it we may observe, that seeing he is God, he is able to revenge
his quarrel upon all those that do resist him, and not only to defend those
that do depend upon him, but also to reward them with liberal gifts for their
service, and to do them good for evermore, so that they need not to fear any
thing for this world, or the world to come. A thing always to be remembered by
us, lest either we lift up our selves against him, or taking his part should
faint, through the manifold afflictions, that do happen unto us for his sake.

As thus we have heard whose son Christ is, namely Gods, so now we must
mark, how it is proved, that he is Gods son: and that is included in these
words, This day have I begotten thee: that is, this day or time, wherein thou
do rise from the dead, and return from death unto life, have I manifested
and declared unto the world all abroad, that thou art my Son, and that I have
begotten thee. For so is this place expounded by Paul, even of the time of
Christ's resurrection, as we may see in Acts 13.30.33. So that then there must
be a distinction made between generation, or begetting it self, and the
manifestation of it. The generation or begetting it self was from all
eternity, but the manifestation of it was in time, and then chiefly, when
Christ rose from the dead. For then was he mightily declared to be the Son of
God, as the Scripture does teach us. But here before we stand upon the proof
it self, a few things may be observed touching the generation, or Gods
begetting of his Son. For as we are to know, that Christ is the Son of God,
so we are to understand in some sort, how the Father did beget him, whose Son
he is said to be.

The manner therefore of this generation in few words was this. The Son was
begotten of the substance of the Father, not by any flux, as when water is
derived from the head of the spring to the channel: not by any decision, as
when a thing is cut in pieces: nor by any propagation, as when a graft is
transplanted into a new stock: but by an unspeakable communication of the
whole essence or godhead from the Father to the Son; in receiving whereof the
Son does no more diminish the majesty or godhead of the Father, then the
light of one candle does the light of another, from which it is taken. The time
of this generation has neither beginning, middle, nor end, and therefore it is
eternal before all worlds. Wisdom in the Proverbs (which with one consent
of all Divines is said to be Christ) affirms, that she was before the world
was created, that is, from eternity. For before the world was made, there was
nothing but eternity. Prou. 8.24. Here are many things to be wondered at in this
generation of the Son, and we must be warned, not to conceive it in any
carnal or humane manner. For there is a great difference between it, and
those generations, which are found here in this world amongst us that are men.
For first, in our generations the father is in time before his son, and the son
is after his father: but in this generation God the Father and the Son are
coeternall, and not one before or after the other for time. Secondly, in our
generations the father is forth of the son, and the son forth of the
father, so that they are distant in place sometimes the one from the other many
a mile: but in this generation God the Father is in the Son, and the Son is
in the Father, so that they are in place always together. Thirdly, in our
generations the son is from his father by propagation: but in this generation
the Son is from the Father by communication of substance, and not by
propagation. Finally, in our generations the father does beget the son by
communicating only his seed unto him: but in this generation God the Father
does beget the Son by communicating his whole substance unto him. So that
here is a fourefold difference to be found betwixt our carnal and this
spiritual generation, or begetting. And therefore (I beseech you) do none of
you conceive of it after a gross manner, but pray you unto God for spiritual
eyes, that you may behold it. And if any of you cannot conceive aright of it,
wonder at it, as at a deep mystery; but beware, contemn it not, as a thing
either false or unfruitful. And so I leave it, and come to the proof it self.

That is taken (you see) from Christ's resurrection from the dead. All the
miracles that Christ did from time to time, going still beyond the reach and
power of man, did declare, that he was the Son of God: yet it has pleased
the holy Ghost, to apply this chiefly unto his resurrection, as being a most
notable argument to prove the same. For being dead, if he had not been the
Son of God indeed, he had never risen again, but had perished in death. And
in that the Father raised him again to life, he gave evident witness and
testimony, that he was his own natural Son, and that he had begotten him
from all eternity. And therefore Paul does say, that he was mightily declared
to be the Son of God by the resurrection from the dead, in Romans 1.4. So that
those that doubt, whether Christ be the Son of God, or no, they may be
resolved, if they will but thoroughly consider of his resurrection from the
dead. For thus they may reason with themselves: No creature that is dead and
buried, can of himself rise again from the grave, and return from death unto
life, but he that does this must needs be the Son of God. But Christ Jesus
was dead and buried, yet he rose again from the grave, and returned from death
unto life. Therefore Christ Jesus is no bare creature, but he is a Creator, and
the Son of the living God.

Many things might be here observed, and stood upon concerning this point, but
because they are common matters, and are included in the Article of our faith,
touching the resurrection of Christ from the dead, I will pass them over, and
refer them to your own private meditations. Only noting here by the way,
that as God did manifest the generation of his natural Son unto the world,
and did make men see, that he had begotten him, even by his miracles, and
chiefly by raising him from the dead: so he does continually manifest the
generation of his adopted sons, and make them known to themselves, and unto
others, by his holy working in them, and chiefly by his raising of them up from
the death of sin unto the life of righteousness; as we may plainly see by
many places of the holy Scripture, but most excellently by that which John has
written in the third chapter of his first Epistle, the 8.9. and 10. verses
thereof. For there he does manifestly teach us, who they be that are borne of
God, and how they may be known from the children of the Devil, and that is,
by their lives and conuersations. For as the one of them do commit sin, who
are of the Devil, so the other of them do not sin, who are of God, but they
work righteousness, and become holy, as God their Father is holy: yea, as he
does further say, they cannot sin, because they are borne of God. So that
then, they are not lewd and licentious, as others are, but they are sanctified
persons, and such as do work out their salvation with fear and trembling.

By this we may shortly learn two things; the one is whether we our selves be
the children of God, or no: the other is, whom of others we are to account for
such. For our selves, if we fly the corruption, which is in the world through
lust, and give all diligence thereunto, joining moreover virtue with our faith,
and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love: we may assure our own souls,
that we are the children of God, and that he has begotten us unto life
eternal, as Peter does well declare in the first chapter of his second
Epistle, the 10. and 11. verses thereof. For others, we are to take them only
for the children of God, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to
the Spirit, and do become new creatures, performing the same holy duties with
us, whereof mention was made (out of Peter) last of all. But if either we our
selves or others fail herein, leading wicked or loose lives, we may tremble
and fear; but we must not challenge this prerogative unto our selves, to be
called the sons of God; nor give it unto others, that are unworthy of the
same. For as God is holy, so are all those holy, who are borne of him; but as
for the rest who are wicked and naught, they belong to the Devil, who was a
sinner from the beginning, as John does teach us in the place before alleged.
Wherefore look to your selves, that you may be boly and righteous, rising from
the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness, that thereby you may be
assured, that God is your father, and that he has begotten you: and beware
also what title and appellation you give unto others, that none may be wronged,
but every one may have that which does of right belong unto him.

Having thus spoken of the person of Christ, or his sonne-ship: now we are to
speak of his office, or princely kingdom, wherein is set down first the
largeness of it in the 8. verse; then secondly, the invincible power of it in
the 9. verse. In handling these things I will be as brief as I can. In
describing the largeness of it, there is included a duty which he must
perform, namely prayer; then the fruit of it, which is a great and large gift.
I will join both these together for breuities sake. Ask of me, says the
text; these are the words of God the Father, inuiting David or Christ, to ask
somewhat of him, and enioyning them a certain duty to perform, if they would
have their kingdoms enlarged. The words following contain the gift it self,
which God would bestow upon them, upon their prayer and petition, which they
should make unto him: And I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the ends of the earth for thy possession. A worthy reward of such a small
duty as prayer is, and a gift (as we say) most worthy of a king. Surely as God
is, such is his gift. For as he is great and mighty, so is his gift here great
and mighty. It is observed of Alexander the Great, that he gave to one Perillus
for the marriage of his daughter fifty talents; and when Perillus told him,
that it was too much by half, he answered him, and said, If half be enough
for thee to take, yet it is not enough for me to give. And in like manner, when
he had given unto a poor Egyptian a rich and populous city, and the
Egyptian stood all astonished at it, supposing that he had mocked him, Take
(quoth he to him) that which I give thee: for if thou art Bias that demandest,
I am Alexander that gives. Thus he would give gifts according to his own
ability and power. So, even so, does the Lord our God deal here: he does
bestow his gifts according to his own ability and power. Though half a
kingdom be a great gift, yet a whole kingdom is but a small gift with him.
David and Christ must have more of him then that. For David (who was but the
figure and type of Christ) had of him not only the whole kingdom of Israel
and Judah, but all the heathen also, that were round about him, as the
Ammonites, Moabites, Aramites, Philistims, Amalekites, and diverse others; all
which were in subjection, and became tributaries to him, as may be seen by the
second book of Samuel, and namely by the 8. chapter thereof. But as for Christ
(who was the body and truth) he had spacious and large dominions of him indeed.
For he bestowed upon him not only one kingdom or two alone, but all the
kingdoms of the world from one end thereof unto the other; as the Apostle does
at large declare in his 1. chap. to the Ephe. and in his 2. chap. to the Phil.
Whereupon Christ himself spoke unto his Disciples, saying; All power is given
unto me in heaven and earth; Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing the^
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, as it is in Math
28.18.19.20. Here I might stand upon the largeness of Christ's kingdom, and
gather some good observations out of the universality thereof; as to show, that
wheresoever we live or be, yet we are under his dominion, and are there to
worship him; and that if we do once offend him, and play a treacherous part
with him, there is no place of safety for us to fly unto, to escape his power
and hand, as who does reign throughout all the world, and not in some places
alone, as kings here upon the earth do; amongst whom malefactors (yea most vile
and notorious traitors) do escape oftentimes death and other punishments
according to their just deserts, because they shift out of one man's kingdom
into another. But I will pass them over to your own considerations, and come
to more neceslary points for our learning.

A duty, you see here, is enjoined upon Christ, that he must pray to his Father
for his kingdom, and ask the same of him. Again a large promise is made unto
him, that if he shall so do, he shall have an ample one indeed, even such an
one, as shall reach from one end of the world unto the other. Upon both these
brances, a man might severally insist and stand, but (as I promised before) I
will conioyne them both together, that of two works I may (for shortness sake)
make but one. Wherefore the doctrine (which is to be collected out of them both
together) is this, Ask (says our Savior Jesus Christ) and it shall be given
you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For
whosoever asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened, as it is in Math. 7.7.8. Likewise James does say
(making instance in one particular, which is wisdom) If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives unto all men liberally, and
reproacheth no man; and it shall be given him, as you may see in James 1.5. And
whereas man will not regard us in the time of need, but then begin to forsake
us, when once we come into trouble and misery, though in the time of our
prosperity he made much of us, and was ready to do us what good he could: it
is not so with God. For if we shall pray unto him in the midst of all our
calamities, he will harken unto us, and become most gracious and favorable
unto us, to deliver us out of them all, as he himself does teach us in Psalm
50.15. saying, Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. By all which places (you see) it is a most clear and
evident doctrine, that we must both pray to God, and that by our prayers unto
him, we shall receive favors at his hands.

And the reason hereof is this; we must pray to him, and one, on whom our whole
life, and all that we have, do depend. By prayers we shall receive benefits of
him, because he has appointed prayers as an ordinary means and second cause
to convey his benefits oner unto us. For as he has appointed the end of all
things, so he has appointed also in the same decree of his, the means which
are fit to bring them to the same end. And therefore seeing prayer is one of
the chief and principal means, which he has ordained for the pouring down
of his gifts and graces upon mankind, it is no marvel, though by praying unto
him, men do receive from time to time most rare and excellent blessings from
him.

Learn we then from hence these points. These. 5.17. and to watch thereunto
with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints, as it is in Ephesians.
6.18. But yet alas, we do it too seldom, and some almost never in all their
lives. But let us amend this our fault, and grow better in this respect.

Secondly, that the reason, why many do receive few or no benefits at the hands
of God, is this, not because his hand is shortened it and unable to do them
good, but because they do not pray unto him, and ask for benefits of him. Ye
lust (says James) and have not; ye envy and have indignation, and cannot
obtain; ye fight and war and get nothing, because ye ask not. James 4.2. If
you say, that you ask and receive not, I will answer you with the same
Apostle, and in the same place, that the cause thereof is, because ye ask
amiss, as does follow there in the next verse. Either the thing which you
crave is not lawful and expedient, or your mind in craving is not earnest, or
Christ is not made the Mediator, or the end is not good, or the prayer is not
continual, or faith lastly is not there to present it. If these or any of
these fail or be wanting, it is no marvel though our prayer receive the
repulse. But let them all concur and meet together, as they ought to do,
then shall we obtain of God whatsoever we will ourselves.

Thirdly, that prayer is a most fruitful thing, and such a means, as it
brings with it unto us the great and wonderful gifts of the Almighty. As it
will stay the Lord from smiting, even then, when his hand is vpto lay on, (as
we may see at large in the beginning of the 32. chapter of Exodus, where Moses
prayer pacified the Lord, and turned his wrath away from the Israelites, so
that they were not consumed according to their desers:) so it does pull down
his mercies and benefits in great abundance upon us. For look what we do
desire, the Lord is ready to grant unto us, yea he does grant more unto us
oftentimes, then we do desire. As for example, Zaccheus desired only to see
Christ; but befides that, Christ called him by his name, and offered his own
self unto him for his salvation, as it is in the beginning of the 19 chapter
according to Saint Lukes Gospel The sick of the palsy desired only the
health of his body, but he obtained also the forgiveness of his sins, as
appears in the beginning of the ninth chapter according to S. Matthew. Solomon
desired only wisdom, that he might know how to rule his people, and to go in
and out before them, but as God did bestow that upon him, so he did give him
also riches and honor, so that among the kings there was none like him all his
days, as it is evident in 1. Kin. 3 6. etc. Lastly, Jacob desired only food
and apparel, when he went from his parents to Padan Aram, to fetch him a wife
amongst his own kindred; but the Lord made him a great rich man, and caused
him to return home again, with abundance of wealth and goods, as it is
storied of him in the book of Genesis, in chapter 28.30. and 33. Well
therefore might Paul say, that he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that
call on him. Romans 10.12. And well also might David say, that the Lord is near
unto all that call upon him, yea that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 145.18. And
as for the Lords dealing toward himself, he does utter it in these words:
Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the request of
his lips. For thou did prevent him with liberal blessings, and did set a
crown of pure gold upon his head; he asked life of thee, and thou gave him a
long life for ever and ever. Psalm. 21.20. etc. I pray, think deeply on these
things, and let them encourage our hearts to pray still. If we were sure, that
the kings Majesty would admit us always into his presence, and grant unto us
whatsoever we should desire of him, I doubt not but that we should be forward,
yea too forward, to go unto him often with our suites, to have benefits and
high promotions from him. But such a king we have here (who is the king of
kings) and shall not we then commence our suites continually unto him? and
wait at the gates of his grace with our supplications a ready drawn in our
hands to deliver them unto him at his coming forth? Kingdoms (we say) go not a
begging, yet the Catholic and vninersall kingdom of Christ (which is the
greatest of all) was obtained by begging. For he had it only for the asking.
If beggars speed so well (we say again) we our selves will beg. To conclude
therefore this point, let us do it then, and run still to God begging for
benefits, and doubt we not, but we shall receive them, and such large ones too,
as none can be larger. For as God is greater then all, so are his gifes larger
then all. Think on these things for your good; and so let us pass from this
first point, whereby Christ's kingdom is set out, and come to the second, which
is the invincible power thereof. For as his kingdom is large reaching over all
the world: so it is powerful, being able to beat down all opposition, that
is made against it. This is set down in the 9. verse in these words, Thou
shall crush them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

The speech is allegorical, being drawn part of it from kings (as mention is
made here of a king) who are armed with authority and power to punish those
that do offend, or rise up in rebellion against them; in regard whereof some
scepter (noting out the same) is wont to be carried before them: and here this
scepter is said to be of iron, rather then of gold, silver, brass, wood, or
the like; because iron is the strongest and fittest to beat down all things
before it: And part of it also from potters, who do many times so break their
earthen vessels into pieces, which they do dislike withal, that they can never
be soudred fast together again. By this then is meant, that the enemies must
be destroyed, and that in such a fearful manner, as that they may never be
able to recover their former estate again, or have any the least hope left
unto them for the same. And mark you here, how God does enjoin this duty upon
Christ his son, and command him for to do it. There are other uses of the
power of Christ. For this invincible power is granted unto him as well for the
defense and good of his subjects, who are loyal and faithful unto him, as for
the destruction and overthrow of his adversaries. But yet this latter is only
touched here, because mention was made before only of his adversaries, and
nothing was spoken of his friends. So that when the Lord does command him to
crush and break them in pieces, he does not understand by the word or name of
them, all the heathen whatsoever, which he gave unto him for his inheritance,
nor all the ends of the earth, which he bestowed upon him for his possession;
but he means only such rebels as did rise up against him, which were touched
in the three first verses: those he must destroy, and bring to nothing, but the
rest he was to favor, and to do good unto. Look then how David gave his son
Solomon a charge (when he lay, as we say, upon his deathbed, and was ready to
depart out of this world) touching Ioab (that slew Abner and Amasa) and
touching Shimei (that cursed him, and threw stones at him, when he fled from
Absalom his son conspiring against him) that he should not suffer their hoare
heads to come to the grave in peace; as it is in the beginning of the second
chapter of the first book of the Kings: So does the Lord here give his son
Christ Jesus a charge, touching those as did rebel against him, that he should
not suffer them to live, but utterly to destroy them for evermore, accordingly
as they had deserved.

But here two questions may be moved, the one is, whether Christ did it; the
other is, the manner how he did it. For the first, it is answered in a word,
that He did it, as was showed before, and therefore not now again to be stood
upon. And as for the second, the manner was manifold. For some of his enemies
he does destroy with some sudden and extraordinary death. Others he does
torment with griefs and wounds of soul, which are almost intolerable, and by
the means whereof they have no peace within themselves, but do lie in
continual despair of their own salvation. Not a few of them are tortured in
their bodies by horrible diseases, and made also desolate and poor for wealth,
having no maintenance to relieve them. Thousands, and ten thousands he gives
over to hardness of heart, that they commit sin with all greediness, and
make themselves fat against the day of slaughter. But to pass all other ways,
whether of infamy or the like, which happen unto them here in this world, that
is the wofullest way of all, when he throws them down into hell, and there
does keep them in flames of fire, that cannot be quenched, boiling and rosting
for evermore. And this all of them shall be sure of, as we may see in Math.
25.41. when he says unto them, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. For as his kingdom is
not of this world, so commonly are not his punishments in this world, but in
the world to come, in that hideous, and euer-tormenting place.

As we stood not upon the universality and largeness of Christ's kingdom in
the former verse: so will not we stand now upon the invincible power and might
of his kingdom in this verse; neither yet press any further the destroying of
his enemies spoken of therein. First, because mention was made of them before;
and secondly, because occasion will be offered to speak somewhat of them
again hereafter in the end of this Psalm.

Here at this time, Betimes (says David) will I destroy all the wicked of the
land, that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord,
as it is in Psalm. 101.8. so that he would spare none, that were wicked and
licentious, and did rebel with an high hand against the Lord. Phineas the
son of Eleazar the son of Aaron, was greatly commended for his zeal
toward the Lord, when he executed death upon the adulterer Zimri the
Israelite, and the adulteress Cozbi the Midianite, and did run them both
through with a spear, even through their belly, as they were in the tent,
committing the act of their filthiness together, as it is in Numb. 25.7. etc.
The law of the Lord was amongst the Israelites, and in the policy of their
government (the equity whereof does belong to all common wealth, and states of
government whatsoever, though the body of that people be dissolved, and their
policy came to an end) that idolaters, blasphemers, disobedient children to
their parents, murderers, adulterers, witches, and other notorious sinners
should be put to death, and be cut off from amongst men, as we may see at large
in the book of Moses, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers and Deuteronomie: and as for
other faults, there were other punishments appointed according to the quality
of the offense, and the trespass therein committed. By all which we may see,
that God had a special care from time to time, that sin should not go
uncontrolled, but be justly punished, according to the nature of it, either
more or less, as it did deserve. In consideration whereof, you perceive,
malefactors must not be spared, but be duly punished for their faults and
offenses.

And the reasons hereof are four. First, Solomon does say in Prou. 20.30.) The
blewnesse of the woundserueth to purge the evil, and the stripes within the
bowels of the belly: or else, if they will not amend, that they may be taken
away by death, to sin to more against their own souls, or to pollute the
land any longer, wherein they dwell. And this was the cause, wherefore God
would have idolaters to be stoned to death, as we may gather from his words in
Deuteronomy. 17.7. when he says: So thou shall take the wicked away from among you.
Secondly, that others may learn by their examples, to take heed of the like
offenses, lest they be made partakers of the same punishments with them. For
punishments executed upon some are oftentimes great terrors unto others, and do
bridle them from their licentious ways, as daily experience and all Chronicles
of the world do show. But at this time remember one example alone, and that is
of the third Captain with his fifty men, spoken of in the first Chapter of
the second book of the Kings; for he so profited by the judgments that came
upon the two former Captains with their fifty men apeece, when fire came
down from heaven and consumed them all, that he submitted himself to the
Prophet Elijah, and fell to entreat him for the safety of his life, as it is
in the 14. verse of the same Chapter.

And this was the cause, wherefore God would have the Judge to do unto every
man, as every man thought to do unto his brother, as we may see by his words in
Deuteronomy. 19.20. when he says, And the rest shall hear this, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such wickedness among you. Thirdly, that the
good and innocent may not be corrupted by their company, and bad example. For
as evil words do corrupt good manners, so much more do evil deeds, and bad
conversation. The life and example of one incestuous man was sufficient to
corrupt all Corinth. And this was the cause, wherefore Paul would have the
Corinthians to excommunicate that incestuous person out of their holy
fellowship, as we may well collect out of his words in 1. Corinthians. 5.9. when he
says, Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye
are unleavened. For Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Lastly, that the
Lords anger, who is offended with their sins and transgressions, may be
appeased, and not break out against all for the same. For as the sin of man
does pollute the whole land, as the story of the Cananites do show, Leui.
18.24. etc. and set all things out of order, as we may see by the sin of
Ahab, that troubled Israel, 1. Kings 18.18. and by the sin of false apostles
that troubled the Galathians, Gal. 5.10. as also by the sin of the prodigal
son, which put him besides himself; for he repenting of his sin, is said
to have come to himself. Luke 15.17: So it does drive the Lord away from him,
and from others for his sake, until he be duly punished for his sin, as he
ought to be; as we may see most excellently in the seventh chapter of Iosuah.
For there we find, that God did leave Israel for a time for Achans sin, but
after he was put to death for the same, he did help them again, and gave them
a notable victory over their enemies. And this is the cause, wherefore the Lord
would have Moses to put the adulterers to death, as we may perceive by his
words in Numb. 25.4. when he said unto him, Take all the heads of the people,
and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun, that the indignation of the
Lords wrath may be turned from Israel.

Out of these things thus laid down, upon us punishment, after that we have
sinned against the laws of the Lord our God, and have transgressed the good
and lawful statutes of the land. Then, then I say, we must take all things
patiently, and acknowledge that we have but our due, and that our governors
therein do but discharge an holy duty, which the Almighty does require at
their hands. Let children and servants (amongst others) mark this well, that
so when they are corrected and chastised by their parents and masters for
their faults, they may possess their souls with patience, and learn thereby
to amend, and not to fall to murmurings, and discontentments, as many
ungracious children and servants are wont to do. What praise (says Peter to
servants in 1. Pet. 2.20.) is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
take it patiently? but and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God. Whereby he shows us, that this is a
necessary duty belonging to all that have offended, quietly and with patient
souls to bear such punishments, as are laid upon them for their offenses.

Secondly, by it we may see, what Magistrates and men of authority ought to do,
who bear the sword not in vain (as Paul does speak in Romans 13.4) but to take
vengeance on him that does evil. They must not see offenses committed in the
land, but they must draw out their swords for the punishment thereof. A wise
king (says Solomon in Prou 20.26.) scatters the wicked, and causes the
wheel to turn over them: His meaning is, that good Princes, and godly
Magistrates cannot away in any hand with wicked persons, but they must needs
root them out. For under the word wheel he alludeth to the manner of
threshing used among the Jews in those times. The saying is old and true, Non
minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri, It is as great a virtue to keep
what is gotten, as first to get it. And even so it is as good a duty in a
Magistrate to see laws executed and kept, as at the first to make them. And
since they will not be kept of all without punishments, therefore punishments
are most necessary. Ill then and wickedly deal they, that have authority in
their hands to cut down sin, and yet will let it grow and flourish still,
and never punish the offenders thereof. The grieuousnesse of which sin you
may see notably in the examples of Ely the Prophet, and Saul the King. For the
Lord had brought most terrible judgments upon the^ both, and upon their
posterity after them for the saine sin and offense of theirs: Upon the one of
them, because he spared his sons, and did not punish them according to their
deserts, as the beginning of the first book of Samuel does show: And upon the
other, of them, because he spared Agag the Amalekite, and did not kill him,
according to Gods commandment, as it is in the 15. chapter of the same book.
Here, here, beloved, it may go near unto our hearts, and cause us to sigh and
sob within our selves, when we consider, how blasphemy, the contempt of the
Word, the breach of the Sabbath, disobedience to governors, adultery,
drunkenness, and other grievous offenses (which make the Sun as it were blush
again to behold them) do go uncontrolled and uncorrected in our times, and
have no severe punishments inflicted upon them for the restraint thereof, as
they do deserve. We have as good laws, as any nation in the world, but they
want execution, which is the life of them: and those that should look most
unto them, do neglect them commonly most, and not only break them themselves,
but countenance others also that do it. But let superiors remember what the
Lord does say by Jeremy the Prophet in chapter 48.10. Cursed be he that does
the work of the Lordnegligently, and cursed be he, that keeps back his
sword from blood. So that there must be no sparing of men, under a curse and
damnation, when God will have them killed. And let them always bear in their
minds what God did say to Ahab the king, in 1. Kings 20.42. saying, Because
thou have let go out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall
go for his life, and thy people for his people. So that to spare a malefactor
from death, is to bring death unto themselves, and to such as do belong unto
them.

Object.

Ans. justice, and to make his own kingdom strong, though he were a murderer
himself from the beginning, yet will come in amongst us, sometimes like a
meek lamb, to persuade us to foolish pity and compassion: but know you this,
that we must not pity where God himself does not pity, nor spare through
compassion those whom he does condemn; for that is to condemn him, and to
exalt our selves above him in mercy and goodness, which is an horrible and
vile thing in his eyes who is all mercy and goodness it self. Moses you know
was the meekest man upon the earth, and he had a most pitiful heart, being
contented to be razed out of the book of life for the good of others; yet he
caused to be slain at one time three thousand persons, for the golden calse
which they had erected up in his absence, as it is in Exodus 32.27.28. And
albeit David and Solomon were very mild men, and merciful, yet Ioab and
Shemei must be slain and put to death by them, as may be seen in the second
chapter of the first book of the Kings. And as one does well observe of them,
either of them did sanctify their hands by this severity, in executing justice
belonging to them; which otherwise they should have defiled by unlawful lenity
and sparing. You know it is no fault in a Surgeon to cut off a corrupt
member for the saving of the whole boby. So in a Magistrate it is no cruelty
but virtue, to prefer the safety of many before a few. Let not then a
superstitious affectation of clemency or pity make a more cruel gentleness,
with the peril and hurt of many. For under the government of the Emperor Nerua
it was rightly said: It is ill dwelling under a king or Magistrate where
nothing is lawful, but it is far worse dwelling under one where all things are
lawful.

Lastly, here we may be put in mind, what we our selves ought to do, and that
is this: we must neither spare sins in our selves, nor in others, but we must
labor to bring all to repentance and amendment of life, by inflicting deserved
punishments upon both. First we must deal with our selves, and after we have
sorrowed to repentance, we must take an holy revenge upon our selves (as the
Corinthians did, 2. Cor. 7.2.) in pinching our own souls and bodies, in those
things wherein we passed our bounds before, and in restraining our selves from
some things, which are most lawful in themselves. Then for others, as we must
not countenance any in their evil ways, nor become advocates unto others for
them: so, if power and authority do rest in our own hands, we must strike
them, and see them justly punished for their offenses. Herein let governors of
families look to themselves, as well as Constables and other officers.
Beloved, you must know that, when enormities and grievous sins are committed in
your Parishes, or in your houses, you are not to wink at the same, but
according to your places you are to see the same justly punished. O remember
the reasons that were alleged before, to awaken you up to this duty, and let
them sink deeply into your hearts, to bring forth a notable effect with them
within you. Have a care (I beseech you) of the offenders, that they may be
reclaimed: have a care of others, that they may not be corrupted: have a care
of the whole land, that that may not be plagued: and have a care, lastly, of
your own persons, that they may not be destroyed. Let none of these evils fall
out through your defaults, for want of punishing such as do offend. And herein
you must spare none. Thine eye (says the Lord, in Deuteronomy. 19.21) shall have no
compassion, but life for life, etc. And in the 13. chapter of the same book,
the sixth verse and so forward, he does declare, that though they be most dear
and near unto us, as our own children, brothers, wives, and friends, that are
to us as our own souls, that do offend, and go about to draw our hearts away
from the true God; yet they must not be spared, but be stoned to death, and
that our own hands must be first unto it: and therefore deal impartially with
all; favor none before others (as the world does) but deal with all according
to their ways.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
THE SIXTH SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. VER. 10. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the
earth.


HItherto from the beginning of the Psalm to this place, all things have
passed along by way of doctrine, in a certain continued narration of speech,
after the manner of a story; but now comes an exhortation to hand, wherein
all the former rebels (standing in most woeful case, and dreadful peril of
their lives) are graciously called upon, to return and to submit themselves
unto the Lord and his Anointed, against whom they made their former rebellion
and insurrection. Great was the sin, which they had committed; yet the Lord
(whose mercy has neither bottom nor measure) not willing the death of any
sinner, much less of so many thousands together, but rather that by repentance
pardon may be procured; in this place favorably uses the means, that their
hearts may smite them with true feeling of their faults, and so they turn and
be spared. He calls upon them all for true repentance and amendment of life,
showing unto them, both wherein it does stand, and also when it must be yielded
unto him. It stands in two things, the one is an heavenly wisdom, and an
holy knowledge of the Lords ways. The other is a loyal subjection, and a
faithful obedience unto his commandments. Both these he does require of them.
First, that they be wise and learned, in his word or statutes; then secondly,
that they be subject and obedient unto him and his Son, in performing such
duties as do belong unto them. And as for the time, when these things are to be
done, it is straight, and out of hand; they must not defer them, no not so
much as one day, but presently they must go about them whithout any delay, or
procrastination whatsoever. This is the sum of this verse with the two next
following. But to leave them at this time, and to stand only upon this, mark
the paraphrase thereof, it runs after this manner. Now therefore (says the
Prophet) while there is time, before the judgment before spoken of do overtake
you, and consume you to nothing, labor you to get true wisdom and vnderding;
plant you the word of the Lord in your souls, and be well seen and learned in
his statutes, that you may know your selves, and understand aright, what the
Lord your God does require at your hands, for all matters, which do respect his
worship, and your own peace. And here I speak not alone to the small ones,
and the baser sort of the people, but I speak to you all, and chiefly to you,
that are the great ones, and the states of the land, even to you that are
Princes, and have the chief stroke in matters of government, and to you that
are Judges and have authority to sit upon life and death, and to censure all
matters and persons, that are brought before you: to you, I say, do I chiefly
speak, and therefore look to your selves, defer not your repentance any
longer, but presently while you have time, be wise and learned.

So that the sum of this verse is nothing else,

The persons to whom the exhortation is directed, are the kings, and judges of
the land. The Spirit of the Lord does single them out by name from all the
rest: not meaning thereby, that they alone were to do the things, that here and
after he does require of them; but his meaning is, by them to understand all of
what degree soever they were, by the figure Synecdoche, when some are put for
all. For he would have all to repent, and to submit themselves unto the Lord,
who before did rebel against him. But yet he names them only, who were thus
the Kings and Judges of the land, for sundry causes. As first, because they
were deepest in rebellion, and had trespassed most therein, as being the
ringleaders of all the rest. Secondly, because they bad more things to stay
the^ back then others had, and a greater means to pull them from the
performance of the exacted duties. And lastly, because they being converted
would easily draw all others after them, and cause them to do as they had done.
For the multitude commonly does depend upon the higher powers, and look what
they do, the same does content them well, according to that in 2. Sam. 3.36.
And all the people knew it (speaking of David's mourning and fasting for Abner)
and it pleased them, as whatsoever the king did, pleases all the people. For
these causes and the like, the holy Ghost might well direct his speech by name
unto the Kings and Judges, and not speak in general unto all, though he did
mean all, and his purpose were to have every one to do the things here exacted
of them, and not that the Kings and Judges should do them alone.

Here by the way, we may observe a notable good instruction, which is this;
namely, that Magistrates, and men in chief authority should first of all turn
unto the Lord, and be as the captains of all the rest in performing loyal and
faithful obedience unto him, in all dutiful manner, as it does become them.
For first and foremost they are more bound (as we say) unto God, then others
are, as having larger benefits, and greater gifts bestowed upon them then any
besides them have; for the more bountiful that any is to us, the more dutiful
should we be to him a gain. Secondly, because they (for the most part) go
beyond all others in sins and trespasses for number and greatness; for the
more and greater our sins and trespasses be, the more speed and have should
we make to leave them, and to turn unto the Lord from them, lest they bring
destruction upon us before we are aware. Finally, because all others do hang
upon them, as the door does on the hinges, and turn as they do turn; for
whom also they must answer at the dreadful day of judgment, when all secrets
of men's hearts shall be disclosed, and every one shall receive according to his
ways. For the more that we may bring to God, and the heavier charge we have to
answer, the more forward should we be to do those holy duties which do belong
to us, that we might save many, and not be damned our selves. Oh that
governors would lay this near unto their hearts, and make a good use thereof
unto themselves. Blessed, yea twice blessed then should both they and we be.
Abraham, Iosuah, Samuel, David, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezechia, Josiah, and others,
that were men of great place and authority, have done this long before our
days. The Lord grant for his mercies sake, that our rulers and chief men for
government may do it, and always do it in our days, and in the days of our
posterity after us. But if they should fail herein (which God forbid) yet let
us who have some authority over others, look to our selves in this case, and
perform that duty, which the Lord does require of us. We must not alone bring
our children and servants to the knowledge of their sins, and cause them to
walk in the ways of the Lord: but we our selves must go before them in these
duties, and by our examples lead them on to a careful performance thereof.
First we our selves must turn to the Lord, and become most dutiful and loyal
unto him, and walk continually in his commandments. Then when this is done,
we must be most earnest with the^, and see that they do the like: that so all
of us may join together in turning unto him, from whom we went astray, and
redeem (as it were) the time that is past, by an eager persuing after all
those things, as do belong to us, according to our rooms and callings. I pray
think on these matters, and I beseech God, to give a blessing unto them, that
they may do you good.

But to to come to the chief point, which is here to be stood upon, mark
diligently, upon what consideration the Kings, and Judges (and so all others in
them) are called upon to repentance and amendment of life. It is upon the
consideration of the great peril and danger, wherein they stood. For the
exhortation which is here made, is deduced out of the former words, and the
manner how it is drawn stands thus. All those that are in a most dangerous
estate, and are likely to be overthrown with a shameful and perpetual
destruction, they had need to be wise and learned, and turn to the Lord, as
it does become them. But such is your case, o Kings and Judges, your are in a
most dangerous estate, and you are likely every one of you to be overthrown
with a shameful and perpetual destruction. Therefore it stands you upon to be
wise and learned, and to turn to the Lord as it does become you. From hence we
gather this doctrine, Nineueh, For when the Prophet Jonah had cried in their
city: and said, Yet forty days, and Nineueh shall be overthrown, they
fasted and prayed, and did put on sackecloth from the greatest of them even to
the least of them, and did turn from their evil ways, and from the
wickedness that was in their hands, as we may see at large in the third
chapter of the Prophecy of Jonah. So did wicked Ahab; for when the Prophet
Elijah had told him of his sin, and of Gods judgments that did belong unto
him for the same, and had showed him, how the Lord would bring evil upon him,
and his posterity, and make his house like the house of Iereboam the son of
Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah for the provocation
wherewith he had provoked and made Israel to sin; even then, when he heard
those words: He rent his clothes, and put sackecloth upon him and fasted, and
lay in sackecloth, and went softly, as it is in 1. Kings 21.27. So did
stifnecked Israel. For when troubles did come upon them, and miseries were
likely to wear them out, and to consume them to nothing, they cried from time
to time unto the Lord, and bewailed their sins and transgressions before him,
as may be seen at large in the books of Moses, the Judges, the Kings, and the
hundredth and seven Psalm. So, lastly, did the prodigal son; for when he saw
all was spent, and he was like to die for hunger, as having nothing to eat, no
not so much as the husks, which the swinne did feed upon, he came to himself,
and resolved to return home unto his father, and to confess his fault unto
him, and to crave favor at his hands, as it is in Luke 15.16 etc. that so he
might be made as one of his hired servants, if not to be accepted of him, as a
dear son and child again. Thus you see, how perils and dangers should move
us to repentance and amendment of life.

The reason is this, Jeremy chapter 18. verse 8. touching this matter in these
word. But if this nation (says he) against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon
them. And do you never forget what he also said to Josiah the king in 2. Chron.
34.27.28. Because (says he) thine heart did melt, and thou did humble thy
self before God, when thou heardest his word against this place, and against
the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thy self before me, and tarest thy
clothes, and weptest before me; I have also heard it, says the Lord. Behold I
will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace,
and thine eyes shall not se all the evil which I will bring upon this place,
and upon the inhabitants of the same. Most acceptable therefore (you see) unto
the Lord is an humble casting down of our selves before him, and shall bring
unto our souls mercy and comfort, when proud rebellion and stiff standing out
with Pharaoh and others, shall procure plague upon plague, till we be destroyed
out of the world. Seeing then, that repentance does stay the judgments of God
from falling down upon us, and remove them clean away from us, that they may
do us no hurt, there is cause sufficient, why we should repent and amend, when
his judgments do hang over our heads, and are likely every hour to fall down
upon us to our destruction, and utter undoing.

By this then we are taught first, out his hand to lay hold of that which may
save his life, and minister unto him a present succor and aid.

Secondly, hereby we may learn, what we our selves ought to do in all manner
of distresses and calamities whatsoever. Is the hand of the Lord already upon
us? or do we fear some judgments to come? Humble we our selves then before
the Lord, be we sorry for our sins, leave we all our wicked ways, and turn
we soundly unto the Almighty, and all shall be well with us; both his hand
that is upon us shall be removed away, and those judgments that do hang over
us, shall be stayed, and never fall down upon us. Never forget we that
comfortable saying, which is in 2. Chro. 7.14 and is uttered by God himself in
these words: If my people (says he) among whom my name is called upon, do
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked
ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and will
heal their land. Down then at night, and down in the morning before your
God, send up unto him the true sighs of an humble heart, and of a broken soul
for all your transgressions; and assure your selves (as you live and breathe)
he will respect them with a saving grace. For he has a most melting heart
toward his poor people, that when the rod is even up, and he ready to smite,
then, even then, he stays his hand oftentimes of himself, and is loath to
strike: yea he breaks out into compassionate words, such as are in Hosea
11.8. when he says, How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, O Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim?
My heart is turned within me: my repentings are rolled together, I will not
execute the fierceness of my wrath, etc. as it is there in that place. Could
ever any father speak more compassionately over his child, when he were about
to beat him? Surely no tongue can express the Lords goodness and pity
toward us. And therefore settle with your selves this comfort, that if you
return from your sins, and once leave your transgressions, he will not
punish you, nor execute those judgments upon you, which you have deserved.

Object. But we are in no danger, may you say, Ans. For we all have sinned and
trespassed against the Lord, and his Anointed, as well as these Kings and
Judges had done, who are here called upon to repentance and amendment of life;
and look what danger they stood in through their sins and trespasses; the
same do we now stand in through our sins and trespasses, and therefore we
have as great need to repent, as they had. Will you, that I speak all in one
word? Then thus it is. Every person of us have deserved to be cast into hell,
forasmuch as we do daily break the commandments of God, and all the
judgments that are there do of right belong unto us, and we are liable unto
them every hour, yea every minute of an hour; and therefore, I say, we have
great need to repent, to avoid them. Questionless, the more we stand out, the
worse it will be for us. We our selves dislike haughty pride in others toward
us, but especially in such as owe us duty and obedience; and humble and meek
spirits we take pleasure in. He that yields when we chide, and stoopeth to us
when we are angry, we quickly observe, and readily receive to favor again.
How much more, think you, are these things due to God from dust and ashes?
Follow then what to him, you know, is pleasing, and to your selves ever
profitable. An army of soldiers shall not sooner repel our enemies from us,
then true repentance shall the Lords wrath, that hangs over us. That is the
only thing that can make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before the Lord
for us, that he should not destroy us. For the Lord cannot strike us, when we
hold up our hands for mercy, and look upon him with watery eyes, humbled in
the dust before him, and for Christ begging pardon at his hands. And therefore
ever make up this wall of defense by true prayer, and hearty repentance against
him, and stand your selves in the gap, thus crying unto him in his Son
against your sins, and be assured you shall prevail.

But alas, men do fail much in the performance of this duty. It may grieve a
good heart and soul to think, how wretchlesse and careless they are therein.
Though judgments lie heavy upon some of them already, yet they repent not, nor
return to the Lord. The sickness that is upon them, the vexation of spirit
that is within them, the untowardness of their children and servants that are
near unto them, and the loss of their goods, which do decay each day more and
more round about them, cannot rouse them up from their sins, nor convert them
soundly unto the Lood, but they continue still in their transgressions, and
grow rather worse, then better therein, adding drunkenness unto thirst, and
one sin unto another. God amend them, if it be his pleasure, and give unto
them better hearts. Others there are amongst them, who yet are spared, over
whom notwithstanding the judgments of the Lord do hang in a most fearful and
cuident manner. For they are likely every hour to have some plague fall upon
them, and to be carried away body and soul to hell, their sins and
abominations are so vile and filthy before the Lord. But yet alas, they
persevere on still in their evil ways, and take not this holy course of
repentance, to stop the Lords judgments from falling down upon them, and to
save themselves from that sulphurian and euer-tormenting place.

It is noted of the wise man in the Proverbs, chapter 23.3. that he sees the
plague, and hides himself; but the foolish (on the the contrary side) go on
still, and are punished, Deal we, as this wise man, and not as the fool.
Look we upon our dangers, and labor we by a sound conversion unto the Lord to
prevent them: otherwise the Lord himself will say of us, as he did of Ephraim,
when he said, The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an
unwise son, else would he not stand still at the time, even at the breaking
forth of the children, Hosea 12.13. Great stir does every man almost make,
when his adversary comes to take the possession of his house and living over
his head, and that by force and violence: or when the Shrieffes men do approach
near to take him, and to carry him to the jail, where he knows he shall lie
in woeful misery some time, and in the end leese his life by a shameful
death. Oh what ado then is there? what shiftings then do enter into man's heart?
No stone then (as we say) is left unmoved, but every course that may be thought
upon is taken, to prevent that peril and danger. And yet shall men lie still,
and do nothing to prevent the danger of hell, which is 10000. times worse the^
any prison or death in this world, and brings with it more troubles by
millions, then ever the loss of any house or living can do here? Awake we,
awake we; and if ever men will bestirre their stumpes, (as it is in our
proverb) now let them bestirre them, and with all have let them run unto the
Lord for mercy and grace, before his wrath break out and consume them.

Lastly, by this we may learn, what counsel and advice to give to others,
when they are in some danger, and know not well what course to take to rid
themselves therefrom. If any of them shall come unto us, as the Jews did to
the Apostles, saying, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. we may
easily answer them, even as it is here, Be wise and learned, etc. that is,
repent you of your sins, and submit your selves unto the Lord your God in all
dutiful obedience, as it does become you. This, this is the only course that
you must take. Doubtless no other course in the world can do you any sound and
perfect good; but if you shall once perform this, all shall be well with you
quickly; as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, who upon his submission unto the Lord,
was restored again to his kingdom; or as it was with Manasses, who upon his
prayer unto the Lord, and hearty sorrow for his sin was delivered out of his
prison at Babylon, and reestablished again in the throne of his kingdom at
Jerusalem: or lastly as it was with the Israelites, who upon their cry unto
the Lord, and the confession of their sin, were from time to time delivered
from their enemies, and blessed with peace, and abundance of good things.

Hitherto for the persons, to whom the exhortation is directed: now let us come
to the matter, whereof it does consist. And that in a word is repentance and
amendment of life, as I touched before. Wherein is contained first the time,
when it must be had, then secondly the points, wherein it does stand. The time
is present, set down in this word, Now. Because they were in a present danger,
and were likely every hour to be destroyed; therefore the Prophet would have
them to repent presently, and out of hand, even before those judgments of the
Lord did fall upon them, which were mentioned before in the 5. and 9. verses of
this Psalm. Wherehence we are taught this doctrine, that men must out of hand
repent and turn to the Lord, and not defer their conversion from time to
time, but presently go about the same. Seek the Lord (says the Prophet Esaias
in Chap. 55.6.7.) while he may be found, call ye upon him, while he is near.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the vurighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he is very ready to forgive. While we have time (says Paul in Gal. 6.10.) let
us do good unto all men, but specially unto them that are of the household of
faith. And to day (says the holy Ghost in Heb. 3.7.) if ye shall hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, according to the day of
the temptation in the wilderness; but exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
Thus you see shortly the verity of the doctrine, and the confirmation thereof.

Now the reasons of it are many, but chiefly these four. First, Thou fool
(says God to the rich man in Luke 12.20.) this night will they fetch away thy
soul from thee, then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?
And when men shall say (says Paul in 1. These. 5.3.) peace and safety, then
shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travail of a woman with child,
and they shall not escape. Many examples we have hereof in the Scriptures. The
world thought themselves sure, when they were eating and drinking, but then
came the flood, Luke 17.27. The morning was fair, when Lot went out of Sodom,
and yet before night, were the Sodomites destroyed. Genesis 19.23. Nebuchadnezzar
thought himself never more sure, then when he had builded great Babell, but
yet while the word was in his mouth, God humbled him down upon his knees. Dan.
4.12. And well was Herod when he began his Oration to the people, but before
the end thereof, and his departure from them, the Angel of the Lord smote him,
so that he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. Acts 12.23. So that if
we do defer our repentance but one day, yea but one hour, death may prevent
us, before that we can repent, and so we shall be damned.

Secondly, because the longer that a man does post off his repentance, and
amendment of life, the harder it will be for him to repent and amend at the
last. Can the black Moore (says Jeremy in Chap. 13.23.) change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil. As though it were a thing impossible for a sinner, who has continued
long in his sin, to leave his sin, and to forsake it, and so to become a
good man at the last. And surely with man it is impossible, though it be
otherwise with God, unto whom all things are possible. For if we cannot
overcome a Lion, when it is young, and but a whelpe; how shall we be able to
overcome him, when he is old, and grown to his full power and strength? And if
we be not able to bow a tree of six years growth, it is in vain for us to go
about to bow it, when it is twenty years old or more. So, even so, it is also
with sin; the longer that we shall nourish it in our bosoms, the harder it
will be for us to ouer-maister it in the end, yea it will be impossible for us
to do it. For that will grow still stronger and stronger, and we our selves
shall be weaker and weaker. And therefore it is good to go about the cure of it
betimes, as we do about the cure of such wounds as are made in our bodies,
knowing that the longer that they be deferred, the harder is their recovery at
the last.

Thirdly, because God is to be served before all things (whether the world, the
flesh, or the devil) as Elijah the Prophet would be served before the widow
that fed him. 1. Kin. 17.13. Seek first the kingdom of God (says our Savior
in Math. 6.33.) and his righteousness, and all these things shall be ministered
unto you. So soon as man was created, a law was given him; to show, that he
should live under obedience from the day that he was borne in. So soon as he
is borne, he is baptized in the name of God; to show, that when we cannot run
to God, we should creep as it were to him. So soon as he begins to pray,
he says, Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, etc. before he ask his
daily bread; to show, that we should seek the sanctification of Gods name, and
the doing of his will before the food that we live by, much more before the
sins and pleasures which we perish by. And so soon, lastly, as he receives
any talent or gift from above, he is commanded to use them; to show, that we
must go about the Lords business, and not our own, and be occupied alone in
such matters, as may bring glory and honor unto his name. So that nothing is
to be preferred before the Lord, but the Lord before all things: and therefore
repentance not to be deferred any time, but the works thereof to be done out
of hand, that so God may have his due and right, in being served and honored
before all things, as he ought to be.

Finally, because all service whatsoever is only due unto the Lord, who may
justly challenge unto himself (as his own due and right) our selves, and all
that we have. Ye are bought for a price (says Paul in 1. Cor. 6.20.) therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit; for they are Gods. We must love
the Lord our God (you know) with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with
all our strength. Deuteronomy. 6.5. And we are delivered from our enemies (you know
also) to this end, that we should serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Luke 1.75. So that God must have all,
we may not take so much as an hour, no not so much as a minute of an hour,
and bestow the same upon the service of the world, the flesh, or the devil,
but he that has made us, must have every part and portion thereof. And
therefore in all these respects, you see, we must immediately without any further
delay apply our hearts to wisdom, and seek only those things, which do
concern the Lord and his worship, and take no more care for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

The use hereof stands chiefly in three things. eternal salvation upon an
uncertainty. Herein the devil does most bewitch them, and lull them fast
asleep in the bed of their security. Look how racking usurers are wont to
give day to young heirs from time to time, until at last they wind their
inheritance from them: So does he deal with them; he does harden them on still
from day to day in their sins, until he has gotten them for his own
inheritance, and firm possession in hell for ever.

But to leave the world, let us come to our selves: out of this in the second
place we may learn, that it is our part and duty, not to run on still in
our transgressions, as the most do, but presently and out of hand to leave
them, and to turn unto the Lord our God. As Abraham rose up betimes in the
morning, and deferred no time, to go to sacrifice his son Isaac, according to
Gods commandment, as it is in Genesis 22.3: So we must make have, and post off no
day, to go to sacrifice our sins and transgressions, that do offend the Lord
and displease him. All of us do confess that our sins must be left, and that
God must be served, but we cannot accord of the time, when to begin. One says,
he will begin, when he is rich; another says, he will begin when he is free;
an other says, he will begin, when he is settled; an other says, he will
begin, when he is out of debt; an other says, he will begin, when he is old,
and so forward. We are like the Jews in the first of Haggay, who said: The
time was not yet come when they should build the Temple. But beloved the time
is present, we must change our minds out of hand, and turn to the Lord. Did
ever any whom we read of in the Scriptures, feeling the piercing power of Gods
Spirit, smitting upon the rocks of their hidden hearts within, take time with
the Lord and say. They would yield after two months, four months, or the
like? No, no, they did not covenant with the Lord for any time, but presently
they were converted: they stayed not an hour houering and hammering, looking
back to Sodom with Lots wife, or to Egypt with the Jews, but joyfully
embraced the truth without delay. To day, to day is the voice of God, as you
have heard, and to morrow, to morrow is the voice of Satan Christ (you know)
would not suffer one of his Disciples to go home, as it were to bury his
father, but he must leave that business to others, and come and follow him, as
it is in Math. 8.22. So that no delay in the world must be made, but
immeadiatly we must leave our sins, and go about the Lords business. Many
reasons there are (as you have heard before) to move us up thereunto: I pray,
remember them well, and let them stir you up to the discharge of your duty,
that this day wherein I do now speak unto you, may be the day of your sound
co^uersio^ unto the Lord, and for the which hereafter you may rejoice for
evermore. Say not with your selves, that you will repent hereafter. For first,
you are not sure that you shall live till hereafter. As the Israelites died
while the meat was in their mouths, Numb. 11.33. And as Jobs children were
killed as they were banqueting in their eldest brothers house. Job 1.18. So
may you die, or be killed on the sudden before you are aware. Go to now
(says James in Chap. 4.13.14.) ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go
into such a city, and continue there a year, and buie and sell, and get
gain: and yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow. For what is your life?
It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away. Secondly, if you had a charter of your lives (as no man has) and so were
sure to live till hereafter, yet you are not certain, that then you shall
repent. For repentance is not at your commandment, neither does it lie in your
power to take it, when you will: but it is the only gift of God, and in his
hands alone to bestow it upon whom he will, as you may see plainly by Paul's
words in the latter end of the 2. chapter of his 2. Epistle to Timothy. And the
longer that you do continue in your sins (as you have heard already) the
harder it will be for you to leave them in the end. For custom of sinning
takes away the sense of sinning, and long abode in darkness makes stark
blind. Lastly, if repentance were in your power (as it is not in the power of
any mortal man whatsoever) and so you were certain to turn at the last, if
you would; yet you ought to repent presently, because your selves and all that
you have or can do, do belong to the Lord your God, who must be preferred
before all things, as was showed before unto you. For God must have a morning
sacrifice, as well as an evening. And it is very absurd and wicked, for a man
to offer the first of his vintage to the delights of sin, and to serve God
with the lees and dregs of his age: or to yield the flower and strength of his
life unto the foul affections of wretched nature, and to reserve for God the
very refuse and weakness of his time: wherefore turn, turn I beseech you,
even now presently, and make no longer delay. I speak to you young men and
maids, because you must remember your Creator in the days of your youth,
before old age does come, as Solomon does teach you in Eccles. 12.1: and
because you are now aptest and fittest to do service unto the Almighty, as
having all the powers of the body and soul in the chiefest vigor and strength,
for the exercises of pure and holy region. You must not spend your time in
vanity, or in the carnal pleasures of your flesh, after the manner of wicked
young men and maids; but in holiness and righteousness, according to the vow
and promise, which you have made with your God in baptism; after the manner of
godly young men and maids, who are regenerated and adopted to life eternal.
And to restrain your selves the better in, you must always remember with your
selves, that you shall be brought at the day of indgement, to answer for every
thing, which you shall do amiss in this time of your youth, be it great or
small, whether words or deeds, as you may see in the end of the eleventh chapter
of Eccles. I speak to you old men and women, because you have lien too long in
your sins, and are ready to drop into the grave. For it is too much
already, that you have spent your former time, after the lusts of men, and not
after the will of God, in much wickedness and abominations. As Paul says in
Ephe. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light: so I say to you, Awake all you that sleep in your
sins, and stand up all you that are dead in your trespasses, and so the Lord
shall give you life, and not death. It was too late (you know) for the foolish
virgins to knock, when the gate was shut against them; and for the rich
glutton to howl and cry to Abraham, when he was tormented in hell. So before
it be too late for you, remember your selves, and while you have light walk in
the light, and betake your selves soundly unto the Lord, as it does become you.
In a word, I speak to you all without exception, because I love you all, and
would gladly have you godly here, and vessels of glory hereafter; happy for
this world, and happy for the world to come: make no covenant with your sins,
but renounce them all from this day forward for evermore. And albeit they shall
as it were; cry out and say, Why do you come to dismiss us before the time? As
the devils said to Christ, when he did cast them out, Why do thou torment us
before the time? yet hearken not unto them, but give them a deaf ear. For the
time 1e already come, if not past already. For we should have repented long ago
in sackecloth and ashes, if we had done as we ought to have done; but yet now,
now let us turn, and defer no day or hour longer, but while the word is
sounding in our ears, let us be converted unto the Lord. He is the fondest
fellow that ever was heard of, who falling into a deep river, and having
present help offered him, whilst he is yet swimming on the top of the water,
makes refusal of it, and answers, that he will not be helped till another
time, or before the next day; when as he is in danger to sink presently, and
to be drowned every minute of an hour. Beware we that we deal not after the
same manner; for if we shall defer our repentance and conversion to God, our
case is no better then his. For every minute of an hour we stand liable
through our sins to be thrown into hell. What? shall we then stay and not
turn? As God said to Israel, Turn you, turn you from your evil ways: for
why will you die, o house of Israel? so say I to you; Turn you, turn you from
your cuill ways; for why will you die, o people of England?

Some (I grant) will out of hand repent in words, but not in deeds: they have
Jacobs smooth voice, but Esaus rough hands. Their mouths (as one says) are
greater then their hands, which is monstrous in nature: for they word it much,
but they work it little. As the fig tree (spoken of in the Gospel) had
fair leaves, but no figs: so they have goodly words, but no holy works.
They are deciptfull Gibeonites, and painted tombs, like the hypocritical
Scribes and Pharisees. But we must do otherwise, we must be sound in heart as
Nathaniel was, who was a true Israelite; and be plentiful in good deeds, as
Job was, who was a true child of God: we must repent both inwardly and
outwardly, in word and in work: and so I hope you will do, as also make have
for to do it.

Object. But here some man may say, what a stir is here about repentance?
here is more have required, then needs for: a soft fire makes sweet malt: we
may repent at our ley sure. For first, nullum tempus est poenitentiae
inidoneum, there is no time unfit for repentance. Secondly, Deus est Deus
misericordiae, God is a God of mercy, he will forgive us, whenever we shall
repent and turn to him. Ans. This, this has always been the fashion of the
world. Look how indulgent mothers are wont to deal with their children going
to school, that have ouer-slept themselves, and do fear the correction of
their masters: even so do carnal men and women deal with themselves, when
they have continued too long in their sins, and do hear the judgments of
the Lord sounded out of his word against them for the same. For as these
mothers are wont commonly to comfort their children (thus fearing) with one of
these two things, either that there is no time yet past, or else if the time be
past, that their master is a gentle man, and will forgive them: So they do
usually heart on themselves against all fear and dread whatsoever, by the
consideration of these two things; first, that there is no time unfit or too
late for repentance: secondly, that God is a merciful God, and one most ready
to forgive them, though they have posted off their repentance ouer-long, and
have not turned unto him in time, as they ought to hane done.

In this snare and cord of the devil, lest you also should be led along to
your destruction at the last, mark what answer may be given to these things.
To the first it may be said, that though no time be unfit or too late for
repentance, while we are here in this world; yet oftentimes we are taken out of
this world, before that we can think of repentance, and soundly turn unto the
Lord. For as many are taken away on the sudden, so it falls out by the just
judgment of God most usually (as an ancient Father does well observe) vt moriens
obliuiscatur sui, qui cum viueret oblitus est Dei, That he should forget
himself in the time of his death, who did forget God in the time of his life.
Again you must know, that late repentance is seldom or never good and true,
but always for the most part feigned and dissembled, like to that which was in
Pharaoh, Ahab, Saul, and others, who seemed to be sorry for their sins, and
desirous to have the hand of the Lord removed from them. For qualis vita, finis
ita, such as the life is, such commonly is the death. A good man has a good
end, and a bad man has a bad end. Lastly, you must always remember what was
said before; namely, that repentance is not in our power, and that we cannot
turn to God, when we will. And therefore as a beggar must take his alms, when
it is offered unto him, and not refuse it, because there is no time amiss to
take an alms: so we must take repentance when the Lord does offer it unto us,
and not upon such a foolish consideration cast it off, as now was touched. Now
to the second it may be answered, that though God be a God of mercy, receiving
all sinners unto himself upon their repentance and amendment of life: yet he
is withal a God of justice, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of all such as do hate him, as
you are taught in the end of the second commandment. David tells us in Psalm.
18.26. that he will show himself froward with the froward. Solomon shows in
Prou. 3.34. that with the scornful he scorneth. And in the first chapter of
the same book, Wisdom her self informs us, that she will not regard
wilful and obstinate sinners, turning unto her; in verse 28. saying: Then
shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but
they shall not find me; because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord. You know, how the Lord did swear in his wrath, that the
Israelites that did provoke him in the wilderness, should not enter into his
rest. Heb. 3.8. So that God will be far off at such a time to give
repentance, and upon repentance to receive to mercy. And therefore as the women
sung concerning Saul and David, saying: Saul has slain his thousand, and
David his ten thousand. 1. Sam. 18.7. so we may mournefully sing, that the
despair of Gods mercy has slain thousands, but the gross presumption of his
mercy, has slain ten thousands. Wherefore to conclude this point, let neither
of these impediments, nor any other whatsoever, hinder you from a present
conversion unto the Lord, but out of hand take him for your only God, and
serve him.

Lastly, here we may learn, what to do in regard of those, who are under us.
We must not suffer them to go on still in their sins, but break them quickly
to the Lords yoke and bow. He is a fond fellow, that will not break his
horse, while it is a colt, but let him run on till he be old, and shall fling
him into the ditch. And he deals very foolishly, that having a beautiful
standing cup, and very precious balm given unto him to put into the cup,
will not yet put it in, before the cup has stood long full of stinking liquor:
So we our selves shall be no better, if we shall suffer our children, and
others under our tuition, to go on in their childhood and youth unnurtured in
the ways of the Lord, and suffer them to live after their own will, and to
drink in the deadly poison of the world, whereby they shall be made unable to
be reclaimed at the last. But teach we them betimes, and labor we to bring
them to the knowledge of the Lord, and obedience unto his will: so shall not
sin be their destruction, nor rebellion be their overthrow. But more of this
elsewhere.

As thus we have heard when we must repent, so now let us hear, wherein
repentance does stand. And that is in two points, the one is knowledge or
understanding; the other is obedience or subjection. Of the former of these
mention is made in this verse; of the latter in the following.

Bewise (says the Prophet) ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth. Here
is that knowledge and understanding expressed, which is required of us in every
true and sound repentance: but what means the Prophet hereby, may you say? were
the Kings unwise? and were the Judges of the earth unlearned? Yes surely, for
otherwise they would never have rebelled against the Lord and his anointed, as
they did. Yet his meaning is not, that they were altogether without wisdom
and learning: for they had wordly wisdom and learning in great abundance;
but that they wanted the heavenly wisdom and learning, and therefore he does
exhort them to look for that. Mark here, there is a twofold wisdom and
learning; one that is earthly and from man: an other that is heavenly, and from
God. The children of this world (says our Savior, in Luke 16.8.) are wiser in
their generation, then the children of light. In which words he does intimate,
that as there are two sorts of men; the one wicked, called the children of this
world; the other godly, termed the children of light: so there are two sorts of
wisdom, the one for the body and this life; the other for the soul and the
life to come. This latter wisdom the Kings and Judges (here) wanted, but the
former they had. For the body and this life they were wise and learned, they
knew well enough how to rule and govern, and to turn all things to their
greatest honor and profit, that might be. But for the soul and life to come
they were unwise, and unlearned: they had no good experience in the word of
God, nor any sound knowledge to do their souls good, but herein (I say) they
were unlearned, and no better then fools before the Almighty. This the Apostle
does make most clear and evident in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the
second chapter thereof, the sixth verse and so forward, when he says: And we
speak wisdom among them that are perfect, not the wisdom of this world,
neither of the Princes of this world, which come to naught: but we speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom, which God had determined
before the world unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world has
known. For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. Lo, here you see, that the Apostle does not only say, that the Princes
of this world (who are here in our text spoken unto by the name of Kings and
Judges) are without the true and heavenly wisdom of God, but also does prove
it to be so, even because that they did oppose themselves against the Lord
Jesus Christ, and did put him to death.

Wherefore here by the way we may observe, that in truth, and before the Lord,
all are fools and unlearned, who do withstand Jesus Christ, and his kingdom,
and do live wretchedly, and not according to the Lords commandments. Howsoever
they be for this world, men of great reach and policy, and be well schooled in
all kind of literature for the government of humane life, and the procuring of
much honor and wealth unto themselves: yet being ignorant in the word of God,
and not seasoned with an heavenly wisdom, which may sanctify them in their
ways, but do live ungodly and unholy lives: they, even they, whatsoever they
be, be unwise and unlearned, and no better then fools and idiots before the
Almighty. For so also it does please his Majesty for to style them in his holy
word, as you may see in many places of the Proverbs, and namely in the first
chapter thereof; as also in the fourteenth Psalm, and sundry other places
besides. Hereof is it, that that comparison is made by our Savior himself in
the beginning of the 25. chapter of the Gospel according to Saint Matthew,
wherein all wicked persons are compared to foolish virgins, as the godly on the
other side are compared unto the wise virgins. And hereof also is that saying
of Paul, that the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God; and that the
Lord knows, that the thoughts of the wise are vanity. 1. Cor. 3.19.20.

Object. Yea, but this shall never sink into mine head, may some man say, that
thus the chief men of the country, and those that do bear the greatest stroke
and sway amongst men, and do know how to rule and govern themselves and others
well, should after this sort be reputed and taken for fools, and unlearned
persons, as you speak; I think rather, that the godly, and those that do
resort unto Sermons are such: for they are simple persons in my judgment, and
very idiotes indeed. Answ. It may be so indeed, for the natural man perceives
not the things of Gods Spirit: for they are foolishness to him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned, as it is in 1. Cor. 2.14.
But consider of things well, thou that art of that mind and opinion, tell me,
what is the property of a wise man, and of one well learned? Is it not to walk
circumspectly, and to provide best for himself, as well for the time to come,
as for the time that is present? Yes, for so we are taught in Ephesians. 5.15. and
in Luke 16. the beginning thereof, where the steward is commended for a wise
man, for that he did provide how to live, when his master should take away
from him his stewardship.

Well then go on, tell me in the second place, do those walk circumspectly and
provide best for themselves, who do war against the Lord and his Anointed, and
not fore cast what shall become of them after this life, but do run on still in
their sins, to be damned for ever? Answer me this point, if thou can.
Suppose thou did see a man, who is but weak and feeble, taking up weapons
against his sovereign Lord and King, who is most warlike and potent, and
challenging him into the field; would not thou take him for a fool, and one
destitute of good sense and understanding? But so deal all wicked persons (how
politic or rich soever they be for this world.) For they are but weak and
feeble persons, yet they war against their dread sovereign the Lord and
King, even the mighty God of heaven, who is able in the twinkling of an eye
to destroy them all. And yet shall they be wise and prudent with thee? Suppose
again, that thou did behold one in a place, where is both gold and brass in
great abundance, and goodly garments together with much base attire, so that it
should be lawful for him to take of either of them most freely which he would
himself; yet he would not meddle of the gold, and goodly garments, but would
be exceeding busy still, in gathering up the brass and base attire, reaching
after one piece here, and another piece there; what would thou judge of that
party? would not thou take him for a simple fellow, and a mere idiote? Yes,
I must needs do that, thou will say. So, even so, is the case here with men of
this world. For whereas they might gather up gold and goodly garments, that is,
provide for themselves heavenly graces, and everlasting happiness in new
Jerusalem above (where are more precious things, then ever the eye of man has
seen, or his ear has heard of, or can enter into his heart) yet they leave
them, and occupy themselves wholely in gathering up the brass and base attire;
that is, they leave the cate of heaven, and hunt after the world altogether,
being very busy about the pleasures and commodities thereof, which are nothing
in comparison of heaven. And shall not they then be unwise and unlearned with
thee? But if thou will not count them so, yet the Lord does, as thou have
beard, and let this suffice us. And by it let us be admonished to take heed of
all rebellion and wickedness whatsoever, lest we our selves be styled after
this manner, and be registered in the book of God, for fools and unlearned
persons. And so much shortly of this point bythe way.

In that the Kings and Judges are called upon to be wise and learned, we
observe this doctrine, that every person must labor to get unto themselves an
heavenly wisdom and understanding of the Lords will and word. Get wisdom
(says Solomon in Prou. 4.5.) get understanding, forget not, neither decline
from the words of my mouth; forsake her not, and she shall keep thee, love her
and she shall preserve thee. Wisdom is the beginning, get wisdom therefore,
and above all thy possessions get understanding. He is very frequent with the
like exhortations in many places also of the same book. Read them, I pray, at
your leisure, and mark them well. Paul in like manner, writing unto the
Ephesians, does stir them up to the same duty, saying: Wherefor be ye not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is. Ephesians. 5.17. David also
inioined the same duty upon his son Solomon, toward the end of his days,
saying unto him as follows: My son, know thou the God of thy fathers, and
serve him with an upright heart and willing mind, as it is in 1. Cron. 28.9.
Finally, the Lord himself does oftentimes make his moan and complaint for the
want of this wisdom and knowledge in his people, which is here required of us
all, teaching us thereby how necessary it is for every one, and how well
pleasing to himself. But at this time two places alone (to show the same)
shall content us. The one is in Esaias. 1.3. when he says: The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe; but Israel has not known, my people
have not understood. The other is in Jeremy 4.22. where you have these words:
For my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish children,
and have no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do well they have
no knowledge. By all which places we may clearly see, what does belong to us,
even a saving knowledge of Gods will, and an holy understanding of his ways.
We must not be like to the horse or mule that have no understanding (as David
says in Psa. 32.9) but we must be changed by the renewing of our minds, that
we may know what is the good, perfect and acceptable will of God, as Paul does
teach us in Romans 12.2.

And the reasons hereof are many. Jeremy does witness of us, in Jeremy 10.14.
and as David does confess of himself, in Psalm 73.22. saying: So foolish was
I, and ignorant, I was a beast before thee.

Secondly, because we shall never obey the Lord aright, until we know him and
understand his will, nor yield any faithful service unto him, as it does
become us. For the groundwork of all religion, and the foundation of all true
piety, is the knowledge of the Lord and his ways. As on the contrary side,
the cause and fountain of all disobedience against God, is the ignorance of
his will, and the vnlearnednesse of the same, as we have heard in this Psalm
already: and as we may see by Hosea his complaint, in the beginning of the
fourth chapter of his Prophecy, where he does make his moan, that men did
lie, and steal, and commit adultery, and that blood did touch blood, and
assigns this reason of it, even because there was no knowledge of God in the
land. And surely where men know not God, what can be looked for else, but all
impiety against God, and all unrighteous dealing against men?

Lastly, because all such as are ignorant of the Lords will, do not only err
while they are here, committing grievous sins against him, but shall be
damned also hereafter for ever. My people (says the Lord in Hosea 4.6.) are
destroyed for lack of knowledge. And Paul does show in 2 Thessalonians 1.8. that when
Christ shall come to judgment, and show himself from heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, he shall render vengeance unto them that do not know
God, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power. So that if we ponder of all these
reasons well, we shall easily grant, that there is cause sufficient, why every
man should labor and strive, to plant some heavenly knowledge within his
soul, and to become wise and learned in the statutes of the Almighty.

In regard whereof we see first, in what great fault the world is in. For there
is ignorance in every place. Alas, alas, most men know not aright, either that
God who has made them, or themselves, who are made by him. And as for the
grounds of true religion, and the rules of the Lords worship, they are as a
sealed and clasped book unto them. We dwell in a nation and country, wherein
the word of God has been freely read and preached many years together: yet it
is pitiful to hear and understand, what ignorance is still amongst men, and
how unwise and unlearned they be in the statutes of the Lord. God amend us. But
here some may say, that there was never more knowledge in this land, then now
is at this present. To this I answer, first, that our knowledge is nothing to
our long and continued teaching. For in regard thereof, we ought to be teachers
our selves, who yet are taught of others, and have need also to be instructed
in the very first principles of the word of God, and are become (many of us at
the least) such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat, as the Author
to the Hebrews does speak in the latter end of his fifth chapter. Secondly,
that our knowledge (for the most part) is not a saving, or sanctifying
knowledge, but talkatiue and discoursing: It hangs upon our tongue, and swimmes
about in the circumference of our brain; but it sinkes not down into the
bottom of the heart (as it ought to do) to bring forth a reformed life. For we
have many talkers, but few true walkers: and sundry there are, who can
discourse at large in matters of religion; but few there are, who feel the
power and force thereof, being deaded by the means thereof unto their sins,
and quickened up unto all fruitful works of righteousness, whereby God may
be honored, and man edified.

Secondly, by this we may see, that that doctrine, which is most current at
Rome, and those places where Popery does bear sway, to wit, that Ignorance is
the mother of Devotion, is most false and erroneous, and to be abandoned by us,
that are true and holy Christians. As Christ does say to the Sadduces: Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, in Mat. 22.29. making there
ignorance the cause of error, which is clean contrary to their doctrine: so he
says to the Jews: Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, in John 5.39. imposing
there this duty upon all that do intend to be saved at the last, to be
conversant in the Scriptures; which is dissonant altogether to their practice
and teaching. If I would stand upon such a common place as this is, I could
allege both places and reasons enough to overthrow them in this respect, who
are herein most like unto those cursed and hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees,
who did shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, neither going in themselves,
nor suffering others that would enter, to come in. But let these things thus
spoken suffice, and cause us not only to see their fault, and that woeful
misery wherein they live, but also to behold the sweet and great blessing of
knowledge, which God has vouchsafed unto us, through the happy government of
his Anointed over us, who does permit us to enjoy the Gospel freely for the
good of our souls, and does take a care also for the right publishing of the
same; that so his subjects might not be ignorant therein, but have the saving
knowledge thereof established within them, to their eternal happiness, and
everlasting life.

Lastly, out of this we may observe, what is our own duty to do, and that is
this: We must cast away our ignorance, and become learned in the Lords will; we
must set his statutes before our eyes, and make them the men of our counsel;
we must call after knowledge, and cry for understanding. We must seek after
wisdom, as after silver, and search for her as for treasures. Let the word of
Christ (says Paul to the Colossians, chap. 3.16.) dwell in you plenteously in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with a grace in your hearts unto the Lord. Here you
see, he would not have them to content themselves with a little knowledge, but
they must labor to be furnished with a great abundance thereof, that they
might know how to carry themselves in all matters, as well for them of mirth
and joy, as for others that were more grave and weighty. And good reason too;
for the word of Christ must be the stone Ezell to us, that we may know where
to stay and remain (as David did 1. Sam. 20.19.) It must be our tinne-stone,
(spoken of in Zecharie 4.10.) that we may know the measure of the walls of new
Jerusalem, our glorious and renowned City, the foundation whereof is of
pearl, and the streets of pure gold. In a word, it must be our star, that we
may know which way to go directly unto all our duties, that are here below, and
unto all those sweet beatitudes that are above. Doubtless without the true
knowledge thereof, we are all of us like to Sampson without his eyes, or unto
an hawke that is hooded: we shall wander from the Lord we know not whither, and
commit most grievous abominations; but we shall never serve him aright, or do
any faithful homage unto him. For only those that know his name do trust in
him, but others do renounce him, as the Scriptures do teach us. Knowledge (we
find by experience) does help men exceeding much in the ways of eternal
life. For it does direct them aright both what to judge, and what to do in all
matters of says and manners, and it is a good bridle unto their lusts. It is
most like unto a clock, whereby thou may know how thy life is spent; as
also unto a man, which strives to beat the dust out of our clothing.

Wherefore, I beseech you, and that in the bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ,
have a care of knowledge, and labor by all means possible to plant a saving
wisdom within your hearts. Remember the reasons that were alleged before, to
move your selves to this, think oftentimes upon them; and if neither your own
beastliness by nature, who have gross and thick scales of blindness upon
the eyes of your souls, as Paul had upon the eyes of his body at the time of
his conversion, can stir you; nor yet the commodities that comes by the
knowledge of the Lords will, which are sweet and great, can awaken you; yet
(yet I say) let the fear of your own damnation rouse you up hereunto. For it
is a most woeful thing to lie burning in hell, and yet (as it has been
observed) all ignorant persons do so. Suppose here were a fire prepared to
burn you, and to morrow you must be cast into the same, and there lie burning,
piece after piece, till all be consumed; would not you do any thing which any
man should command you to do, to avoid this punishment? O yes, any thing I
doubt not. And yet will you do nothing to avoid hell fire, which is
tenthousand times worse then this, where you shall lie burning body and soul
for evermore? Shall not this move you up to get knowledge and understanding? If
you were blind in body, you would give great sums of money to have your
perfect sight again. And yet will you do nothing for the sight of the soul,
which is blind, and can see nothing at all? Will you take no pains to have
that covering that covers all people, and that veil that is spread over all
nations, to be removed away from you, that you may be troubled no more with it?
Darkness was one of the greatest plagues which God brought upon Egypt. But
as for the darkness of the soul, that is worse then that by many degrees. For
as this does hinder the judgment (which as an eye should guide our actions)
from discerning things fit to be done, and fit to be undone; and as it does
let our hearts and minds from going and walking about our works of godliness,
so that we cannot pass through the sweet fields of true comforts and heavenly
meditations to life eternal: so it does make us fall oftentimes into most
horrible sins while we are here, and it does cast us down at the last into the
bottomless pit of hell (wherehence we can never come out again) so soon as
we do depart from hence. And will you then rest in it, and not seek rather to
come out of it? What? could Pharaoh (that wicked King) use means to come out
of that bodily darkness wherein he was, by sending unto Moses and Aaron for
that end and purpose, and by offering unto them a certain kind of liberty to
depart out of his country? And will you sit still, and not use means to come
out of the spiritual darkness wherein you are, which is far worse then that
of his was? Remember your selves, I pray, and do as you ought to do.

But here some man may say, For the servant (says our Savior in Luke 12.47.)
that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes, yea with more then he that knew it not, and did it not.

Here is a goodly shift for men to cosen their own souls by. and does it not
yet the other which is ignorant of it, shall be beaten with stripes, and he
also shall be cast into hell, as well as the former; howbeit his judgment
there shall not be altogether so severe as his. And will thou willingly be
beaten with any stripes, and go to that fearful and euer-tormenting place?
Lastly, that some ignorance does increase a man's fault, and make his judgment
to be the more cruel at the last, to wit, that ignorance, which is wilful and
affected: as when a man has means to know the Lords will, and yet does refuse
it of wilfulness, or stubburnnesse, even because he will be ignorant still,
and not have knowledge to control him in his sins, or to stand up as a Judge
against him in the end of the world, when the books of men's consciences shall
be opened, and every one judged according to the things which are written
therein; for this does make him to be the more abominable before the Lord, and
does procure unto him the heavier plagues to be executed upon him. I will show
this unto thee by a familiar example, taken even from thy self. Thou have two
servants, the one of them does reverently hearken unto thee, to understand thy
will, and pleasure; and he is content to learn it to the uttermost, but yet he
will do nothing accordingly: the other does so far scorn thee and thy work,
that as he will do nothing for thee, nor according to thy mind, so he will not
come into thy presence to hear what thou will say unto him, or standing before
thee, will give no heed to thy words. Which of these two (I pray thee) is the
worse, and the viler in thine eyes? and which of them will thou beat most? Is
not the latter? Yes, I must needs confess that, will thou say; for he does
commit a double fault, he will neither hear nor do; but the other does commit
but a single fault: though he will do nothing, yet he is content to hear. So,
even so, must thou judge of most ignorant persons, who do live now in our
days. For they commit a double sin, in that they will neither learn the will
of God, nor do it; whereas others commit but a single sin, in that they only
neglect it, and not do it. And therefore, I say, they are most abominable
before the Lord, and shall at the last be beaten of him with more stripes, then
others shall be. Wherefore let this be no impediment to thee, but rather a spur
in thy side, to prick thee forward, to get knowledge and understanding.

But what course shall I take, may thou say, to attain unto it? Thou must
perform these things, First, thou must pray earnestly unto the Lord, to
entreat him to disclose his mind unto thee, and so to circumcise thine ears
and heart, that thou may understand his will, and see the wonders of his law.
For wisdom comes by prayer, as James does show, in chapter 1.5. saying: If
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man; and it shall be given him. Secondly thou must
regard the Ministry of the word most reverently, and frequent always the holy
exercises thereof, watching daily (as Solomon does speak, in Proverbs 8.33.)
at the gates of Wisdom, and giving attendance at the posts of her doors.
For this is an excellent means to beget, and to increase knowledge within us;
as Paul does well observe in many places of his Epistles, and namely in the
fourth chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians; and as we our selves do find to
be most true by our daily experience, both in our selves and others. Thirdly,
thou must meditate carefully with thy self both day and night in the law and
word of thy God. For as the infant does grow from strength to strength, to be
able to go by it self, by sucking and plucking his mothers breasts: so does
the child of God grow from knowledge to knowledge, by hanging continually upon
the two breasts of the Lords book, the old and new Testament. Fourthly, thou
must confer and talk considerately with men of GOd, and with such as carry
knowledge in their lips, and are able to discover unto thee the secrets of
the Almighty. For they shall make thee to understand that, which thou could
never attain unto by thy self, and cause thee to see those points after some
clear and evident manner, which were before unto thee as dark as a riddle it
self; as thou may see by the example of Philip and the Eunuch spoken of in
the eight chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Fifthly, thou must teach others
circumspectly that which thou thy self do know already, and rehearse the
ways of the Lord evermore unto them. For by teaching another, a man does teach
himself, and ripen his own knowledge and judgment exceeding much, as many by
their own practice have found it to be most true, to the great joy and comfort
of their souls. Finally, thou must abstain most prouidently from all such
things, as will hinder thy knowledge, and bring a spiritual darkness upon
thee. For as he that would have a perfect sight, to behold all things clearly,
must beware of every thing, which will blemish his eye: so all those that would
have a good understanding in the counsels of the most High, must take heed of
all such matters, as are a stop and impediment thereunto. Now these are in
number chiefly three. The first is a lodging of the affections of the heart,
and the cogitations of the mind upon this world: for as outward darkness
grows sometimes by two much gazing upon bright and glistering things, as in
experience we find by white snow, white paper, and the like: so does inward
darkness grow also by fixing the mind too much upon the glistering glory of
this world, the pompes and pleasures that shine in it. Proof hereof is that
rich glutton, that wealthy Barne-builder in the Gospel, and that turne-coate
Demas, of whom Paul speaks: who all were blind (you plainly see) with gazing
too much upon this tempting world. The second is a continuing in evil, and a
doing of things which are wicked and naught. For as outward darkness grows
by long being in darkness, as in a prison or elsewhere; (for by experience it
is found so often) so by long custom of walking and living in the outward
works of darkness, grows a strong and thick inward darkness in the heart of
man or woman, Confirmation hereof is Ahab, Cain, Herod, Judas, and such like
spoken of in the Scriptures, and too many in our days, who having long used
swearing, lying, uncleanness, and some other vices, are grown so blind in
them, that they neither will leave them, neither be persuaded, that they tend
so to their destruction, as they do. The third and last is, greediness after
the world, and the commodities thereof. For as outward darkness grows now
and then by overmuch heat, as we know, the hot dung falling into our eyes
will hurt them, as it is said it did Tobies: so ouer-hote desire of gain
hurts the inward light, as is apparent, both by that which has been said
already touching the world, and by that also which Paul says, that They that
will be rich fall into temptations, and into many foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction. 1. Tim. 6.9. For this is a kind
of pestilent heat within, which as powerfully thrusts out the inward eye and
light of the mind, as ever any outward heat did the eye of the body. Now of
all these must we take heed, and void them. Thus thou have shortly the things
which thou must perform for the getting of knowledge. To conclude therefore,
look well unto them, and with care and conscience do thou use them: and no
doubt but thou shall become wise and learned, and do that which is here
required at thine hands.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
THE SEVENTH SERMON upon the second Psalm.
PSALM. 2. VER. 11. and 12. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling.

Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way: when his wrath
shall suddenly burn, Blessed are all that trust in him.


THE Prophet having spoken in the former verse, of the first part of
repentance: he comes now in these verses to speak of the latter part thereof.
As he would have the Kings and Judges in the first place to get unto themselves
wisdom and learning: so he would have them in the second place to become
subject and obedient, and so to carry themselves in the whole course of their
lives, as they ought to do. First toward God the Father in the eleventh verse;
then toward God the Son in the twelth verse. For seeing they had before
rebelled against them both, he would have them now return in all submission
unto them both. To the Father they must perform these duties. They must serve
and worship him; and whereas without fear, they cannot but fail in many
points, which do belong unto him; they must fear and reverence him in their
hearts, being most willing at all times to do his commandments, and most
unwilling to offend him in any thing whatsoever. Moreover considering he is a
God most loving and bountiful to all such as are under him, and do truly
belong unto him, they must rejoice and be glad in him, and triumph (as it were)
again in his praise and honor. Yet forasmuch as he is one withal, full of
Majesty, and has judgments enough in store to power down upon them that are
proud and arrogant, they must be humble and lowly, and even tremble and quake
before him. Now to the Son, this is that which they must do. They must in like
manner adore and worship him, and in token of their true love and loyal
subjection unto him, they must go unto him, and kiss him. And lest they should
be slack or backward herein, the Prophet moves them up to this their duty by
strong and forcible reasons. For first he sets down before their eyes the great
inconveniences which otherwise will fall out unto them upon the neglect or
contempt thereof. For thereby it will come to pass, that the Son will not
only be angry, and much offended with them for it, but also in his anger and
great displeasure will bring great judgments upon them; which shall consume
them, and that in the way, before they can bring their purposes to pass; yea
though he burn but a little, and therefore much more will he (...), when he
shall thoroughly take on against them. Then second, he shows them what benefit
they shall have if they will perform it, and do as he would have them do; for
then they shall be blessed, and have joys and happenesse for evermore, though
others perish and are destroyed. For Blessed (says he) are all that trust in
him. And so with this Epiphoneme or grave sentence, he shuts up the whole
Psalm and ends it.

In sum, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, as though there
were but two brances included in it. But yet if you would go more plainly to
work, there are four things exacted of us. The first is that we serve the
Lord; the second is, that we fear the Lord; the third is, that we rejoice in
the Lord; and the fourth is, that we tremble before the Lord. The former of
these seems to import the worship and honor it self, which is due unto him;
and the three latter the manner how it must be yielded unto him. And that is
first, in fear, as the fountain from whence it must proceed; then secondly,
in joy and trembling, as the hands by which it must be presented unto him. Of
all these by Gods grace I will speak somewhat, and that in order as they lie
in our text.

Serve the Lord, says the Prophet, that is, give unto God the Father his due
honor and worship, which hitherto you have kept from him; disobey him no
longer, but submit your selves unto him in all obedience to his will, and
fulfill his commandments. For by the name of the Lord, here is understood God
the Father, as it was in the fourth and seventh verses of this Psalm before
going: and under the word service, is comprised all that honor and worship
which does belong unto him in the whole course of our lives, and which does
chiefly stand in the obeying of his voice, and in the keeping of his
commandments.

In this, Matthew does instruct us as much in the fourth chapter thereof, and
tenth verse, when repelling the temptation of the devil, who sought to be
worshipped of him, he said unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is written; Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The Scripture
is full of this matter, but one place more, as containing all the rest under
it, shall suffice us at this time. And that is in Revel. 14.7. For there you
shall find, that this is the very sum and principal matter, whereof the
whole Scripture does entreat, and which all the Preachers in the world from
time to time do deliver unto their people; when the Angel flying in the midst
of heaven, and having an everlasting Gospel, to preach unto them, that dwell
on the earth, does cry out and say: Fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven and earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters. So that this is a point as clear and
manifest as the Sun at noone days, when it shines most brightly over all
the word.

And the reasons hereof are many, touch two. The one is in regard of his making
and creating of all things. For seeing we are his workmanship, and have our
whole lives and being from him, he having created us and made us of nothing; it
is good reason, that we apply our selves, and all that we have to his worship
and service alone; according to the judgment of the Church triumphing in
heaven, whereof mention is made in the Revelations Chapter 4. verses 10.11. For
the 24. Elders (noting out the Saints in heaven) are there reported to fall
down before him that sat on the throne, and to worship him that lives for
evermore, and to cast their Crowns before his throne, upon this ground and
consideration, that he had made them, and all things else, saying: Thou ort
worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power. For thou have created
all things, and for thy wills sake they are and have been created. Iosuah his
exhortation unto the children of Israel in the 23. and 24. chapters of Iosuah.
For in these places you may see, that he does persuade them to fear the Lord,
and to serve him in uprightness and in truth, and to put away all false gods
from amongst them, only upon this reason and foundation, that God was good and
beneficial unto them, destroying all their enemies before them, and placing
them in a fruitful country, where they had goodly cities, which they did never
build; excellent vineyards and Olive trees, which they did never plant; and
other notable commodities, which they did daily enjoy without any labor and
toil of theirs. And surely when these things were thus lay de down before
their eyes, they also upon the due consideration thereof, resolved with
themselves, to serve the Lord and to worship him, and to do as Iosuah had
exhorted them for to do, as is apparent about the midst of the 24. chapter
before quoted. And you know, that equity and conscience does require, that if
a man hire a servant, and give him meat and drink and wages, that he should
do his business, and be obedient unto him, and his commandments. And so
should it be betwixt God and us, seeing we are his servants, and have all that
we have from him, even every morsel of meat that we do eat, and every piece
of cloth that we do put about us, as all other things besides; we should be
tractaable to his voice, and be always ready pressed to do his commandments.

Wherefore as this may control them, The hearers of the law (says Paul in
Romans 2.13.) are not righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be
justified. And our Savior does teach us, in Luke 12.47. that the servant who
knows his masters will, and prepares not himself, neither does according
to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Yea, you your selves do know,
that as the ignorant, who know not the Lord, must be cast into hell, and there
lie boiling in torments for evermore; so must the disobedient also, and all
such who obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to Paul's
words in 2. These. 1.8. And therefore, you see, the Prophet here does not only
call for wisdom, and learning, but also for worship and service. Content not
then your selves with your knowledge and understanding, but go on forward, and
become faithful servants unto the Lord in doing his will. And look what you
do require of your servants that are under you, do you your selves perform
unto your God that is above you, and whose servants you are: hear his voice
and obey it. For what? shall he make you, and place you here in this world, and
that in a fruitful soil, and in the days of much peace and plenty? and yet
will you not serve him? What? Shall he nourish you daily, give you light to
see, air to breathe in, food to eat, liquor to drink, garments to wear,
houses to dwell in, and lade you with other infinite blessings, both for this
life, and the life to come? and yet will you not honor him, and walk
according to his commandments? Doubtless, if your servants should refuse to
do your business and work, you would turn them out of doors, and not feed
them upon your own cost and charges, and in the end pay them their wages; and
will God then take it well at your hands, if you shall refuse to do his
business and work? will he always then nourish you, and give you a good
recompense at the last? No, no: but he will turn you out of house and home,
and pay you your wages (according to your evil deserts) in that lake that
burns with brimstone and fire, where you shall be tormented for evermore. For
you know, that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, must be hewn
down, and cast into the fire, according to John the Baptists words in the
third of Matthew, and the tenth verse thereof. For as you your selves, after you
have taken some pains, and bestowed some cost in the planting of an orchard,
do look that the same orchard should bring forth fruit, not for other men, but
for your selves, and your own uses; and if it happen, that any trees therein
do wax barren and fruitless, you will cut them down, and not suffer them
there to remain: So you must think, that the Lord will deal with you.
Behold, you are his orchard and vineyard, he has taken great pains with you,
and has been as it were at great cost and charges to plant you (as he speaks
of Israel in the fifth of Esaias, and the beginning thereof;) and he looks that
you should bring forth fruit, not to your selves, or to the world, or to the
devil, but to the honor and praise of his name. Now then, if you shall be
barren, or bring forth wild fruit much displeasing unto his Majesty, assure
your own souls, that he will not spare you, but cut you down, and not suffer
you to grow in his orchard still; as our Savior does most excellently declare,
by the parable of the fig tree, in the 13. chapter of the Gospel according to
Saint Luke, and about the beginning thereof. Wherefore, I beseech you, serve ye
the Lord your God, and worship him; be obedient unto his voice, and let no
commandment of his seem grievous or irksome unto you, but endeavor you to
observe and keep them all. And as he that has called you out of darkness
into his marvelous light, is holy, so be you holy in all manner of
conversation, knowing that we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, to
this end, that we should serve the Lord without fear, all the days of our
life, in holiness and righteousness before him. Luke 1.74.75. And therefore
in one word, submit your selves unto the Almighty at all times, and in all
matters, and do as James does will us for to do, when he says, Be ye doers of
the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Iam. 1.22.

Thus far shortly for the worship or service it self, which does belong to
God the Father: now follows the manner how it must be yielded unto him. For as
God does respect the matter of every work, so he has an eye also unto the
manner of the same, as you may see most evidently by the story of the
Scriptures, and namely by the first chapter of Esaias, and the sixth chapter of
Matthew: where you may find, that he does even loathe and reject alms,
fastings, prayers, sacrifices, and other holy duties, which are commanded by
his own Majesty; for that they are not done in the same manner, as they ought
to be. Note it (I pray) well by the way, and make use thereof to your selves,
that in all your ways you may not only look, that the work it self, which
you go about, be correspondent to the will of your God; but also besure, that
you do it with that holy mind and affection in every respect, as it ought to
be done both by you and others. And seeing that here are three things required
of us by name in the service of the Lord, as noting out the right manner how it
must be exhibited unto him, namely fear, joy and trembling; labor you to have
them all established within your own souls, and rest not till they be rooted
there within you. For they will do you exceeding much good, and fit you every
way unto your duties. The first of them, which is fear, will make you careful
of all the commandments of God, and cause you to fail in none of them. The
second of them, which is joy, will make you constant and stable, and cause you
never to be weary of well doing. For the more delight that a man does take in a
thing, the more willing is he for to do it, and it is a kind of death unto him
to be abridged from it. The third and last of them, which is trembling, will
make you humble and lowly, and cause you never to swell for any good which you
shall ever do. For he that does tremble does suspect his own works, and dare
not trust in them, but does sear lest some judgment will fall upon him for
some defects therein. Thus in a word or two I pass over the manner of Gods
worship, as being a thing not so clear in it self, but somewhat questionable,
whether, to wit, it be agreeable to the spirit of God in the text or no; for
some may doubt thereof. But yet on the points themselves I will stand more
largely upon, as on matters which are most evident, and beyond all question and
doubt whatsoever.

The first of them is fear. In fear, says the text, or after some, with
reverence; both come almost to one end, but the former word is the better of
the two: and he means the fear of his children, who are loath to offend him,
not so much for fear of punishment, as for loathsomeness on their part of love
to displease his Majesty, or to cause him to be angry with them for any thing.
There is a twofold fear, the one is holy and good, called filial or
childish; the other is bad and naught, termed servile or slavish. The filial
or childish fear is such an one, as is in children toward their parents, who
do reverence and fear them, as being unwilling to offend them any way, whether
by words, or deeds, through the tender love and affection, which they do bear
toward them. The servile or slavish fear is such an one as is in bond-slaues
toward their masters, who do reverence and fear them, and are loath to
displease them whether one way or other, through the dread and fear of
punishment, which otherwise they are sure to have, if they offend and do
contrary to their duties. So that some do fear the Lord through love, and care
to offend him; and others again do fear him through dread of punishment, and
power to torment them. Of the former of these is mention here made, and not of
the latter. It may be defined thus: It is a reverence of Gods Majesty in our
hearts, whereby we are made unwilling to offend him in any thing, and most
willing to please him in all things, through the love which we bear toward
him, and the great excellency of superiority, dignity, power, and goodness,
which we see in him, far above our selves, and all other creatures besides.
This is a virtue most necessary, and requisite for all Christians whatsoever.
For hereupon hang the whole service of God, and all graces that belong to man,
as might at large be showed, if it were needful. But let the Example of
Abraham suffice, who thinking that the fear of God was not in Gerar, utterly
despaired of any other virtue; and therefore moved his wife to say, that she
was his sister. Genesis 20.11. In this respect the fear of God is both by David
in Psalm. 111.10. and also by Solomon in Pro. 1.7. called the beginning of
wisdom, that is, the root and fountain of all goodness, and therefore of
the whole worship and service of God spoken of here in this place. So that
there is good cause, why the Prophet should require of us, to serve the Lord
with fear. Where-hence let us collect this doctrine, Thou shall fear (says
Moses to Israel in Deuteronomy. 6.13.) the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall
swear by his name. Esaias does require the same duty of his people in chapter
8.13. when he says unto them: Sanctify the Lord of hoasts, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread. But to pass other places, mark what
Solomon does say of this in Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear (says he) the end of
all, fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.

There are diverse reasons to move us hereunto. they live and are maintained;
and look who are most bountiful and prodigal unto them, to them again do
they become most obseruant and obsequious, as being afraid to offend them in
any thing. Simple persons fear great states, and such as excel in glory and
majesty above the^felues, though other wise they owe no homage or subjection
unto them. Loose livers and wantons fear grave and religious persons, and such
as are zealous for Gods glory, and earnest for the salvation of man's soul, as
being ashamed to power out their evil words, or to commit their wicked facts
before them and in their presence. Lastly, every one by nature is forward to
apply himself to those things, which he does know will bring great profit, and
benefit unto himself, as being desirous to be out of misery, and to live in
happiness and prosperity all the days of his life. Now to apply this to God
and to our selves; first, he is of power and might, we are no body unto him in
that respect; he is able to pay us home, if we do displease him. This reason
our Savior does urge in Math. 10.28. when he wills his Apostles not to fear
men, who can kill but the body, but to fear the Lord, who is able to destroy
both body and soul in hell. Secondly, he has authority and jurisdiction over
us, we are his, he has made us, and he may do with us what he will, as the
potter does with his vessel, or as the master does with his servant. This
reason the Lord himself does press in Malach. 1.6. saying, A son honoreth his
father, and aseruant his master. If then I be a father, where is mine honor?
and if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts unto you, o
Priests, that despise my name. Thirdly, he is good and kind to us, his
benefits which we do enjoy from him, are infinite, we have all that we have
from him, even our lives and all the rest. This reason David does touch in
Psalm. 130.4. when he says unto the Lord, But mercy is with thee, that thou
may be feared. Fourthly, he is a God of infinite Majesty, and we are but
poor simple creatures, made of the dust and clay of the ground; the heaven of
heavens cannot contain him, neither can the Angels themselves stand before him
for his brightness, unless they cover their faces with two of their wings.
This reason does Moses glance at in Exodus 20.20. when he shows the end,
wherefore the Lord did publish his law in that glorious and maiesticall manner
as he did, in thunders, lightnings, and the like, saying: For God is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not. Fifthly, he
is holy and righteous, his eyes are pure eyes, and cannot abide to behold sin
and iniquity. This reason is laid down before the eyes of the Israelites
oftentimes in the old Testament by the Spirit of God, when he would draw them
to the true fear and service of the Almighty, from all such manners as were
found among the Gentiles. For then still his holiness and purity was enforced
upon them. Finally, the commodities, which the fear of the Lord being once
had, will bring unto us, are exceeding large and great. For first, it will make
us holy and frameable unto Gods will, in avoiding those things which he has
condemned, and in performing those things, which he has commanded. The fear
of the Lord (says Solomon in Prou. 8.13.) is to hate evil, as pride and
arrogancy, and the evil way. Where he shows, that in what measure any one
fears God, in the same measure, he does loath and detest all evil; yea not
only the open and abominable sins, which the world does condemn, but the
most secret and hidden. For he says not, to hate evil, as murder and
adultery, but pride and arrogance, which lie in the heart, and do not show
themselves to the world, yet he that fears God, will hate them. Secondly, it
will make us blessed and happy in all our ways. Blessed (says David in Psalm.
128.1.) is every one, that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways. This
reason the sweet Singer of Israel has alleged in Psalm. 34.9. when he says,
Fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for nothing wants in them that fear him:
nothing he means, which is good and wholesome for them, as he speaks
elsewhere, saying: The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will
he withold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.17. So that the fear of
the Lord brings with it always a plenty of all good things, and comes laden
with the blessings of God, whersoeuer it comes. For all these causes now
rehearsed should we fear the Lord, and in reverence endeavor to please him.

The use that we must make of this, the very beginning of wisdom, and the
soundation or groundsill of Gods worship (as has been proved unto you
already,) it is impossible, that either they should have any true wisdom in
them, or else religiously should serve the Lord, when they want this fear, the
only cause and fountain thereof.

Secondly, this may serve to stir us up to get the fear of the Lord unto our
selves, and to labor by all means possible to bring our hearts thereunto, that
so we may truly say of our selves, that the Lord is our fear and our dread.
But against this it may be objected: John's words, in 1. John 4.18. Secondly,
that we are delivered from our enemies, that we should serve the Lord without
fear, as it is in Luke 1.74. To this I answer, We have not received the spirit
of bondage (says Paul in Romans 8.15.) to fear again, but the Spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abbah, Father. So that true love is so far off from
casting out this holy fear of adoption, or reverence, whereby we are drawn to
hate sin in love toward God, and not for punishments sake; that it does
bring it in, and establish it within us. Yet this is to be noted by the way,
that servile fear is a good means at the first to bring us unto God. For it
prepares a place for the holy Ghost to bring him into our souls, as the
bristle brings in the third: but when he is once entered into us, and has
taken up the possession of our souls within us; then this fear is gone, as
the bristle is when the third is entered into the hole. Besides this you must
mark, that as the children of God are not by and by perfect, so a piece of
this fear may still remain in them: whereupon some make a fear, which is in
the midst of these two fears, the filial and servile, calling it timor
initialis, an entering fear, reaching out her right hand unto the one, and her
left hand unto the other, being found even in men renewed by the Spirit of love,
whose sanctification is but begun; and therefore as they fear separation from
God by offense, which belongs unto filial fear, and proceeds from love:
so they fear punishments and evils, which God has prepared for the offenders;
which belongs to servile fear, and proceeds from the same. But to proceed
on, the fear that is here required of us, and which is to last for ever, is
that fear of reverence, whereby we beholding on the one side our own paruitie
and smalnesse, and the excellency of our God, and his incomprehensible Majesty
on the other side, dare not lift up our selves against him, but do stand in awe
of him with all reverence, being loath to offend him in any thing, and most
careful to please him in all things. It is such a fear as is in loving
children toward their parents, in dutiful wives toward their husbands, and
in faithful subjects toward their Princes. The fountain whereof is love, and
a due consideration of his excellency every way above us. To this fear must we
stir up our souls every day. And so far as we would either worship God
aright, or have his blessings powered down upon us (whether for this life, or
the life to come) we must strive and contend with our souls and hearts to
bring them hereunto, that so we may always reverence and dread the great name
of the Lord of hosts. Doubtless we shall nener serve the Lord aright, or
become happy and blessed, until this be brought to pass. Well we may
perform some duties in outward appearance, but we shall never look to all with
a good heart and conscience within: and howsoever we prosper and flourish for a
while, yet woe and destruction will overtake us at the last. But let his fear
be once planted within us, then shall we inwardly and from the heart, have a
respect unto all his commandments, and be most careful to please him in all
things. And then again shall we prosper and flourish for ever, not only in
this world, but much more in the world to come. If any then shall come unto us,
to entice us unto any wickednesle whatsoever, as Potiphars wife came unto
Joseph, and enticed him unto uncleanness; we shall not consent unto him therein,
no more then he did unto her, who was kept therefrom by the fear of his God.
And if any cross then shall begin to assault us, and to lie heavy upon us,
the Lord will be ready to remove it from us, and to supply on the other side
all our defects and wants whatsoever. For he is always present with them that
fear him, and there is no good thing, but they shall have the same stom him,
as you have heard already. Wherefore look you to this your duty, and fear ye
the Lord your God. Remember, that he is your Father, your Master, your Savior,
your Benefactor, your King, and one that is full of power and majesty, and of
such pure eyes, that he cannot endure any corruption whatsoever. For shall the
child fear his father, the servant his master, the subject his king, the
poor his benefactor, the redeemed his savior, the weaker his stronger, the
baser his more honorable, and the loose persons such as are stayed and grave for
religion? And yet will not you fear the Lord your God, who is all these unto
you? Yes, yes, we would do it, may you say, but what course shall we take to
attain thereunto? You must do these things. First, you must deny your selves
quite, and renounce utterly all the carnal wisdom, that is in you. As
Solomon says in Prou. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear God, and
depart from evil. As though a man could never fear God, so long as he is well
conceited of his own wisdom. And indeed no more ca^ he; For the wisdom of
the flesh is enmity to God, and will not be subject in any sort unto his law.
Romans 8.7. Secondly, you must pray heartily unto the Lord for his heavenly grace
to help you in this respect. For it is he alone, that must bestow this fear
upon you: for otherwise you can never have it, who of your selves can do
nothing, no not so much as think one good thought, as Paul does confess of
himself in 2. Cor. 3.5. Lastly, you must often and seriously think on all the
reasons before going, as also deeply meditate with your selves upon Gods
fearful judgments, which he has executed upon sinners from time to time.
For this will breed in your hearts a sense and awe of his Majesty, as we may
see by many stories in the Bible, and namely by that which is written in the
Acts of the Apostles, chap. 5. verse 11. where you find, that fear came on all
the Church, and on as many as heard what judgment fell upon Ananias and
Sapphira his wife, when both of them fell down at Peter's feet, and yielded up
the ghost before him. Wherefore perform these things with care and conscience,
and no doubt, but you shall have the true fear of the Lord at the last within
you.

Hitherto of the first point, now follows the second, which is joy.
Andreioyce, says the Prophet. In the entrance of the Psalm it is evident,
that they were grieved against the Lord, and that they did, as it were, loathe
and abhor him; but now on the contrary side they are willed to rejoice in
him, and to be glad in his behalf: and there is good reason for it too, not
only because he has set such a good and bountiful king over them, as his
Son is; but also because he himself is so sweet a God, and his service so
pleasant and beneficial as it is. Then as men do desire to have their servants
to rejoice in them, and in their service, and to do whatsoever they do with
cheerful hearts: so the Lord would have them his servants to rejoice in him
and in his service, and not to go about his business with murmuring and repining
souls, but with cheerfulness and alacrity of spirit. Learn we then from
hence this doctrine: Be glad ye righteous (says David in Psalm. 32.11.) and
rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are upright in heart. Likewise
Paul writing unto the Philippians in the 4. Chap. and 4. verse thereof, he does
stir them up unto the same duty, saying: Rejoice in the Lord always, again I
say, rejoice. But those places, which are in Esaias 54.1. and in Zophonie 3.14.
etc. are excellent for this purpose, if they be well considered of, and
therefore (I pray) read them at your leisure, and mark them well.

But to leave the doctrine, uses; how much does he rejoice in these? daily
experience does teach us, that they are the only joy and delight of his soul.
And even so should it be with us in regard of our God: for he does pass and
excel all others whatsoever, as in wisdom, in mercy, in justice, in power,
in love, in goodness, in glory, and the rest. And therefore we should rejoice
in him, and make him our sole delight and pleasure.

The other reason is this, because he does, and also is most able to do us most
good, and to bless us both here in this world, and also in the world to come.
For it is an usual thing with us evermore to rejoice in those things, which
are good and profitable unto us, and the more commodious and beneficial any
thing is unto us, the more commonly do we rejoice and delight therein. I need
not demonstrate this unto you by any examples. For you know it too well your
selves. Doubtless, if any of us have but a friend, who is always kind and
loving unto us, as being ready still with his horse to lend it us, with his
plough to labor for us, with his money to lay it out upon us, and with his
body to go and come at our desire for our profit and emolument, we cannot but
greatly rejoice in him, and be exceeding glad, that ever we met with such a
good and faithful friend. But behold (dearly beloved) the Lord our God does
pass him by many and infinite degrees: for all that we have we have from him,
he does never fail us, but he does help us every day and night, and he is
able to do us good for evermore; to bless us here, and all that we have, and
to crown us with glory hereafter in the heavens above, where shall be joy, and
no sorrow; health and no sickness; holiness and no wickedness; glory and no
shame; riches and no poverty; life and no death; and in one word, happiness,
and no misery. And therefore there is great cause why we should rejoice and be
glad in him.

But this is condemned you may see in Jeremy 9.23.24. where the Lord does
forbid the wise man to glory in his wisdom, and the strong man to glory in
his strength, and the rich man to glory in his riches; and does command all to
glory in him, and his knowledge. And therefore Paul does say, Let him that
rejoices, rejoice in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1.31. and 2. Cor. 10.17.

Secondly, as this does controlle them, who take no pleasure in the Lord, but
do go about his service with unwilling and heavy hearts, like unto the Bear,
that is drawn to the stake: so it does teach us, that that is but a slander,
which is cast out against us, when men say, that Religion breeds melancholy,
and cuts off all mirth and joy. For here you see, we are called upon to
rejoice: and this joy also that is in us, is exceeding large and great. For
Peter does show, that it is unspeakable and glorious in 1. Pet. 1.8. when he
says, that we do believe in Christ, though we see him not, and do rejoice in
him with joy unspeakable and glorious. And Esaias also does show (in chap. 9.3.)
that it is like the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice, when they divide a
spoil. True it is, that religion does cut off all wicked and profane mirth
and joy; but as for that, which is holy and good, consisting in the Lord and
upright ways, it does bring that in, and daily increase it in our souls. For
as Paul does teach us in Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God stands not in meat
and drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. As
here is righteousness in the Church or Kingdom of God, so here is peace and
joy, which the holy Ghost does work in the hearts of men. You may see in Psalm.
68.3. and Psalm. 106.5. that rejoicing does belong to the people of God. But the
righteous (says the Prophet in the former of these two places) shall be glad
and rejoice before God, yea they shall leap for joy. And again he says in
the latter of them: Remember me, o Lord, with the favor of thy people, visit
me with thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice
in the joy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance. The music that
was used under the Law in the Temple may well declare this thing: for that was
typical, and figured out the true joy and mirth, which should be in the
Christian Church, where is the assurance of the remission of sins, and life
eternal. Surely to speak all in one word, Gods children have more joy of
heart then the wicked have, as David does declare in Psalm. 4.6. and this their
joy also is of longer continuance: for it shall never be taken from them, as
our Sauiors words do import, in Ioh. 16.22.

Finally, out of this we may learn, to stzine against our sorrow and
pensiveness, that so we may rejoice still in the Lord and his ways. For
seeing we are called upon for this duty, we must perform it. We must rejoice
and be glad in the Lord, as the Church does speak of her self in the
Canticles, Chap. 1. ver. 3. Howsoever we may mourn sometimes for our sins,
and be pensive for our transgressions: yet we must not suffer our sorrow to
overcome us, but we must overcome it, and break out into joy and mirth before
the Lord. And this our joy and mirth must not be in feasting, in playing, and
in wickedness, according to the course of this world, but it must be in
spiritual matters, and in the holy exercises of religion, which do belong unto
the Lord. We must go about the business of our God, and his holy service, as
cheerfully, and as willingly as if we went unto a feast; and take as great
delight and pleasure therein, as we do in any banquet whatsoever; according
unto the example of David, and others, spoken of in Psalm. 42.4. who are said
there to go into the house of God with the voice of singing and praise, as a
multitude that keeps a feast. And that this may the better be performed of
us, we must first labor to be fully reconciled unto God, and to be assured
that he is become our God and Savior. For otherwise we shall never rejoice in
him aright, but rather detest and abhor him. Secondly, we must know and
remember, that the service which he does require of us, is a reasonable
sernice; and that there is a great reward laid up for them which shall do the
same. For otherwise it will be grievous and irksome unto us; but this will make
it easy and pleasant, and as sweet to us, as the honey, or honey comb; as David
does speak of it in regard of himself, in Ps. 19.10. Wherefore look (I pray)
unto both these things, that so the Lord and his service may be unto you, the
very joy, and rejoicing of your hearts. And in any case be never quiet or at
rest, until you have brought your hearts to this, even to rejoice in the Lord
your God, as it is here in our text required of you. For this joy being once
had, will be marvelous commodious and beneficial unto you. For first, it will
bring comfort unto you in the midst of all your troubles, and take away the
sharpness thereof from your souls. Secondly, it will help the good estate of
your bodies, and make them the more strong and healthful. For a joyful heart
(says Solomon in Prou. 17.22.) causes good health, but asorrowfull mind
dries the bones. Thirdly, it will fit you for the service and worship of the
Almighty, and cause you to be very prompt and expert in doing the same. For the
heart is fittest for holy duties, when it does rejoice, as Elisha was to
prophecy when the musician played. 2. King. 3.15. Finally, it will confirm
you in your holy religion, and so establish you in the same, that you shall
never shrink away from it while you live. For we are never weary of that,
wherein we do rejoice, but the more we do the same, the more greedy still are
we for to do it, and it is a kind of death unto us for to leave it. And yet
will you not for all this rejoice in the Lord? Remember your selves, and labor
for to do it, and give no rest (I say) unto your souls, until you can bring
it to pass. And so I come unto the last point, which is Trembling.

As we must rejoice in the Lord, nothing doubting of his love and good will
toward us, so we must tremble before him, carrying our selves with all
reverence and lowliness toward him, as it does be come us. And therefore the
Prophet does add, in trembling. Rejoice (says he) intrembling. It is manifest
in the former part of the Psalm, that they were high-minded, and stout against
the Lord, in that they did take up weapons and arms against him: but now the
Prophet would have them to tremble and quake before him, and to do all service
unto him with humbleness and lowliness of mind. Where there is joy and
gladness of heart, there oftentimes do men forget themselves, and become too
bold and malapert. Now, lest they should do the like, they are commanded here
not only to rejoice in the Lord, but also to tremble before him, that so there
might be found in them no lightness or wanton behavior, but all reverence and
grave carriage whatsoever, with an humble soul, not lifting up themselves in
any of their works, but even trembling before him, that is the Judge of the
world. Whence we collect this doctrine, Almighty. Paul shows in Philipp.
2.12. that we must work out our salvation with fear and trembling. There are
two great evils which do hinder man's salvation. The one is carnal security:
the other is the pride of the mind. Carnal security makes a man too
negligent in the doing of good works, and does cause him oftentimes to fall
into many offenses, and sins. And pride does make him too arrogant in his
good works, when he has done them, and causes him often to attribute that
unto himself, which does belong only unto the Lord and his grace. Herein the
devil has a great stroke, and skill. First, he labors to keep us from
good works, by making us secure and careless. Then secondly, if he cannot
prevail therein, he endeavors to make us proud of our good works, by
lifting up our souls with an high conceit therein. Against both these does
the Apostle here go about to arm the Philippians. First, setting fear against
carnal security: then, trembling against the pride of mind. And as there the
Apostle deals, so does the Prophet here in our text. He would not have us
only to fear the Lord, but also to tremble before him. The like in effect we
have in Hebrews 12.38. Where the Apostle shows, that seeing we do receive a
kingdom, which cannot be shaken, it is our part to have grace, whereby we may
so serve God, that we may please him with reverence and fear. So that nothing
must be done in the service of God lightly or arrogantly, but all with great
reverence, and humbleness of mind, whereby we tremble before him and fear
his judgments.

The reasons hereof are two. The one is, Esaias 66.2. when he says: And to him
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my words. For we must always do that, which will be well pleasing
unto God, and cause him to take a delight and pleasure in us, considering that
his love is better then life it self. Psalm. 63.3. The other is, because the
Lord does resist the proud, and such as be arrogant, and cannot in any case
endure them; as may be seen by our Saviors words, when he made mention of the
bragging Pharisie, and poor Publican, in Luke 18.9. etc. For after he had
showed what both of them had done, and how the latter of them was more
justified in the sight of God then the former, he gave this reason of it,
saying: For every man that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that
hu^bleth himself shall be exalted. For we must evermore avoid that which will
cast us out of the favor of God, and bring his judgments upon us.

This then may serve to pull them down who are proud and hautie. Behold (says
Habakuk in chap. 2.4.) he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in
him. There is no goodness in such. They can never serve the Lord aright, but
they will always mar every good thing which they take in hand. Look upon
the^ even in holy assemblies; if they tremble not before the Lord, nor quake at
his judgments, you shall find them enermore vnreuerent therein. They will
neither be attentive, neither yet will they bow and beck, as they ought to do:
either they will talk, or sleep, or gaze about, or read of some other matter
in a book, then of that which is in hand; or think on things at home or
abroad, or go out before all is ended; or laugh and grin when they should
rather mourn and weep, or do the like; yea when they should kneel lowly upon
their knees, they either fit or stand, or bow their bodies but a little. Such
irreverence and stoutnesse is found amongst them from time to time.

But here for our selves, we must learn to be humble and lowly, as Christ our
Savior was. And as we look to be respected by God, and not to be plagued by
him, we must labor to draw our hearts unto a trembling and a quaking before
him, that so we may carry our selves reverently in his worship at all times:
and when we have done all that we can do, not trust in any thing, but think
our selves to be unprofitable servants, and to come too short of our duties by
many degrees. But what shall we do, will you say, to attain to this? We must
perform these things. First, we must pray to God, that he would humble us,
and bestow upon us meek and lowly hearts. For by nature all of us are proud
and arrogant, like to Euah our first mother, who would not be subject to God,
but be as God herself: and of our selves we cannot be humble and lowly when we
would be, but God must humble us and make us lowly; who said in Zophonio 3.12.
Then will I leave in the mids of thee an humble and poor people, and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord. Secondly, we must consider often with our
selves, how base and vile we our selves are, and how glorious and full of
Majesty the Lord is. For by this consideration it may come to pass, that we
shall cast our selves down before him in most humble and submissiue manner, as
Abraham did, when he acknowledged, that he was not worthy to speak unto the
Lord, because he was but dust and ashes. Genesis 18.27. And as Esaias did, when he
cried out and said: Woe is me, for I am undone; because I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell in the mids of a people of polluted lips. For mine eyes have
seen the King and Lord of hosts. Esaias 6.5. Thirdly, we must always remember,
that all the service which we can do unto the Lord, is due unto him; that our
best righteousness is as a polluted garment; and that if the Lord should enter
into judgment with us, to reward us according to our ways, we could not
answer him one for a thousand, or be able to stand before him, or appear just
in his sight. Lastly, we must set before our eyes all the judgments of the
Lord, which he has executed upon men for their transgressions, and which he
has in great store for all such, as shall stand stoutly out against him, and
break his commandments. For they may quail us, and break the stony rock of
our souls to pieces, and make us cry out with Habakuk, saying: When I heard,
my belly trembled, my lips shook at the voice, rottenness entered into my
bones; and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble. For
when he comes up unto the people, he shall destroy them. Hab. 3.16. Remember
these things, and perform them.

Thus far for the duty belonging unto God the Father: now follows the duty,
which belongs unto God the Son. Wherein consider first, what must be done
unto him, then the Reasons to move unto the same. The duty to be performed is
this; they must Kiss the Son. The use of a leisse in the holy Scripture is
twosold, one of subjection, as in 1. Sam. 10.1. where it is said that Samuel
did kiss Saul, when he anointed him to be king of Israel: for this was in
token of his subjection unto him. And in this sense also is it taken in 1.
Kings 19.18. where the Lord told the Prophet Elijah, that he had left 7000 in
Israel, whose knees had not bowed unto Baal, and whose mouth had not kissed
him. Another of love and kindness, as in Genes. 45.15. where you find Joseph
kissing all his brethren, and weeping upon them: for this was in token of his
love and good will, which he did bear toward them. And so also is it taken in
Romans 16.16. where the Apostle does will the Saints to salute one the other with
an holy kiss. Here in this place it may be taken in both the significations:
for it was their part both to love Christ, and also to be subject and obedient
unto him. And therefore they must kiss him, not only in sign of homage and
subjection, but also as a sure pledge of their love and faithful trust, which
they will perform toward him. Yet chiefly the former of these is meant, and
not the latter. Howsoever, from hence we gather this doctrine, John's Gospel,
and the 23. verse thereof, where he does set down a reason, why the Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son: Because (says
he) that all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father: and
thereupon does conclude, that he that honoreth not the Son, the same honoreth
not the Father, which has sent him.

Now the reasons for this doctrine are two. Gideon, Reign thou over us, both
thou and thy son, and thy sons son; for thou have delivered us out of the
hands of Midian. Judges 8.22. So we may say to him in this respect, Reign
thou over us, both thou and thy Spirit, and thy Spirits holy word; for thou
have delivered us out of the hand of the devil. And this is the reason that is
pressed in the fifth chapter of the Revelations, by all the Saints and Angels
that are in heaven, why Christ is worthy of honor and glory, even because he
was killed, and by his blood has redeemed us to God, and made us Kings and
Priests unto him. Likewise Paul does show, that this was the end wherefore he
died for us and rose again, namely, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
quick, as it is in Romans 14.9. The other reason is this, because he will
hereafter glorify us, and take us to himself up into the heavens, where he
is, according to his promise in the bebeginning of the 14 chapter of Saint
John's Gospel. For this is the reason, which he used unto his Apostles, to
encourage them on unto all dutiful service unto himself, in the latter end of
the 19. chapter of Matthew. For when they did ask him, what they should have,
which had forsaken all to follow him, he answered them and said: Verily, I say
unto you, that when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his Majesty, ye
which followed me in the regeneration, shall also sit upon twelve thrones, and
judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And whosoever shall forsake houses, or
brethren, or fisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for
my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit
everlasting life.

The use hereof is first, Jews, Turks, and others who know not Christaright,
nor yield any reverence or worship unto him, as unto God the Father. For, as
after it does follow, they must needs perish and be destroyed for ever. There
is no salvation or life eternal to be had of them, but they shall be sure to
be damned in hell for evermore. For as it is in John 3.18. Every one that does
not believe in him, is condemned already. And as it is in 1. Ioh. 5.12. he that
has not the Son of God, has not life: he means eternal life, for of that
did he speak in the former verse.

Secondly, this must awaken us up all, and stir us to the execution of all
such duties, as we do owe unto the Son: we must not only know what he is
aright, either in regard of his person, or of his office, but we must withal
perform all loyal and faithful service unto him. We must kiss him, that is,
soundly love him, and carefully obey him in all his commandments. Learn we
then his statutes, and let us evermore observe and keep them. Whereas he has
a yoke, and has commanded us to take the same upon us, Math. 11.29. let us not
fling it away, or withdraw our necks therefrom, but with patient souls let us
submit our selves unto it, knowing that we must observe and keep whatsoever he
has commanded us, as it is in Math. 28.20. Happy were we if we could once say
to Christ, as the children of Israel did to Iosuah saying: All that thou have
commanded us, we will do; and whithersoeuer thou sendest us, we will go;
whosoever shall rebel against thy commandment, and will not obey thy words,
in all that thou command, him, let him be put to death. Iosuah 1.16 17.18.
Cause there is great wherefore we should do this. For what? Shall he die a
cursed and shameful death for us, to deliver us from hell and damnation? and
yet shall not we obey him? and through love do his commandments? Again, does
he daily bestow upon us great benefits? and do we look to be glorified by him
at the last? and to have glory and honor, and immortality through his means?
And yet shall not we love him? and be well content to take up his yoke, and to
do whatsoever he shall command us? But yet alas we do dishonor him
continually; we can blaspheme his name and swear by his wounds and blood, and
use his titles of Christ and Jesus irreverently: but where is a man almost that
does worship him aright, and love him as he ought to do? What? Could
Nebuchadnezzar and all the States men of his Provinces make a law, that
whosoever would not fall down before the golden image which they had made, and
worship the same, should be cast into an hot fiery furnace, and there be
consumed to death? And shall not we so much as dislike with our selves, and
inflict some punishment upon our own persons, when we cannot bring our souls
to fall down before Jesus Christ, the most glorious image of God the Father,
and worship him? For as for that image, it was nothing else but a dead piece of
gold, and a matter of detestable idolatry, to be abhorred of every one. But as
for this image, it is a living and a mighty God, and a thing of great joy to
all the world, to be embraced of all persons, as bringing life and blessedness
unto all. To conclude this point, I beseech you dear brethren, even as you
regard your own salvation, and happiness for evermore, love him, and do
whatsoever you can for him; and call him not only your Lord, as many do, but
honor him also as your Lord, as few do; and fulfill all his commandments from
time to time, as you ought to do.

And so I come to the reasons, which may move you hereunto. In number they are
two. the benefit or commodity, which we shall enjoy, if we do perform it, as
we ought to do. The former of these is set down in these words, Lest he be
angry, and ye perish in the way, when his anger shall suddenly burn. The
latter in these words, Blessed are all that trust in him. Both these do yield
us a large field to walk in, but I will be very succinct and brief in
handling them.

Lest he be angry (says the text) that is, lest he be offended and displeased
with you for it. Here is the first evil or inconvenience that will fall out
upon the neglect of our duty unto Christ. It will cause him to be angry, and
much offended with us for it. (And ye perish) that is, lest you your selves be
destroyed, and come to perdition. Here is the second evil or inconvenience
that will fall out upon the passing over of our obedience unto him. He will not
spare us, but he will punish us and destroy us for the same. And this
destruction of ours is amplified by two things. The first is by the
circumstance of the time: for as we shall perish, so shall we perish in the
way, that is, before that we can come to our iourneyes end, and fully
accomplish such things as we go about, and do intend to perform; which no
doubt will be a great grief unto us. For it is a grief unto a man to perish
at any time, but a greater grief by far is it unto him, to perish in the
midsts of his business, and to be cut off by death, or any other judgment of
God, before he can dispatch such matters as he is most desirous for to do. The
other is by the suddenness of it, or rather by the certainty of it, touched
in these words, When his wrath shall suddenly burn, or as others read it, If
his wrath shall burn though never so little. Of these two readings the latter
is the best, as most agreeing with the circumstance of the place, and the words
in the Hebrew text: for they are these, Chi ijbegar chimengat, that is in our
English tongue word for word, when he shall burn, though but a little; or
thus: though he shall be wrathful, albeit never so little. The last word of
all called chimengat does not signify suddenly, as it is translated in our
Bibles, but it does signify though never so little or but a little; for it is
compounded of chi and of mengat, the which mengat does come of the verb
Mangat, that imports to diminish, or to make small. And hereby I say, the
certainty of their perdition is noted out: for if they shall perish when he is
but a little angry, they must never look to escape that do anger him greatly,
and provoke him datly to wrath by their sins and disobedience,; but be assured
of destruction as the coat that is upon their back: as it is in our Proverb.
Thus in a few words you see, that there are two evils or inconveniences, which
fall out unto all such as will not love Christ, and obey him. The one is the
anger of Christ against such; and the other is his judgments proceeding from
that anger, which he will power down upon the^ to their utter overthrow and
destruction. And both these are urged by the Prophet, to draw us to all
dutiful service and subjection unto him. Wherefore let us consider here first,
what is noted of Christ and of those that will not submit themselves unto him,
as they ought to do: then secondly, what use we must make thereof.

Touching the former of these, there are four things noted and set down. The
first is, that Christ will be angry with men, that do disobey him. Look how we
are offended and displeased with our children and servants, and such others as
are under us, when they are stubburne and wilful, refusing to do our
commandments, and to submit themselves unto us: So is Christ Jesus our Savior
offended and displeased with all such, as will not do homage unto him, and
walk according to his commandments, but will do whatsoever seem good in
their own eyes, and follow the pleasures of their own hearts. The second is,
that he will not spare such, but destroy them, and bring most heavy plagues and
judgments upon them. For howsoever they may flourish and prosper for a time,
yet in the end they must come to perdition. As we, when we are angry and
wrathful with our people for their transgressions and offenses against us, do
beat them and lay them on, according to the quality and quantity of their
deserts: So will Christ deal with them, that break out daily against his
Majesty, and will not submit themselves unto his government; he will take them
and beat them, and lay them on stroke upon stroke, until he has crushed them
all to pieces. The third is, that the wicked shall never accomplish their
purposes to the full, but in the very way, as they are going about their
practices, they shall be arrested, and be brought to perdition, like the fishes,
that are taken suddenly in the net, and the birds that are caught in the snare,
even while they hunt after their prey, and do seek for food to nourish
themselves withal. The fourth and last is, that though Christ be merciful,
and the sweet Savior of the world, and so full of love and compassion, that he
was content to lay down his life for his enemies; yet when he is once angry,
albeit but a little, there is nothing but death and destruction with him. His
wrath is like the roaring of a Lion, howsoever his favor be like the dew upon
the grass; and he that provoke him to anger sins against his own soul.
This, even this, all shall confess at the last, when the kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
men, as well as others, shall hide themselves in dens and among the rocks of
the mountains, and say to the mountains and rocks: Fall on us, and hide us
from the presence of him, that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? as it is in
the latter end of the sixth chapter of the book, called the Revelations.

All these points are worthy to be stood upon, but I will refer them to your
own meditations. thoroughly, and let them have a most deep and serious
meditation in your souls, to do them good. And say not with your selves, that
Christ is merciful, and that therefore we shall do well, and see no evil,
howsoever we do offend; for he will forgive us all, and receive us to favor
again. But remember always what is in our text, namely, that he will be angry
with us, unless we do kiss him, and that if his wrath burn never so little,
we must needs perish, and that in the way, before we can bring our work to an
end. Oh deceive nor your own souls, he is even a consuming fire to burn up
all those that do disobey him. Those mine enemies (says he in Luke 19.27.)
which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay
them before me. He will take then no pity or compassion upon any, but he will
break and bruise all to pieces, who shall lift up themselves against him, be
they, whatsoever they be; and therefore submit you yourselues unto him, if not
for love, yet for fear of his judgments, which are most intolerable; some in
this world, and others in the world to come.

Having thus touched the reason, which is drawn from the damages which will
come to men, that will not obey Christ: let us now descend unto that reason,
which is derived from the commodity which they shall receive, that will obey
him. Blessed (says the Prophet) are all that trust in him. Though others do
perish, and are destroyed, who do withdraw their hearts from him: yet blessed
and happy are those, that do depend upon him, and make him their only trust and
confidence, they serving him aright, as it does become them. For here it should
seem that the word trust, which is a principal part of that worship and
service, which man does owe to Christ, is put for the whole worship and service
it self, by the figure Synecdoche, when one part is put for all. And well
might the Prophet use this word before all others, in regard of the judgments,
which he spoke of before, to note, that the godly, who have a care to obey
Christ, have good hope and trust in him, even in the midst of dangers; that
howsoever he be angry, and in his anger does destroy all others round about
the^, yet he will spare them, and do the^ good. And indeed, Christ is not as
some choleric men are, who in their rage oftentimes will lay on those that
are clear and innocent, as well as such as are guilty, and have committed the
faults: but he is one that will put a difference betwixt men, and do good to
those, that do depend upon him, and are obedient to his will, though he does in
his rage destroy the wicked, and all such as do rebel against him. Howsoever,
here we learn this doctrine, Blessed is the man (says Jeremy in chap. 17.7.)
that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. And blessed is he (says
David in Psalm. 146.5.) that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is
in the Lord his God. But more particularly concerning Christ (whereas these
places speak in general of the whole Godhead) mark what the Church does
confess of him in the second chapter of the Canticles, and the third verse
thereof. Like the apple tree (says she) among the trees of the forest so is
my well-beloved among the sons of men: under his shadow had I delight, and sat
down, and his fruit was sweet unto my mouth. Behold, she notes hereout, by a
notable comparison, the excellent commodities that she does receive by Christ
her husband, and the happy estate, that she does enjoy through his means. Add
hereunto also, that which the Lord himself has delivered touching those that
are under him, and do live obediently unto his government, in Ier. chap. 23.
ver. 6. saying: In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely. So that all that do trust in Christ, are happy and blessed.

And the reason thereof is this, because they shall never perish, John, and the
16. ver. thereof; where God the Father is said to have loved the world so, that
he gave his only begotten Son for it, that whosoever did believe in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For in these two things all
blessedness and happiness does stand: first, in a freedom from all misery
and destruction; then, in a possession of all joys, and life everlasting.

and let us place them wholly upon him. As they are cursed that do make flesh
their arm, and trust in man: so they are blessed that do make Christ their
arm, and trust in him. Remember what David said touching this matter. Lo
(says he to God, in Psalm. 73.27.28.) they that withdraw themselves from thee,
shall perish, thou destroyest all them, that go a whoring from thee. As for me,
it is good for me to draw near to God; therefore I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare all thy works. Let these things move up our hearts
to cleave fast unto Christ. Doubtless there is nothing wanting in him, which
is fit to be in one, on whom we are to place our trust. There are six things
required of such an one. First, power, that he may be able to help us.
Secondly, will, that he may be ready to do it. Thirdly, skill, that he may know
how to do it. Fourthly, remembrance, that he may mind us for the doing of it.
Fifthly, carfulness, that he may not post it off, or neglect it from time to
time. Lastly, boldness, that he may fear no inconvenience to ensue upon it,
to hinder him from the doing of it. But all these are in Christ. He is able to
help us, because he is omnipotent, and can do all things. He is willing,
because he loves us to the death. He is skillful, because all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom are hid in him. He is mindful, because his eyes are
always open upon us; as who does neither slumber nor sleep, but stand always
girded in the mids of the seven golden candlestickes to do them good. He is
careful, because he is touched with our wants and infirmities. Lastly, he is
bold, because he is Lord and King over all, and that Lion of Judah, that fears
nothing. Withdraw not then your hearts from him, but trust in him most
constantly for evermore.

Secondly, by this we see, that godliness is great gain or riches, as the
Apostle does speak: for trust, here you see, brings with it blessedness. It
is not a barren thing, but fruitful, it comes laden with all the blessings of
the Lord unto us. Cursed man will say, that it is in vain to serve God, and
that there is no profit in keeping his Commandments, and in walking humbly
before him, as it is in Mal. 3.14. But here we are taught the contrary. The
wicked that do rebel, they are cast down and do perish; but as for those
which do serve Christ, and trust in him, they stand up, and are blessed. Then
for as much as your labor is not in vain in the Lord (that I may use the
phrase of the Apostle) be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant always in the work
of the Lord; and trust you in Christ for evermore, which will thus bring
blessedness unto you.

Finally, seeing they are blessed that do trust in Christ, even then, when
others perish and are destroyed; we should not fear at any time, but be of a
good hope and comfort in the midst of all our calamities, as knowing that then
we are blessed and in happy estate, as well as at other times. For Christ does
know how to make a separation betwixt us that are his friends, and others that
are his enemies. Questionless, as God did put a difference betwixt the
Israelites and the Egyptians, in all such plagues as he sent amongst them,
sparing still the Israelites, and punishing the Egyptians: And as he did put a
difference betwixt his servant Noah and the old world, saving Noah, and
drowning the world: And as he did put a difference betwixt holy Lot and wicked
Sodom, delivering Lot and burning Sodom with brimstone and fire from heaven:
So will Christ put a difference betwixt us and others, to save us, and to
destroy them; as we may see most apparently in Math. 25.32. etc. where it is
said, that he will gather all nations before him, and that he will separate
them one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats,
sending some to hell, and carrying others with him to heaven. Let us then never
fear in any peril or danger whatsoever, whether of war, famine, plague, or
the like, lest we should perish with the wicked hand over head. We see he has
a care of his own, and what he will do, he can do. If it be good for us to
escape these worldly woes, we are assured we shall, as we are sure we live. And
if otherwise it please him to wrap us with others in the outward punishment,
yet shall we ever be sure to be distinguished from them in the eternal pain;
and these outward griefs shall be but means to lead us to everlasting joys.

Wherefore cleave ye fast unto him, and fear not: be of good comfort: though
others be cursed, yet you shall be blessed. For you see the difference of being
religious, and being profane; of loving Christ, and of loathing him. And this
difference here will (...)


