(...) Vell done thou good and faithful servant.


The Christian SOLDIER, His COMBAT, CONQUEST, And CROWN Against the three
Arch-enemies of Mankind. The WORLD, The FLESH, And The DEVIL.

There is none other that fights for us but only thou O God.

LONDON. Printed by R. H. for J. S. and are to be sold by Bernard Langford at
the sign of the blew Bible at Holborn bridge. 1639.

To his loving and indulgent Mother HELEN MELHUISH, The happiness of this
life, and that which is to come.
MOTHER,
HAving from your breasts received the first nutriture of my body, and by your
daily admonition and wholesome counsel a better aliment for the preservation
of my soul to whom then could I more fitly dedicate those my younger blossoms
of experience (next unto God my spiritual Father and the Church my spiritual
Mother) then to you my careful natural Mother? the Travayle, and pain you
endured at my birth was much, and for that I must ever owe you much obedience;
but what of that? had you only brought me into this miserable world, and there
left me sine cognitione dei without the knowledge of a better, I had not been
much the better, nay far worse: that I have not let the Counsel fall to the
ground, but by the help of my God made a hopeful improvement, let these
ensuing lines be an obedient Testimonial: to your perusal I leave them, that
the Armor therein mentioned may be your furinture, that those evils which the
craft, and subtility of the Devil, or man works against you may be brought
to naught, that in the end you may receive a Crown of Righteousness shall be
the prayer of

Your obedient Son. E. T.

To the Reader.
READER,
THis Christian Soldier came but lately to my acquaintance, he was, me
thought, at the first sight well qualifyed, but some what meanly habited, upon
further conference had put him into a garb suitable to his condition, by way of
thankful Requital he related unto me the necessity of undertaking the
Christian Combat, the use of the Armor therein to be employed, the danger of
the adversaries, their several Attempts, their strength, and power; then
showed the way how to come off with victory, lastly used some further motives,
and encouragements to take up Arms, and that to be done without any further
delay; the security of these times calls for publication of such discoveryes; I
have therefore made that common which was delivered to me in a more private
manner. Not to hold thee any longer in that to which this but introduces.

I bid thee heartily farewell. I. Sp.

The SUMMONS, To take up Arms, (and that speedily) against the three
inveterate Enemies of Mankind. The WORLD, The FLESH, And The DEVIL.
WHosoever thou art, of whatsoever degree, sex, or Condition, if thou have not
as yet entered the field against the common- Enemies of thy salvation, let me
advise thee now at this very instant whilst thou art reading this summons to
buckle on thy arms, and march out speedily, it is Arm, arm, arm.
high time, the Enemies are grown strong and potent for want of opposition,
whilst thou lie sleeping out thy time they have almost entered, nay they have
already take possession of thy soul; do thou not perceive how they begin
to smother the thoughts of heaven, to quench the good motions 1 These. 5. 19.
of the spirit? they are ready to advance their own Diabolical thrones in thy
heart, sin begins to reign Romans 6. 12. 7. 23.
in thy mortal body; the (...) of the members rebels against that of the
spirit, thy understanding is darkened, thy will instead of conformity to Gods
is grown rebellious, all the facultyes both of body and soul are ready to
yield themselves weapons of unrighteousness to sin; is it not high time Romans
6. 13
then to look about thee? and greive not that holy spirit that Ephesians. 4. 30
has marked thee out to; a better design; thou have in thy Baptism received
pressed money to fight under Christ's banner, and to continue his faithful
Soldier to thy life's end; did thou not there promise, Catechism in the
book of Com. Prayer.
and vow to forsake the Devil and all his works, the pompes and vanities of
the wicked world with all the sinful lusts of the flesh? this was the end of
thy Baptism, and let me tell thee plainly, it is great pity that ever that
Sacramental water should have wet thy face, if thou should now forget the
end of thy Christian calling; who made thee a Christian? thou wast not Non
natus, sed factus Christianus
borne so, no natural work (I am sure) has done it; Christianity grows not
on the bitter Root of Nature, thou art therefore called of God to be a
Christian, thou art called of Christ to be a Christian Philip. 3. 14.
Soldier. S. Paul gloried more as he was a Christian by calling, then as an
Apostle by his function; hence it is that a Christian calling is the confluence
of all happiness; if it G. Nazianzen.
were possible to contract all the excellencies that are in Excellency of the
Christian calling. Math. 13. 45.
most eminent callings, the same are to be found in Christians, A Christian is
that Mercator gemmae, he that sells all he has, and trafficks for the
Pearl; a Christian is the Right Soldier that fights the good fight; 2 Timothy
4. Rev. 5. 10.
a Christian is that Royal Priest that is made unto God who shall reign on
the earth: lastly he is the man that fits on the white horse which had a bow,
and a Crown given him better then the Crowns of Kings and Princes. Rev. 6. 2.
these Heathens were surely foolish that called Christians poor Originalls but
of yesterday, a fond people they were that thus judged; not to speak of
Crowns, put but in privileges of Christians.
the honors which attend on Christians, they will be found unspeakable; what is
like unto that of talking with God? walking with God? bearing the Genesis 17. 3.
Act 11. 26 Genesis 4. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Romans 8. 15
name of Christ? fighting under his banner? entertaining the spirit into our
hearts: excellent also are the Privileges that attend on Christians, the
comfort 1 Pet. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 5 1 These. 1. 6.
of joy, unspeakable, peace, of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, as S. Paul
has is concerning the Jews, to whom belong the adoption and Romans 9. 4.
the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the law, and the Dignity of
Christians
service of God, and the Promises; hence it is that they are 1 Pet. 2. 9.
styled (...) generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
people: if it be thus whilst we are in the Race, how glorious will it be 1
Cor. 9. 24.
when we have finished our Course? if it be thus in the Combat, what will it
be in 2 Timothy 4. 7
the Conquest? if there be so much honor in the person that grace has made a
Christian, what then is to be found in the grace it self* every man rises to
honor three ways.

1 By Favor. A Christian made honorable by favor.
2 By Descent. 3 By Virtue.
And a Christian has all these several rises; but it is grace that makes him
truly noble; procul dubio ea est vera Nobilitas quae in favore Dei S. August.
^onsistit, there is not a greater honor then to be in favor ^ith God.

The Bereans are called No^le Act. 17. have not I planted be a Noble vine?
(says God) of the Church. Jerem. 21. are there not vessels of honor 2 Timothy 2.
20? all ^ese titles of honor are given regard of Gods especial ^vour, this is
the estate of a Christian by Gods favor truly honorable.

Secondly, a Man is honorable by descent when he comes 2. A Christian made
honorable by descent Romans 8. 15 Mar. 3. 35.
from honorable parentage and untainted house, if title, and descent make
honorable then may the Christian be accounted truly noble. He calls God,
Father, Christ, brother; whosoever shall do Gods will which is in heaven he is
Christ's brother, and sister, and Mother; here is a noble alliance. Matthew. 12.
50.

Lastly, a Man is made noble by virtue, and that is the chief A Christian made
truly honorable by virtue.
Nobility, here it is that a Christian has his primeexcellence; for virtue is
not to be found out of Christianity, moral virtues are but shadows, in a
Christian, every virtue is a grace, and grace is that which ennobleth states
Prove. 14. it sets the stamp of Honor upon Christians, nay it ennobleth souls.
S. Paul, S. John, Ephesians. 3. 8. Luke 16. 20
Lazarus, to themselves they were but ragged, but grace made their souls so
honorable that they had a guard of Angels to convey them into Abraham's bosom;
thus the gracious calling of a Christian is made honorable both in body and
soul, good reason; it is a calling of God distinguished from others of men,
other callings are honorable by way Great difference betwixt the calling of
Christians, and that of Men.
of assignement, this flows immediately from God, it has its deduction from
him, does not depend on any thing from man, this is the right calling, all
others are but crafts and trades, then surely if Christians have their calling
from God, a Christian is a man of God, but if the name and practice agree not,
aliud professione, aliud conversatione, then the name of Christianity is not a
Comfort but confusion, the true mark of a Christian is not magna loqui, but
vivere: it were better be a bad Heathen then a bad Christian, to have the
form of Christianity, and 2 Timothy 3. 5
not the power is mere hypocrisy; omne nomen ab actu a S^holler is known by
his study, a Merchant by traffic to practice godliness is the proper Act of a
Christian, and the buffetings of Satan are the marks of a Christian Soldier,
yet not every scratch or scarre can be termed the Churches glory, but when it
is as some times: with the Romans, quot vulnera, tot ora, so many wounds, so
many tongues to express the glory of God; all those wounds which are received
in wars for the Countries good are Gods honor, it was the saying of Maelius,
that he had no arms, or coat of Heraldry to brag of Hae cicatrices sunt
meae imagines. Sal^^st. In ipso non sunt vulner a sed ego habco in ipso claro
loco.
but those honorable scarres received in combat for his Countries safety; thus
Telamon upbrayded Ulysses, that he had more words then wounds; it was
Alexanders honor to go bare in that place where he was wounded; thus did he
likewise encourage his Father being lame of his foot, go on and shame not to
limpe, every step you tread is a pace of honor; here was glory but not in
Christ, the wounds were stigmata, but not stigmata Christi, here was glory, but
in the concrete, not in the Gal. 6. 18.
abstract; then is the true glory when Christ is made the aim of all
encounters, then whatsoever The true works of a Christian Soldier.
blows shall be endured will appear as so many honorable trophyes erected to
his glory.

Add unto all this for thy further encouragement, the Justice of the Christian
Soldiers cause. Ephesians. 6. 7.
Justice of the quarrel betwixt thee and the Enemies, no bad cause. God
himself has commanded to put on the whole armor, to resist the Jam. 4. 7. 1
Pet. 5. 8.
Devil, to be sober, and vigilant, surely then the cause must needs be good,
otherwise the Lord of hoasts would not have thus far enjoined it.

As the cause is just; so the Consequence of the cause.
consequence is of no small importance, no less then the glory of God, the
honor of the Lord of hoasts, and the eternal salvation of thy poor distressed
soul, nay thou shall be no sooner in the field, but the Pax belli filia.
daughter of war, the peace of God, and of thy own conscience shall salute
thee, even Col. 3. 15.
that peace of God which passes all humane understanding, that peace of
conscience which is so unutterable, but no such peace Phil. 4. 7. Peace the end
of all the Christian Soldiers combat. Psalm. 2. 4.
(says God) to the wicked. Esaias. 52. 25. He shall be like the troubled sea
that cannot rest. v. 20. he that sits in heaven shall laugh his security to
scorn whereas thou after the Victory shall have the golden Crown of Christ's
approbation, the applause of Saints and Angels: thus shall it be with the man
whom the King loves. Ester. 6. 6. if thou do but fight, I will assure thee
of Victory, I know the willingness Matthew. 26. 41.
of the spirit and the weakness of the flesh, being under Christ's standard,
if thou Encouragement to take up arms.
look on thy own weakness, and the Enemies strength there is small hope,
but if on Christ Jesus the Captain of thy salvation, no cause of doubting, he
has coold Heb. 2. 10.
the Enemies courage, bruised the Serpents head, he may hiss Genesis 3. 15.
at thee; but cannot hurt thee, his sting is out; he was once strong, but now
Christ the stronger has spoiled him of his armor Luke 11. 21. 22. Col. 2. 15.
wherein he trusted, and divided the spoils, he was a mighty Prince in
worldly Canaan, but good Josiah has subdued him: on then in the strength of
Gods holy name, be not white liverd, show not thy self a fresh water Soldier
seeing thou have received a The sign of the cross.
Military Sacrament in Baptism, and given up thy name to Christ, to whom thou
owe thy life by a double right, first, for giving it thee, then for restoring
it being lost, thy life through sin was morgaged, but Christ has redeemd it,
the condition to continue his faithful Soldier to the end.

Will thou then digress from the proper end for which thou wast made? did God
make thee to lust after sin? to delight in sin? to act sin? no surely;
God made thee for this end that thou might do good, and Matthew. 4. 10.
live to his glory; It makes me stand amazed, when that I consider of the
fierceness of the Lion, and the mildness of the Lamb, the cruelty of the one
and the gentleness of the other, and yet that men should be so foole-hardy as
to hug Extreme folly of the wicked.
the one, and so besotted as to reject the other, to leave Christ, that Lamb
of God which takes Joh. 1. 29.
away the sins of the World, and to fight for the Devil, that roaring Lion
which seeks 1 Pet. 3. 8.
whom he may devour. O inhumane and more then monstrous that any age should
produce such a crew of Miscreants, such a Dungeon of iniquity! what to rebel
against God? to deface his Image Josh. 22. 19 1 Cor. 15. 49.
in their souls, and to set up that of the Devil; but let them take their
course, Christ knows whose they are, vos ex Patre Diabolo esti, etc. ye are
of your father the Devil and Joh. 8. 44.
his works ye will do. Let this then animate, and encourage thee to fight
this battle, to serve God, and to do good, not to spend thy time idly, non
vitam veluti pecora, not to roll out thy days in doing no good as indeed
brute beasts do, bestirre thy self therefore, rowse up thy spirits, think on the
thing that is before thee, press forwards toward Phil. 3. 14.
the mark, thrust through the crowde of worldly employments, but look not
back like Lots wife lest thou be partaker of the like Apostasye. Luke 17. 32
Pares culpae pares paenae
A Soldier being in skirmish with the Enemy if he looks back, it argues a
Cowardice, or carelessness in him. So thou being a Soldier in this spiritual
combat, if thou should look back minding more thy pleasures, and thy
profits, those onyons, and fleshpots Numb. 11. 5.
of Egypt; what would this argue? but either a fearfulness or a secure
carelessness in thee, and then whereas Lots wife was turned into a Pillar of
salt, God shall turn thee out of his presence with that fearful sentence,
Ito maledicte etc. depart from m^e thou cursed into everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels, Luke 25. 41.

Being now encouraged for the fight, that thou may be the better enabled to
give the onset, it will be necessary that I show thee the use of the Armor,
wherewith thou art to be furnished, for it is ill fighting without Arms. The
weapons then which serve to 1 Pet. 5. 8.
conquer that roaring Lion (as the Apostle calls them) be these.

1 The Girdle of Truth. 2 The Breast Plate of Righteousness. 3 Shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel. Gods Armory. Ephesians. 6. 14.
4 The Shield of Faith. 5 The Helmet of hope, or salvation. 6 The sword of the
Spirit.
The first piece of Armor, or Weapon (for so I call it) is the Girdle of truth
in these The first weapon of Gods Armory.
words; having your loins girt about with the Girdle of Truth; here now thou
oughtst to have thy soul fenced, and encircled about with this Girdle of
Truth, otherwise called uprightenesse of heart, 1 Cor. 1. 14. Joh. 24. 12
and singleness of heart, that no evil or corrupt thoughts may adventure to
enter in, and that the whole heart may seek after Righteousness, for God
lays charge to the whole heart, and he lays claim to it also, he will have
all or none; he admits of no division; why? because it is just that thou
should give it him, and that for a twofold Reason.

First, because God made the heart, and therefore most Reasons why God should
have the heart Ps. 100. 5. 2 Reason. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
right to it, It is he that has made us, and not we our selves.

Secondly, God did not only make the heart, but he does also sanctify the
heart, and saves it being made, he is Cordis Gubernator the director and
Ruler of thy heart; is it not Reason then that he should have the whole heart
to himself, and not to part stakes with any other? he will not have part of
it given over to sin, and part kept for himself, he will have it all: and
it must be a heart girt with the girdle of truth, it must be girt close to
him, intimating thus much that Truth is not ashamed of it self, nor does it
shame others that profess it, but it will truly adhere, and stick close, (as a
Girdle does to a man's body) to those which do most advance, and defend it.

The second piece of Armor is the Breast Plate of Righteousness, The second
weapon of Gods Armoury.
having put on the Breast Plate of Righteousness. Now as before was commanded
Verity, so here is enjoined Sincerity. Truth went before, Righteousness
follows after, as the Breast Plate, and the Girdle touch each other, so
Righteousness, and Truth being met do kiss each other, Psalm. 85.

The Righteousness that here is meant, is, the Righteousness What is meant by
the Braestplate of Righteousness.
of Christ made ours by imputation so that by this imputation of Christ, thou
art made partaker of him, and his merits; a great Privilege! but the main
utility of this Breast Plate of Righteousness The use of the Breastplate.
does most appear in the placing of it, to defend the heart. In hot, and
feirce wars you know that a Breast Plate is one of the needefullest pieces of
Armor you can have, the Reason, is because it covers, and fences the heart; now
you know the heart is a Principal in a man, it is primum movens, and ultimum
moriens, the first living, and the last dying; if The Heart to be carefully
guarded.
the body or any part of it be but ill affected, the heart is truly sensible
thereof, how necessary is it then that thou should have a Breast Plate to
secure it? just so it fares with this Breast Plate of Righteousness, it covers
the heart, and does defend that which is most subject to be offended with
sin: how therefore should thou labor for to be furnished with this
Breastplate of Righteousness, which is so highly esteemed of, or at least
should be? how should thou have thy heart defended with this Breast Plate to
keep o the darts off sin from it, to oppose, and extinguish sin in it, for
if sin once get footing in thy heart, it will quickly spread it self through
the whole man, if thou have Jam. 3. 13.
Righteousness in thy heart, it must needs oppose sin, but have a care, the
heart is deceitful above all things: and therefore it is that God does so
often call to thee for thy heart, my son give me thy heart; what then shall
be Prove. 23. 26.
thought of those godless, and graceless persons? what will befall, and light
on them that do as it were give themselves Voluntarily to the D^vill? leaving
in their hearts a room for the Devil there to inhabit, and take so much
delight in the acting, and prosecuting their lusts to the full, till al last
their iniquity being come to the full, God shall requite them in the fullness
of wrath for ever more.

A third weapon is to have your feet shod with the preparation The third
weapon of Gods Armoury. Ephesians. 5. 16.
of the Gospel of Peace; those that go to wars will provide that they go
not barefooted, nay, they are so far from going barefoted, that they will be
provided of the best boots, or shoes that possibly they can procure to hold
out the weather; and to keep them warm. So thou that art a Christian Soldier
must endeavor to have thy feet shod with the preparation of the gospel; so
that thy paths, and ways may be the ways of Righteousness, and Peace: for
if thou expectest to come to the Kingdom of God which is Righteousness, and
peace, thou must walk in peace, and have thy feet shod with Righteousness,
and Peace.

Thou see that it is termed the Gospel of Peace, and why? because the
Gospel is Why the Gospel of Peace.
peaceable and full of Consolation, whereas the law is rigorous, and full of
condemnation, therefore to make thee to adhere the more unto the Gospel, and
to relinquish the deeds of the Law, here is a great inducement set upon it in
calling it the Gospel of Peace.

The fourth weapon is the shield of faith; Above all things The 4 weapon of
Gods Armory.
take the shield of faith whereby thou may be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. It is to be confessed that in wars a shield is most
useful, and necessary, for by it darts are repelled, and driven back; the
reason, because it covers the whole body; So this Shield of faith which is
here both commanded, and commended is so useful, and so necessary that a
Christian Soldier cannot be without it, for it covers the whole man, and
repels the several assaults, and affronts of the Devil;

Secondly, it is very necessary Necessity of the shield of faith.
for a Christian, to have this shield of faith, because he cannot live without
it, for the just shall live by faith, without faith it is impossible to please
God, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin: so that it is impossible No life
without faith.
to be without this excellent shield of faith, for he cannot be without Gad,
and therefore not without says which brings to God.

Now because God calls to us to show our faith by our Jam. 2. 6.
works, it will be therefore not amiss to show thee what The works of faith.
are the works, or operations of faith, and they are two fold.

First, it operateth in thee sincere love, and charity both First work of faith
is love. 1 John 4. 16.
toward God, and toward thy Neighbor; love is the fulfilling of the whole
law, and if faith which works by love does produce, and create love in Gal.
5. 6.
thy heart, thou can go no higher step then love, for if thou truly love
God, thou will truly serve God: now if thy faith has no operation, it is but a
dead faith; for the Devils themselves have Jam. 2. 2.
faith, they believe, and tremble, credunt fide, tremunt timore they believe
through faith, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
and tremble through fear, yet they fail in this one thing, they neither love
God, nor man; It behooves a Christian therefore, to let faith have a full work
in him, it must be a working faith, like unto Aarons precious ointment which
ran down from his head to the beard, and so to the Ps. 133.
skirts of his clothing; diffusing, and spreading it self through all the
powers and facultyes of thy soul, all thy words and works must savor of
faith, for as it is a shield to cover the whole man so it must diffuse it self
through the whole man.

The second operation of faith is perseverance in good Second work of faith is
perseverance. Exitus acta probat.
works: it is not enough to begin well but thou must end well; Charity to
the poor is a good work; Prayer is a good duty, but if thou do not as the
Apostle says, pray continually, and thy love endure to the end, thou may
fail of 1 These. 5. 17.
thy end; faith will make thee to persevere when that thou beleevest in God,
and trustest on him till at last thou arrivest at that heavenly habitation
which is the end of all thy hopes. It is he that endures to the end shall be
saved. God Math. 24.
does promise salvation but it must be in the end; when thou have done thy
work, then it is that God will pay thee they wages. The laborious husbandman
therefore though he toil, and Spes alit agricolas.
moyle all the day long, ye he cheeres up himself that he shall not only
have a quiet rest all night, but that he shall be paid for his labor. The
Captain as he passes through the pikes, comforts himself that in the end of
the battle he shall have a Victorious conquest with great spoils; and thus
it fares with every good Christian; though the waters of affliction rise high,
the floods of sorrow Were it not for hope, the heart would break.
^oare, and lift up their voice yet he sails on, he rides through the storm
till he arrive at the wished port; and why? because he knows that ^ee which
endu^eth to the end the same shall be saved. Salvation is not set up only for
those that enter into the lists, nor for those that put themselves upon the
trained band of Christianity, but for those Non otiantibus Coelum.
that strive; it is praenium certantium: this if any thing, will make thee
enter into the lists, and being there to lay about thee; It is no hard measure
to be put thus to it, if tho^ look but upon the prize that is heaven; he is
but (...) faynt-hearted Soldier tha^ will not strain a joint for heaven; it
was otherwis^ with that victorious army (...) Martyrs, they did not stay till
troubles came but met them and did not only entertayn^ but welcome them; but
that is not all, as heaven is praemiu^ certantium, so it is praemiu^ vincentium,
the Conqueror Reward, vincenti dabitur, to him that overcommeth shall be given
a Crown of life, not every slight combating will Rev. 2. 7.
serve the turn, but the constancy of the end; Judas was in the lists when he
confessed that he had betrayed innocent blood, thus in the confusion of thy
sins thou do but combat, not overcome, but stay not there, add unto thy
confession, hearty sorrow for thy sins, that ever thou did offend so good a
God, so gracious a father; add unto faith, patience, unto patience godliness;
unto godliness; brotherly kindness; and with brotherly kindness, love; for
if these things be amongst, and abound, they will make you that you never
shall be idle 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6. etc. Job. had Job 42. 10.
many encounters, but the perseverance to the end was the Crown of all; S.
Paul had many stripes, endured much imprisonment, stoning, shipwreck, though
every foot of ground he trod, was a mine to blow him up, yet for all that,
not a Crown, but then when he had fought the good fight of faith, when he
had finished his Course, then with joy he stretched out his hand for the
Crown, henceforth (says he) is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness;
and quid tu 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Paulo acceptior. Do thou think to have it without a Victory, it cannot be,
vince^^ dabitur it is only for them that conquer, for them that continue to the
end. Then comfort thy self in this that thou art not bidden to fight, but for
a prize, not to labor but for wages, though God might enforce thee, yet he
invites thee, when he calls thee to it, it is for a Reward; if it be to
repentance he will ease thee, if to affliction he will give thee patience; if
to suffer with him then thou shall be sure to reign with him, and if to
perseveronce then thou shall have a Crown of Righteousness which God the Lord
will give thee in that day, and not only to thee but to all them that love his
appearing, and continue to the end; there is a sublimit as ^^atiae as well as
gloriae; faith love, patience, charity may be in their height, but
perseverance is the top of all, that sets the Crown upon thy head, that only
lies at the threshold of heaven, non qui pugnat habet victoriam, non qui currit
habet palma^, sed qui perseverat, coronatur; Finis coronat opus.
it is he only which endures to the end shall be saved.

The excellency of this shield of faith, is, that it does The excellency of the
shield of faith.
not only cover the body but is also a means to preserve, and keep the other
pieces of Armor from danger; what is the breastplate of Righteousness without
the shield of faith? without faith all thy good works, all thy Righteousness
will be as nothing; whatsoever Romans 14. 23. Gal. 11. 12
is not of faith is sin; It is faith only that justifies by the merits of
Christ, and not by the works of the law. O the excellency, and efficacy of
faith! It is stronger then Lions, by it Daniel closed up their devouring jaws;
it is stronger Dan. 6. 21 Dan. 3. 5.
then fire, not a hair of the three children was touched, nor any part of
their clothes singed; it is stronger then water, when that Elisha the Prophet
made the Iron to swim; 2 King. 5. 6 R. B.
faith is that powerful favorite of heaven, it has speedy access to Christ.
A man may be dumb, overwhelmd with horror of conscience, and as it were even
stifled by Satan, or by reason of some great sin, not able to speak for
himself, yet where faith resides, prospectabit ex altissimo sanctitatis suae
Jehova, God will look down from his Ps. 102.
sanctuary, that he may hear the mourning of such as be in Captivity, and
deliver the children of death; nay he will do thus much, if there be but
singultus fidei, a sob, or a sigh of faith, nay, which is less, if but a pant
of faith present it self, I will up says the Lord, and help them, and set
them Ps. 12.
at rest; nay which is least of al, though the pulse of faith beat not atal,
though David be like The very panting of faith prevayleth with God
a deaf man which hears not, or as one that were dumb not opening his
mouth, yet God will look down upon him in mercy, as he did upon the poor
man sick of the Palsy. Faith is the Covenant Math. 19. 2
of all Evangelicall promises, it is the hand that must be reached out to
receive all blessings, Christ exacts it only, Christ appropriates all to faith,
he looks quite through patience, and charity upon faith; faith is the Mother
of all these Androgothemos in the 11. of the Hebrews; faith gives name to
Christians, it sets the stamp on the metal, by the stamp of Caesar's image
the coin was known to whom it did belong, by the impression of says; a
believer is known to be Gods peculiar, Act. 15. 9.
by faith the heart is clarifyed, and cleansed, by faith being dead thou art
revived; by faith thou art regenerated, and Ephesians. 2. 8.
borne again; by faith thou art justified, preserved, and thy To. 3. 28.
soul eternally saved, by faith thou art raised from sin to newness of
life; by faith thou know God, and art blessed of God; lastly by faith thou
may through Gods assistance expel the Devil, and malignant encounters, and so
in the end having fought the good fight, attain everlasting Salvation, an
inheriance that never fades, nor never will decay, Ths. 1. 58.
but will endure for ever.

The fifth weapon is the Helmet of hope, or salvation, take The fifth weapon of
gods armory.
the Helmet of salvation; A Helmet in wars is res per necessaria more then
ordinarily useful it does not only keep off darts that might otherwise be
offensive, but makes him that wears it look the Enemy in the face
courageously, and to go on victoriously; Even so he which trusts to this
Helmet of hope, marches on unda^tedly against all the Assaults of the flesh,
the world and the Devil, it makes him look death in the face, assuring
himself of victory; it makes him invincible in the day why called the Helmet
of hope. First Reason. Heb. 6. 9.
of trial, and it is called the Helmet of hope for two Reasons.

First; because Salvation is the main end of thy hope, which thou do still
expect, and wayt for; It is called Anchora animae, Hope is the Anchor of the
soul by which itlayeth fast hold on Christ, therefore it is that the Apostle
couples both together, These. 5. 6.
and for an Helmet the hope of Salvation, intimating that Salvation is the end
of our hope, and confidence.

Secondly, Hope is a means Second Reason.
to obtain Salvation, it is one of those steps which thou must climb to
Heaven by, by Hope we are saved; Hope will cause To. 8. 24.
thee to rest assured of Gods protection. The Mariner having cast Anchor lies
down, and sleeps securely, so he that has cast the Ancor of his Hope in
Heaven, whose hope is in the 1 Cor. 15. 19.
Lord, needs not then to fear any thing, but may say, and that as confidenly
as ever David did, I will not be afraid of ten thousand of men that have set
themselves against me round about. Again thou know an Anchor must be cast
vpou the Ps. 3. 6.
firm ground, else it is nothing the better, so thou must cast the Anchor of
thy hope on God who is both firm and stable, not relying upon any sublunary or
terrene thing, but on him alone; Trust in the Lord therefore with all thy
heart, and good reason, he is a shield to them that Pro. 3. 4.
trust in him: wait patiently for the kingdom of heaven; watch and pray,
hoping and expecting Pro. 3. 5. Lu. 21. 26.
for the Lords coming; hope patienly but yet constantly the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, say with David, The Ps. 142. 2. To. 5. 2.
Lord he is my hope, my Rock, and my salvation; this hope in the Lord will make
thee to rejoice; it will make thee be of good cheer, and lastly it will make
thee blessed: Blessed is the man that Ps. 31. 24.
trusts in the Lord and he whose hope the Lord is. Iere. 17. 7.

But now as the Hope of the Righteous is blessed; so the hope of the wicked
shall perish; Job. 18. 31
if thou love therefore the salvation of thy own soul let me advise thee to
get Sanctified hope, casting it on God, and heavenly things, leaving, and
utterly, abolishing all transitory pleasures, and glimmering profits that may
any way draw thee from this blessed hope of heaven.

The sixth weapon is the sword of the spirit, take the sword Sixth weapon of Gods
armory. Ephesians. 6. 17.
of the spirit which is the word of God No Soldier goes to wars without a
sword, it is useful both to defend, and offend, to defend himself to offend
his Enemy: So he that fights in this spiritual warfare must be sure to take
the sword of the spirit with him, to defend himself from the Devil, and to
offend him that is always assaltting him. The warfare it seems is spirttuall
so must the weapons be; as for this sword of the spirit, the word of God it is
lively in 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.
operation, it is profitable for all it is instructive, it is reprehensive,
look but through that sacred book of God, and thou Heb. 4. 1 2.
shall find that it does afford help to every one, under what cross, in what
state soever; art thou wounded in conscience? there is comfort art thou
distressed in thy body? there is remedy, there is a salve for every sore,
comfort for evey convert. Men commonly now adays wear swords by their sides,
as they walk along the streets to prevent danger that might ensue, if they
should be surprised by any at unwares. So should thou always have this
sword of the spirit along with thee to bereadily prepared for the least
encounter of the Enemy, Right use of the word of the Spirit.
so that, if he should come upon thee with the most powerful temptations, tell
him boldly, Scriptu^est; It is written, I must not offend god, who has been to
me so merciful and so loving a father, Joseph was well armed with this sword,
when he was tempted of his Mris. How (says he) can I do this great
wickedness, and not sin against Genesis 39. 9.
God? so that if thou shoul dest be tempted to this, or that sin, as to ly, to
swear, to deceive and cozen, answer with Joseph, How can I do this great sin
against God? etc. and by this means thou may soon overcome the Devil, and
all his violent temptations.

Me thinks the very eye of God should be as a sword to cut offsinne, or at
least wise should make thee to abstain from sinning, for when thou go about
to commit this, or that sin, presently thou may think that the eye of God
is over thee, to see and behold what thou do, the eyes of the Lord are upon
all the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his ways; how then Ier. 3 29.
dare thou do that in his presence who is Lord over all, which thou art
ashamed to do in the sight of the most inferior of his creatures?

Do but converse with that word of God, and thou will Excellency of the word of
God.
find it otherwise, the excellencies of it can no way be expressed. It is the
word of comfort, and truth, it administers Ephesians. 1. 15 Phi. 4. 7. 2 Kin. 20.
19. 1 Pe. 12. R. 010. 7. 1
peace to thy soul, and comfort to thy conscience; it is good to thy soul, by
it thou art regenerated and born again, by it, Faith is begotten in thy heart,
It is a light unto thy feet, and a lantern to thy paths to direct thee in
the ways of virtue and piety, It is (as Christ himself Ioh. 17. 27.
testifies) the word of truth and life, it shows that God in Christ has
reconciled the world 1 Cor. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Heb. 5. 14.
unto him by the remission of sins; It is milk for babes, and meat for
stronger men, seeing then that the word carries such power along with it
receive it, and embrace it as a word of power, when it comes home to thy
conscience do not like a child put off the plaster from thy sore finger because
it smarteth; again as it is a word of consolation, with what devotion
should thou read it, and with what attention should thou hear it preached
but above all how careful should thou be to practice it? what then remains
but to take toll, lege toll, lege
this sword of the spirit, this word of God into thy hands, out with it on al
occasions, make a sanctified use of it, and then be assured of spiritual
comfort here, and eternal salvation hereafter.

So now I have done with the weapons belonging to a Christian soldier, which
thou must put on, I say, put on, for it is not enough to have weapons, but you
must put them on, and arm your self with them, put on then the whole armor
of God that thou may be able to stand, and resist in the evil day against
the world the flesh and the Devil. Amos. 6. 3


Being thus completely armed, and ready for the skirmish, take notice, that it
is not enough to have one part armed, and the other part unarmed; Advise to be
completely armed.
but you must put on the whole armor of God, if thou do otherwise the Devil
is a cunning enemy, and he will soon epsy it. It is reported of Achilles the
Grecian Captain that his Mother being warned by the Oracle dipped him in the
River of Lethe to prevent any danger that might ensue by reason of the Trojan
war, but Paris the Trojan his inveterate enemy understanding also by the
Oracle that he was impenetrable all over, except the heel, went presently, and
shot him in the heel, whereof he dyed. So if thou do but leave any part
unarmed, the Devil will be sure to hit that, let not so much as thy eye be
unarmed, if it be, he will present one lewd object or Job 31. 1. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
other to thy sight to allure thee; if it be thy ear, he will make it listen
after bad counsel; Prove. 17. 14.
if the tongue he will make that a world of mischief; if the hand he will
make it ready Jam. 3. 5.
to act all sorts of mischief, if the foot he will make it swift Prove. 13. 4
to shed blood; if a Ship do but spring a little leake at any part of her, she
will in short time be overwhelmed; If thou do but leave any part of thy
soul ungarded, sin will presently enter in, and being once in, sink thee
into the nethermost pit of hell. Stand therefore, and watch when the hour of
thy visitation comes, watch, and see the kindness of Ps. 17.
the Lord, be ready at all assayes to repel these grand, and potent enemies.

Lastly, I will now show thee being thus armed, and prepared, how thou must use
and put on thy arms, and that must be with prayer, praying always with all
prayer, and Prayer to be used at the putting on the Armor.
supplication for all saints; praying unto God that he would send thee his
spirit. Prayer is the means, and the manner how the weapons should be used;
It will not be amiss then to show the use of prayer.

First, how thou must pray. Secondly, when thou must pray. Thirdly, to induce
thee the more to it I will show the power and efficacy of prayer.
For the first of these, how thou must pray, and in this How to pray.
thou art commanded to use three motions; Ask, and you Math. 7. 7.
shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opene^ unto you:
here is first Gods part to thee; secondly, thy part to God; thy part to God
lies in these words, Ask, Seek, Knock; thus explaned, ask, with the mouth;
seek with the heart; knock with the hand, First, ask with the mouth. God
created the lips, and does therefore require the lips; Joakin the Father of
the Virgin Mary said, cibus potusque erit mihioratio, Prayer shall be meat,
and drink to me; If thou would but make prayer to be food, and meat, and
drink to thee, thou would find it more excellent nourishment to thy soul,
then any corporal food can possibly be to thy body; and as there is
difference betwixt the soul, and body, the one being mortal, the other
immortal, the one corporal, the other spiritual; Difference betwixt the
food of the body, and the soul.
the one temporary, the other eternal; so there is a great difference also
betwixt the food of the one, and the food of the other, the bodily or
corporal food goes in at thy mouth to nourish thee here in this world, but
the spiritual food of the soul (which is Prayer) does proceed out of thy
mouth to keep thee, not only in this world, but to bring thee to heaven in the
world to come.

The Righteous man's prayer is his delight, and of prayer Prove. 15. 8
there be three kinds.

The first is, Prayer merely Three sorts of prayer.
mental. The second is, Prayer merely vocal. The third is, Prayer bot^
mental, and vocal.
These three sorts of Praye^ have reference to the three motions, Ask, Seek,
Knock Prayer merely vocal is to pray with the tongue without the heart, this
is that sort which God does so much abhor, to mumble over a few prayers and
yet not know what we say our selves, Appropinquant ore sue, and labiis suis
honorant me, cor autem a me procul amovent. They come near unto me (says
God) with their Esaias. 29. ^5.
mouth, and honor me with their lips but their heart is far from me;
they put that far from God which he does most love, and that is the heart. Lip
labor is nothing worth Lip-service to God abominable
in Gods eye without the heart, that makes the lip acceptable: here are a sort
of people that make their lips their own, saying, who is Lord over ^s? but
that is not the way to ^ome acceptable to God, to make their prayers to become
as sweet smelling incense before him, or to become so powerful as to pull a
blessing ^ut of Gods hand: if thou desire therefore to pray aright, (...)
with the mouth, seek with the heart, knock with the hand.

The second kind of Prayer Ps. 12. 4. Second sort of prayer.
is, prayer merely mental that is meditation, to meditate or pray with the
heart without the tongue; this is allowed by God, and approved by him in the
practice of all the Prayer mental by God approved.
saints. When the children of Israel were passing through the red Sea seeing
Pharao^ host behind them, and (...) Sea before them murmure^ against Moses;
but what di^ Moses? he cried unto the Exodus 14. 14.
Lord. Cur ad me clamas? wh^ cryest thou unto me? (Sayt^ God) whereas it is
not expressed that Moses said any thing at all, only it was his inward, and
ardent prayers to God in the behalf of the children of Israel: pray then with
thy heart, and pray with thy understanding also, and if place, and time will
admit 1 Cor. 14. 15.
pray with thy heart and tongue together.

The third kind of Prayer is mixed Prayer, both mental, and Third kind of
Prayer, mental, and vocal.
vocal included in the words, Ask, Seek, Knock, for to ask with the mouth,
to seek with the heart, and to knock with the hand is that, which God so much
calls for, we will render (says the Prophet Hosea) the Calves of our lips
Hos. 14. 2.
that is, both the heart, and the tongue.

Thus I have breefely showed thee, what is thy part to God, which is to ask,
and to ask aright, now I will show thee what is Gods part to thee, and that is
to give, Petite and vobis dabitur; Ask, and you shall have, do but ask, and
he will give, every one that asks receives, and every Math. 7. 8.
one that seeks, finds; whatsoever you ask in prayer if Joh. 15. 7.
you believe, you shall receive it: what then will this gift be? what is it
that thou shall receive? blessings spiritual, blessings temporal, the gift of
God is eternal life through Romans 6. 23
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The second branch or motion of Prayer is, thou must Seocnd motion of prayer,
to seek with the heart.
seek with the heart; for the asking of the mouth has never prevayled without
the seeking of the heart; but the seeking of the heart has oftentimes
prevayled without the asking of the mouth; let not then thy heart go a
wandering after the pleasures of the world when thou art at thy devotions; God
does promise to be found of those that seek, with the heart; If thou will
seek Deuteronomy. 4. 19
him he will be found of thee, as David instructed his son Solomon; and
again those 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Prove. 8. 17. Heb. 11. 6
that seek him shall find him, yet again, he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; many other places there are, which through the word of
God thou may find all of them instancing this truth God will be found of them
that seek him. Ps. 4. 5.
that God will be found of them that diligenly seek him: when therefore thou
prayest, enter into thy chamber, when thou have set open the door of thy
lips, then enter into the chamber of thy heart, but what must thou do when
thou art there? sweep away all thy sins with the besome of Repentance, and
then ga^nish and adorn it with a godly life, as Solomon garnished his Temple
before he prayed in it, 1 Samuel 7. 27.
1 King. 9. 1.

Now for Gods part, in this Particular, do but seek with thy heart, and he
will surely be found, he that seeks finds; here is thy comfort that Math.
7. 28
God will be found when thou seek aright, when thou art heavy, and weary
laden do but seek, and he will ease thee; Math. 11. 29.
now thou know every thing that a man seeks for, is not presently found, so
when thou seek God though he will not be presently found, seek him yet
diligently, and ^^ve not over till thou have found him: I but say thou,
prayer, yet after long expectation not a syllable of any answer at all, to this
I answer; prayers, as Anglers do to their baytes, if they catch nothing they
look upon the bayte, then mend it, and throw it in again, so m^st thou look
to thy prayers that they be not mingled with carnal corruptions, thou ask
amiss, and that is the reason thou speedest not: Ja^. 4. 2.
thou would have health, God knows sickness to be better for thee, thou
desire understanding, God knows that it would but puff thee up; if thou
prayest for wealth it must not be to abuse it in wantonness; if for wit not to
mayntaine errors, have a care how ever not to beg for sinful things; advise
what to do, so live before men as before God, so pray to God as if all the
world were present.

As for the true seeking of God, it must be done sincerely, when all things
are rejected for Gods sake: whom have (...) in heaven (says David) but thee,
yea when God is thus Ps. 73. 25.
sought, then all the affections dictate nothing, but the praises of God:
again, seek him with mourning as Mary Ps. 145.
did for Christ; the Church in Luke 2. 48.
the Cantic^es for her beloved, and for the place where thou must seek God, it
is not on a bed of The right way to seek God Cant. 3. 4.
down, but in a field of brambles, not cursorily but heartily: thus seeking
thou shall be sure to find, thus praying thou shall assuredly obtain, nay, so
great is his love that he will give more blessings then thou desire. The
Centurion desired Christ Esaias 56. 1.
to speak sed verbum unum but one word, yet he found more, there was one word
for the healing of his servant, but Math. 8. 8.
many more in the commendation of his faith. Solomon desired wisdom, but God
gave him wealth, and length of days 2 Chronicles. 1. 12.
into the bargayne, one thing he desired, but received two things more that
he thought Gods great love to them that seek him.
not on; see here the love of God that when thou seek him, he comes and
meets thee half way, and if thou can not find him, yet thou shall be found
of him, and not only so, but when thou have Habendo eu^ omnia habes.
found him he gives thee more then thou did seek for; yet further see
Christ's infinite Luke 19. 20.
love to come, and seek, and save thee that wast l^st. Ecce sons amoris,
behold the very fountain of love, what! was it not enough to come to seek
thee, but to save thee also? O the depth of the love of Christ, and of the
wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearcheable are his judgments, Romans 11.
and his ways past finding out?

Lastly, seek God because that all happiness is in him only thou may seek
a friend but easily miss him; Riches, Honors, and preferments are the only
things that are now adays sought, for whereas Riches have wings, a few The
uncertanty of Riches.
thieves, or a spark of fire sends them packing; or if they stay so long with
us as death thy do but like S. Paul's Act. 20. 38.
friends bring us to the grave, as they did him to the Ship, and there leave
us; nay, Man gathers riches, and cannot tell Ps. 39. 6.
who shall enjoy them; sometime they pass not to friends but Strangers, this
is the vanity which Solomon saw, that a man should have riches, and Eccles. 6.
2.
treasures, and not to have the power to eat thereof, but a stranger should
eat thereof. Not unlike to our Pack-horses that carry great burdens for
others, and get nothing but gall'd-backs for themselves. Sometimes riches pass
to enemies; thus did those of Haman to Mordecay. But I Esth. 8. 2.
have children (says the Rich-man) what though thou have? they may be given
from thy children to enemies thus was it with Saul, when the Amalekite brought
his Crown, and bracelet unto 2 Samuel 1. 10. Vix gaudet tertius haeres.
David: admit his children have them, yet how long do they keep them
especially if ill gotten? though thou have them fast in thy hand, yet they have
a squint-eye still looking upon others; there is no more hold to be had of
them, then Saul had of Samuels lap, they do but like 1 Samuel 15. 27.
the Raynebowe show themselves unto us in all their daynty colors, and then
they vanish away. That great Conqueror of the world caused to be painted on a
Table; A sword in the compass of a wheel, showing that what he had gotten by
the sword, was subject to be turned about by the wheel of fortune: seek then
for God, labor to be rich in grace, in faith, in humility, lay up treasures
in heaven, in these thou Omnium rerum vicissitudo. Math. 6. 19.
shall be thy own heir, in the things of this world, another man shall be
thy heir, nay, thou shall be haeres Dei, cohaeres Christi, get this, get al,
no man can want that has Christ at his Table, as at the marriage of Cana in
Galile Joh. 2. 9.

As for Honor, how do men scramble up those craggy Honos, onus
paths that lead thereto; and what is honor? it is not in honor (...) but in
honorante the mere breath of others; Honors like pictures seem fairest
furthest off, but if you come nearer you shall find that under the thin
skin of honor lies a vast corpse of trouble, and vexation.

And for Preferment, that last great Idol of the world, how do men gape after
it? whence comes it? It comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the South (says the Psalmist) but why did he leave out the North? Ps.
75. 6
to show, that much might be done by endeavor, by use of means, but for all
that, God would have one place to come in at; seek then after God, for in
having him thou have all things.

I will now show thee the third motion or particular of prayer, and that is,
thou must knock with the hand, as much The third motion of prayer is to knock
with the hand. Jam. 4. 5.
as one should say, do as you say; as thou say well, so thou must do well,
show thy faith by thy works, let thy Religion shine through thy life, and
conversation. Be not like those that pray, and practice not; God will
certaynely abhor such, because their hands are embrued in blood; If that a
subject Esaias. 1. 15.
should offer up a Petition to the king, having his hands blood^ly dyed in the
blood of his son, do thou think that he would accept of it? by no means;
he would surely be so far from acceptance, that he would make him feel
the severity of law; And thus it is, if thou should offer up thy prayers to
the King of Kings with thy hands embrued in the blood of his son, the Lord of
life, still crucifying Heb. 6.
him afresh by thy sins, which are as so many spears thrust into his
precious side; do thou think he would accept of it? I trow not: knock then
with a Religious hand if ever thou desire Math. 7. 8.
God to open unto thee. Ask and thou shall be sure of temporal things,
seek, and God will give thee spiritual blessings; so knock and he will give
thee eternal life^, that is he will open the gates of heaven, and give thee
everlasting happiness more then thy heart can wish, or thy tongue desire.

Now these three motions, Ask, Seek, Knock, being put together make up that
third kind of prayer which I have heretofore discovered already.

But before I pass any further, me thinks I hear thee whisper this
Objection, viz. that there were some that did knock, and yet they were not
opened unto. Luke 13. 24. Luke 13. 24.


To this I answer, knock with a Religious hand, not with the hand of faith,
they had no oil in their Lamps; It is not enough to say well, but to do well;
not to have Religion only at the tongues end, but to have it truly in the
practice of it, those had Lamps, but no oil. Religion Math. 25. 1.
without practice, and that is the Reason they were excluded: they are not
Nominals but Reals that are admitted into Gods Grammar. There are some that
shall knock and say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesyed in thy name, and in thy
name cast out Devils, Math. 7. 23
and in thy name done many wonderful things? some again shall knock alowde,
and call strongly to the Lord; saying, Lord, Lord open unto us; Orationis
instantia est pulsatio, Luke 13. 25
Prayer is indeed a spiritual knocking, and this prayer of these damned ones,
was a well compacted one, if it had come from believers; for,

First thing they desired was, Res optima, the opening of heaven, and prayer is
able to do it, prayer is an excellent picklock, thus did Eliah, and the Theife
on the Cross open heaven.

Secondly, their Prayer was modus optimus, a Prayer of unity, they all began
to say, and it was a prayer of fervency, they were hot in the pursuit, like
the children of Israel in extremity, they cry aloud to the Lord for releife;
there is the unity of their prayer.

Thirdly, it was scopus optimus the best object on which they could fasten
themselves, they go to the Fountayne-head, they ingeminate the word, Lord,
Lord; and it is that word where all good men begin their prayers; Prayer is
called a Conference with God; if it has not relation to God, it has not the
definition of prayer, they of Rome pray to Saints and Angels, but it is most
sure, that if it be not Domine it cannot be Domina if he that calls out Lord,
Lord shall not enter, then he that prays to my Lady will hardly find
admission, therefore this prayer of theirs was well terminated, and in that
regard a good prayer. But what of all this? here is goodly blossoms but no
fruit at all; these things are seemingly good but all these will not serve the
turn, that which does follow poisoned all the rest which may be reduced into
these 4 heads.

First, it was Oration extorta, the fear of Judgment brought them to it; in
this life God often called unto them but they would not hear, they thought as
too many do that a Lord have mercy upon me at their death would have, done it,
but now to their ruin they behold hell open to receive them, heaven shut upon
them, they there for cry out, Lord, Lord open etc.

Secondly, it was Oration hypocritica, it had all form, but not the least power
of Godliness in it, a Godly man calls Lord, and Piety does ingeminate the word,
but these damned creatures could not say with David, my Lord, and my God; but
this prayer of theirs as it was verbal, so not cordial, as verbal not real:
they had despised Christ in this life, they would not have him but Barrabas,
not his saving grace, but their own vile affections, and now when their works
as fruits of their faith should have pleaded for them, now it is that they
belch out hypocritical expressions for the obtaining of that which their own
incredulity had in this life forfayred.

Thirdly, it was Oration arrogans, a most saucy, arrogant Prayer, what did they
think that God would be pleased with sounds? they cry aloude unto God; it is
true if a man be deaf we stretch out our throats unto him; but what
presumption was this to call out thus unto God, who is nigh unto all them that
seek Ps. 34. 18.
him? hoc non est ^rare omnipotentem, sed derogare; but there is a worse thing
in it then all this, they came clothed with their sins before him, whose
pure eyes can endure no uncleanesse; they did dye in their sins, and
filthiness, and then were past washing, or cleansing; it was therefore Opus
audaciae an audacious prayer.

Fourthly, it was Oration intempestiva, an unseasonable Prayer, when the gate is
shut one minute is too late, momentum est unde pendet aeternitas, there is a
moment of time whereon depends eternity: but that must be in this life, for
God hears prayers only in a time accepted; here is the place, and here is the
time too, hereafter is neither place, nor time, sero levavit dives oculos;
prayer is a grace of the way, not of the Country; prayers hereafter are turned
into praises, this prayer of theirs must needs therefore be unseasonable: now
you have the Reason why Christ knows them not, knock they may, but let them
knock never so long Christ will not open, because Math. 7. 22.
they are workers of iniquity.

Knock therefore with the hand of faith as hard as thou can, even at this
beautiful gate, and say with the Psalmist, Arise Lord why sleep thou? Ps.
44. 23.
then thou shall have this blessed answer returned, I will arise, and sleep no
longer, and will open unto thee, so that I say, Ask, and have, Ps. 12. 5.
Math. 7. 8.
seek and find; knock and it shall be opened unto thee.

Thus I have showed thee the three kinds of prayer wherein there is thy part to
God, and Gods part to thee, The manner how to pray.
I have also showed thee the manner how thou must pray, now I will proceed to
the second branch, that is, the time when thou must pray, pray always, that is
to have a heart always composed to 1 These. 5. 17.
prayer. Leave then that fond excuse which too many now a days make to
themselves, to put off prayer, and say that by reason of their employments they
have no time for prayer: just may it be with God to send a Plague of
Pestilence upon such carnal Gospellers, which may hinder their employments,
that they may have vacant time enough to call unto him, and ^o be left void of
excuse; but if thou will have thy proceedings prosperous, pray; if thou
desire to spend thy time well, pray; be it for peace, be it in war, be it
in time of pestilence, be it for superiors, be it for inferiors, be it for
things spiritual, or things temporal; be it for the state of the whole
Church, be it for any particular member therein afflicted be it to be freed
from those Divine Service of the Church most useful.
troubles which the crafts and assaults of the Devil, or man shall work
against thee, pray still; and excellent are those forms, which the Liturgy of
our Church presents unto thee upon these and all other occasions whatsoever.
Thou may Dan. 6. 10.
read how that the Prophet Daniel prayed three times a Ps. 119. 164. Act. 10.
3.
day. David prayed seven times a day. S. Paul gave himself continually to
prayer. S. James his knees were hardened like the hoofes of a horse by constant
kneeling in prayer: Prayer an excellent way to prevayle.
but the knees of most men in these days are like those of Elephants, not able
to how at all; how many are there that pray not once a day? not once a week?
nay, how many thousands that call not to God at all, how do they think that
God will defend them? Certainly he will not do thou therefore get thy self
within the compass o^ his protection, pray, power out thy Soul before God,
and if convenience of place will not admit the expression of thy mouth, use
holy meditations, Col. 4. 2.
which is a kind of talking with God; but withal pray always and watch in
the Great need of Prayer at all times
same; In the time of wars there is always a sentinel watching to prevent
the sudden incursion of the Enemy, and sure I am that thou art always at
enmity with the Devil; he still strives to assault thee, thou have need
therefore to be still upon thy guard, stand out in defiance look to him close
or else he will creep in at one loope hole or other; but as in wars the watch
seeing the Enemies approach, gives notice to the General, do thou likewise; if
the Devil chance by some nonslight or other to come so near as to close with
thee, call to Christ Jesus that great Captain Heb. 2. 10.
of thy salvation, under whose banner all true Christians fight, and have vowed
to continue his faithful soldiers to their lives end, at whose very
appearance that grand Enemy of Mankind will make a sudden retrayte, not daring
like a Dunkerker to board a ship that is thus mand, and provided with
ammunition.

I have now showed thee how to pray, and when to pray now for thy^ greater
encouragement in the combat I will declare the power, and efficacy of prayer.

The very meanest and silliest beast in all the wilderness is not so much
appalled at the roaring of the Lion, as the Devil that roaring lion is
affrighted at the prayers of a true Christian, and why? because he knows them
to be so prevalent with God; Prayer is so forcible, that nothing can withstand
it, by it Daniel stopped the mouths of the Lions, and by it Jonah Dan. 6. 22.
opened the mouth of the Whale. By Prayer Eliah Jonah. 3. 8.
locked up the heavens so that it did not rain upon the earth Jam. 5. 17.
for the space of three years, and six months, and then again by Prayer he
made rain to descend from heaven upon the Earth in great abundance, so that
the Earth brought forth its increase. It was the Prayer of Joshua that made
that nimble post of Heaven who like a Giant deleghts to run his course to
stand stone still in the midst of the firmament; when David was at his wits
Josh. 20. 12
end, and did but pray that the wicked counsel of Achitophell might come to
naught, God stepped in with comfort, and caused Achitophels 2. Sam. 17.
counsel to end in a halter; The Apostles being met together, did by prayer
make the very house crack where they were. Prayer is of that force that it will
conquer Act. 4. 31.
Gods attrybutes, it will lay hold on Gods arm, even that arm which has done
such wonders of old, and will hold it and as Jacob R. H.
did, never let him go till he Genesis 32. 26
give a blessing; It will fetch God down from heaven, S. Paul knew it well
enough. Our savior was so powerful in prayer whilst he was in the Examples
of praying men.
garden that he fetched down Angels: therewas never but one Transfiguration and
that was occasioned by prayer, St. Stephen by it got St. Paul's Conversion; and
by the same way St. Paul had his eye sight restored and his understanding
enlightened Act. 9. 11.
by prayer Moses was called filius precu^ the son of prayer, if Moses did but
pray Gods anger was appeased, and the Plagues from Pharaoh were Exodus 33. 8.
suddenly removed By devout Prayer the pestilent affections of the mind are
healed and, the bodily passions cured; Prayer is avertue that prevails
against all temptations, against all cruel assaults of infernal spirits,
against the delights of this lingering life, and the violent motions of the
flesh, So St. Jerome; by prayer (says Cassiodore) the anger of God is
assuaged, pardon is procured, punishment avoided and Antisthens
large rewards obtained; nay a very Heathen himself could say thus much, that
the surest way for men to avoid the danger of their enemies was to be busily
occupied in devout Prayer. It is the only ladder to climb up to Heaven by. In
the time of persecution no better way Prayer the only way
to the throne of grace then by Prayer; it is via aequissima, The most equal
way; for where Prayer is the Advocate, God is the Vmpire; it is via tutissima
the most safe way, all humane dependances may be intercepted but nothing can
hinder prayer from its ascent to heaven; it is a strong piece of armor that
will stand out the shock of any feirce encounter whatsoever. Prayer is also via
mitissima the mildest way, it is armor but for defense only; and lastly is via
promptissima the most ready way, other ways may admit of delays, there may be
rubbes in the way, but Prayer is swift Prayer will make way through all
difficulties.
is violent in its motion, it is in heaven before it is out of the lips, no
persecution can stop it, not any afflections can intercept it; the tongue, the
lips may fail in their Office but no cruelty can once reach the duty of
Prayer; if persecution be a batching, Prayer can prevent it: if the Clouds of
affliction begin to overcast, Prayer can make them wast a way as the morning
deaw but admit that persecution Hos. 6.
be come, that thy soul is as it were drenched in affliction Prayer can divert
them, and though the sun set in sorrow, yet joy comes in the morning; when
friends fail then comes in God with consolation so that I say in all things
pray, be conversant in prayer, if any thing trouble thee, pray still, the holy
Martyrs when they wrote any letters to their friends, they concluded with this
word Pray thrice repeated Pray, Pray, Pray to intimate the continual and
comfortable use of Prayer.

Now I have showed thee the Christian Armor, with the manner how thou
should use it: now I will discover the Adversaries against whom thou must
fight, but first give me leave to counsel thee (as the Apostle does) to stand
Ephesians. 6. 14. 1. Cor. 16. 13. Gal. 5. 1. ^ Phil. 4. 1.
fast in the faith, and quit thy self like a man; stand fast also in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made thee free, and again I say stand fast in
the Lord, stand therefore ready, stand sure, and stand to the end, and then be
assured of a victorious Conquest in the conclusion.

The first Enemy that presents himself in the lists is the The first Enemy the
World.
world; how potent this Enemy is many in the world can testify who are yet
captivated by pleasures of it, not being able to help themselves but live, and
dye professed slaves to their great Lord and Master This Enemy the World, is with
out thee, whereas the Flesh is within thee, and the Devil about thee yet they
have clapped hands together, they join their forces together to deceive, to
entrap and to entice the very children of God to their most wicked allurements.
Look therefore about thee, and first see whether all be well at home, whether
thou be at peace within thy self, whether any inbred corruption lies
lurking in thy heart, that is a friend to the world, look to The flesh a
private Enemy.
thy own flesh that false seeming friend of thine, least it do betray thee; do
not connive at the flesh, if thou do it will be a ready way to have thy
throat cut, for this one enemy within thee is more then ten without thee,
like Jehohanan, and Shimeon, who did almost as much hurt to Jerusalem within,
as Titus and all his warlike Soldiers did without: or like those Traitors in
the Trojan horse, fifty of them will do more hurt in one night then ten
thousand open enemies in ten years.

An Enemy besieging a Town, the besieged within shut up the gates, lock up all
the ports, and keep a constant watch COR Civitas Omnipotentis Regis.
and ward that no man may come in to discover their strength: do thou likewise
shut up the gates of thy heart, the gates of the City of the great God that no
rotten, or evil communication may proceed from it out of thy mouth, 1. Cor.
6. 19.
or that no allurements of the world come into it to betray it, but always
keep it unspotted, and pure, like to the Temple of the holy Ghost. Now having
given thee an Item of the impediments in this battle and discovered the sly
ambushments of the Enemy, in setting thy self against thy self, I will show
thee a way how to wayle thy self and to come off victoriously; and thus it is.

Let not thy conscience be spotted, and defiled with sin if Hic ^murus
aheneus esto Nil tonscire sibi.
it be; it will fly in thy face, and so become one of thy greatest opposers; on
the contrary, having thy conscience pure, how uncontroulably do thou come on,
and how victoriously do thou come off in this Christian combat? live then in
a good conscience before Act. 13. 1.
God; exercise thy self always to have a good conscienct void Act. 16.
of offense toward God, and toward man; purge thy conscience Heb. 9. 14. 2.
Tim. 1. 3. 4. 2.
from dead works; serve God with a pure conscience, not having thy conscience
seared with a hot iron: having thy conscience Men's conscia recti.
thus qualifyed, come what will come, thou need not fear at all, let the
Flesh come, let the Devil come, let the World come, let them all come they
shall not be able to touch one hair of thy head, or do thee the least harm
possible.

Now thou art come to join battle with this Enemy the World, that the world is
an Enemy is without all doubt he that seeks to deprive, and cozen thee of thy
estates, and never leaves till he have brought thee to beggary cannot
certaynely be thy friend, such is the World that seeks to deprive thee of thy
heavenly state, and so bring thee to misery; Alas! what is the world but vanity
of vanities? Eccles. 1. 2.
Solomon found it Prove. 30. 8.
so, and thereupon advised to remove far off all vanity, denounces a
Judgment against Esaias 5. 19.
those that draw iniquity 1 Cor. 3. 20.
with Cart-ropes of vanity; yet the very thoughts of man are vain, and the
imaginations Romans 1. 21
of a man are vain, so natural is it for a man to live in vanity; but for thy
part cast these cords off; for the frindship of this world is Jam. 4. 4.
Enmity with God, here thou have as it were presented unto thee the effigies of
the world The world nothing else but vanity.
now I will show thee the glory thereof; Let a man hold up the richest color
against the sun as Skarlet, Purple or the like, nay let a man that delights
in gay clothing make himself never so fine, and go never so costly, and let
him be beset with orient Jewels, yet I say put all this against the sun he
shall see but a black and dark shadow for all this fair substance: such is
the end of all this worldly trash, let it be esteemed never so much, Pleasure,
and Profit will be but black when darkness is upon the mountains, nay they
will not only bring sorrow to the heart, and palenesse to the looks but which
is worst of all, darkrnesse, yea thick darkness that may be felt: yet Exodus
12.
strange it is to see how many men now a days delight in this world, how like
children they run and catch after butterflyes, go after shadows, setting up
a rest here where there is no continuing City: What comfort, or Rest is Heb.
11. 6.
to be found here? go but a long the streets and thou shall find some
singing, and but step further, and thou shall see some mourning, the bells
tolling for poor expiring souls, others carried to their long home, Rachel
Math. 4.
mourning for her children because they are not; what alas is the life that
is here enjoyed! take but a short view of the several ages, of the several
estates, of the inseparable adjuncts, of this life and The life of this world
miserable in all estates. In the Ages.
it will easily appear that merely to live, is no great happiness.

First, an Infant, that is a life of pity nine months close Prisoner in the
dungeon of the womb, not beholding the light, which when he comes into, how
sadly he salutes it, presaging his hard welcome, shaming that he is naked,
lamenting that he is borne, repining that he is borne to misery, then if his
Cradle proves not his Coffin; he lives a Child, that is a life of folly in his
speech, thoughts, and Actions; youth succeeds, that is a life of sin Manhood
the flower of all a life of vanity; Old age that is a life of death; this is the
life in ages, what is it the^ in callings?

Man lives either single, In the Callings.
and that is a free life but uncomfortable, or he takes a wife, wed-lock is
the school of patience; demure Sarah chid with Abraham; blear eyed Leah
wrangled with Jacob, scornful Micol scoffed at David, stubborn Vashtay will
not come at Ahashuerus call; and it is no better in the men, discreet Abigail
lights upon a churlish Nabal; Pilate was as unkind a husband as an un righteous
Judge denying his wife the life of our blessed Savior: whether the life be
private or public whether we eat the bread of careful Industry, or the
sweet unswet for bread of an unacquired Patrimony, in the most retired quiet
plentiful condition something falls out still verifying that of our Savior,
Sufficient to the day is the sorrow of it; breifely thus by a learned Gentleman.

The World's a bubble, and the life of Man
Less then a span,
In his Conception wretched, from the womb
So to the Tomb;
Cursed from his Cradle, and brought up to years
With Cares, and fears.
Who then to frail Mortality shall trust
But lim's the water, or but writes in dust.
2
Yet whilst with sorrow we live here oppressed
What life is best?
Courts are but superficial schools
To dandle fools, The worlds misery in all estates.

The Rural parts are turned into a den
Of savage men;
And where is a City from all vice so free?
But may be termed the worst of all the three.
3
Domestic cares afflict the husbands bed
Or pains his head,
Those that live single take it for a Curse,
Or do things worse,
Some wish for Children, those that have them, none
Or wish them gone;
What is it then to have, or have no wife?
But single thraldom, or a double strife.
4
Our own affections still at home to please
Is a disease.
To cross the Seas to any forrayne soil
Peril, and toil;
Wars with their noise afright us, when they cease
We are worse in peace;
What then remaynes but that we still should cry
Not to be borne, or being borne to dye.
Look where you will, like Noah's Dove, thou shall find no rest for the sole
of thy foot, how much evil company does the world present unto thee? come (say
they) let us be merry, and spend the time in jollity, let us eat, drink, and
be merry for tomorrow we shall dye, and 1 Cor. 15.
they have authority for what they say, they have a Prince to countenance them
out, but their prince, and they shall be cast out both together. Joh. 12. 31.
Is it so then? what remains? Does the whole world 1. Joh. 5. 19
lie in wickedness? Seek then the kingdom of God, Christ's Joh. 18. 36.
kingdom is not of this World; and that thou may the better steer thy
course in this tumultuous sea of the World, have a care to keep off these two
Rocks.

1 Gilded Pleasures. Gilded Pleasures Golden Profits maine impediments of
Christianity. Nulla est. sincera v^lupt as.
2 Golden Profits.
For the first, what is this gilded or painted pleasure? it is a painted shadow
for there is no true pleasure in this world though thou lie upon the bed of
Ivory, and eatest the Lambs of the flock, and the Calves out of the stall, and
sing to the sound of the Violl Amos 6, 4, 5, 6. Eccles 11. 1
inventing instruments of Music, and drinking win in bowls, yet what of all
this? thou shall at last come to judgment yet for all this how do men roll
out their precious times? how do they cry out, here is a heaven upon earth? how
do they set a side this day and that day? one day for their pleasure, another
for their profit, such a day to receive their Rents, such a day to take their
pleasures but what of all this time is set a part for Gods service? either for
duties public, or private; here is no Remembrance Amos. 6. 6.
of the afflictions of Joseph, no holy emulation with David In Templum Domini
eamus let us go to the house of the Lord, there is the true heavenly pleasure
to be found, instead of all this, there is swearing and swaggering, hunting,
and hawking, hawking after fowls whilst the Devil that 1. Tim. 5. 6
cunning fowler is laying nets for their souls, they cry Eamus come let us go,
but whither? to do wickedly, I and they go in troops too, and they have good
fellowship too, but alas! what fellowship is there in such unfruitful works
of darkness? Could but the voluptuous man think, and verily believe that
saying of St. Paul that he that lives in pleasures is dead whilst he lives,
he would not go on so merrily as he does, but let any man tell him that he is
dead, he would presently answer, how can I be dead? who is more lively, or
hearty then I am? who takes less The carnal man a mere dead man.
care then I? who has less trouble then I have? do I look as though I were
dead? but let me tell him whosoever he is, that he is the very Picture of
death, he is in a spiritual lethargy, dead in sins, and trespasses yet sees
it Ephesians. 2. 1.
not, feels it not, he sees not the hand writing upon the wall which made
Belshazers knees Dan. 55.
knock one against another, he sees not the hand writing in the scripture that
the wages Romans 6. 23
of sin is death, and thus it is with the drunkard; he takes much pleasure in
his Cups but if he did but consider that there was mors in olla, death in the
pot, he would not take off his cups so roundly, what is this more then to live
in pleasure, and wantonness to be lovers of pleasures, more then 2 Timothy 3. 4
lovers of God, how sweet a name too do they give their pleasures? sweet
pleasures; for my part I do wonder what they do or can sweeten, can they
sweeten death here? or can they sweeten death hereafter? can they sweeten the
pains of hell? Solomon had as much pleasure as the world could afford, he had
costly houses, fair Vineyands, gardens, Orchards, he had much cattle, and
much coin, he had also men servants, and maid servants, he had men singers
and women singers, what his eyes delighted in he witheld not from them, but
what was the issue of all this goodly pleasure? he looked on all his works
that his hand had wrought, and that this was also vanity, and vexation of
spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. Set Eccles. 2. 11
then thy cheifest delight and pleasure in God at whose Right hand are
pleasures, and fullness of pleasures for ever Ps. 16. 11.
more.

Now I will show thee the second impediment or hinderance in the way to
salvation, and that is golden Profit, this it quid non mortalia pectora cogit.
is which draws away many from the consideration of goodness, and their own
happiness how many are there that like the fool in the Gospel sing Requiems
to their souls, and why? because they have goods laid up for many years, his
goods were the ground of all his mirth, his profit was the cause of all his
pleasure, but God made him, a fool upon Record for Luke 12. 19.
his labor; Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, etc.
yet strange it Per mar^ per terras currit mercator ad Indos.
is to see what suing, what running, what riding, what sailing, what swimming?
and all to get a little profit, which is no sooner had but presently betakes it
self to it is wings, and flies away; but Prove. 23. 5.
this is not to use the world as though they used it not, not to 1 Cor. 7.
have the conversation witbout covetousness, not to have the 1 Pet. 1. 15
conversation in heaven from whence there is expectation of a Savior; Philip.
3. 20.
minded man if I should pray, and follow this heavenly calling so much I should
soon become a beggar.

for advantage of sin, let him first tell me what advantage sin has at any
time procured, he that wins the whole world, and loses his own soul
has but a poor Math. 16. 26.
bargayne of it, cannot a man live unless he spend his whole life in carking,
and caring for the things of this world? cannot a man have time for God, and
his calling too? Religion must be the unum the one thing of this life, but not
the unicum the only thing of this life to do that and nothing else, a man may
serve God in Carking care forbidden.
the performance of his calling, no man is forbidden to follow his calling but
he is desired to give God a place with it. There is a great difference betwixt
the Church bell, and the market bell; the market bell ringes but once, yet at
the sound of it what running is there to the market by troops, happy is he
that gets thither first; but for the Church that may ring Peale after peale one
Peale after another yet much a do to get a man to the Church, and if his body
be rung into the Chureh yet a thousaud to one but his mind is gonne a
wollgathering after the things of the world, the very Math. 6. 21
desires of his heart are upon the world, the world is his treasure and there
his heart is Phil. 3. 8.
also, but it is otherwise with a child of God, all things with None but
Christ. None but Christ is the Godly man's note
him are but dung, and dross in comparison of Christ Jesus, he lives in this
world but not according to this world, he lives in the flesh but not according
to the lusts of the flesh, he so uses the Creature that he always has an
eye on the Creator, but let thy conversation be in heaven from Philip. 1. 23.
whence thou expectest a Savior; first in thy meditations on God and heavenly
things; secondly in thy affections desiring to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ which is best of Act. 23. 1.
all; Thirdly, in thy practice, living in a good conscience toward God, and
toward men, though thy hand be upon the Helm yet let thy eye be upon the
stars, thy heart being thus planted in heaven thy hands thy head thy foot
will become the happy instruments of Gods glory, and all that is within thee
praise his holy name.

This Enemy the world being thus laid open and discovered, The Christian
Soldier in battle against the world.
stand ready armed, and take unto thee the sword of the spirit which is the
word of God, take this I say into thy hand, and strike with it. If the world
seek to allure thee to pleasure, hit him home with that saying of Solomon, he
that loves Pleasures shall be a poor man, Prove. 21. 17. and 1 Timothy 5. 6
again with the Apostle, he that lives in pleasure is dead while he lives;
and at hin again with that of Job; My delight must be in the Almighty, Romans 6.
that the wages of sin is death, and therefore thou must not, thou may not,
thou dare not do this great trespass, and so sin against God; but if the
world shall still persist to tempt thee, reach him with Gods promises which he
has made to these that take pleasure in him, that he that delights in him he
will give him his hearts desire, Psalm. 37. 4.

If the world come upon thee again with profits and riches, tell him that the
treasures Prove 10. 2
of wickedness profit not, but Righteousness delivers Esaias 44. 9.
from death. Prove. 10. 2. and again that delectable things Math. 6. 26
shall not profit, Esaias 44. 9. and what were it for thee to win the whole
world and to loose thy own soul. But if for all this the world shall still
assault thee, at him boldly, and tell him that, Godliness with content is great
gain 2 Timothy 6. 6. and profitable to all things 2 Timothy 4. 8. Now for the close
off all that I may take thee quite off from Exit us act a probat.
the world, and the things thereof consider the end, it may begin well but I
am sure it will end ill, thou may take the pleasure of sin for Prove. 16. 2.
a season, but the issue thereof is the ways of death, there is but one end,
and be assured that that end will certaynely come, and that perhaps The end of
worldlings considerable.
sooner too then thou art a ware of; do but consider the end of covetous
Achan. Josh. 7. 25. take but notice of the end of greedy Ahab 1 King. 22. 34.
look but into the end of miserable Gehezi 2 King. 5. 27. but above all forget
not that wretched end of traiterous Judas who for thirty pieces of silver
betrayed his own dear Mr. Math. 26. 15. see what ends they all came to here,
what portion they have now, and what they shall have hereafter; Let al those
that thus forget God remember least he suddenly tear them in pieces and there
be none to deliver them; by this time I hope thou art well furnished to
encounter, Ps. 112.
and come off bravely with this great Idol the world, but behold there
appears a second Enemy, the flesh; by his The second Enemy, the flesh. Non
intus ut in cute.
out side he should be a friend, such a friend he is I am sure that thon
broughtest from home with thee, but trust him not if thou do he will in the
end deceive thee, whereas the world is without thee this freindly Enemy is
within thee, and therefore the more pernicious because he is in thy bosom, a
serpent hugged in thy breast, one that is at bed and Anguis. in ^^rba.
board with thee, but since thou can not tell which way to avoid him be
always prepared for him, watch him narrowly, and take him off betimes,
suppress the rising of evil motions, foris hostem si non habes invenerit
domi; if thou have not an enemy a broad thou shall always be sure of one at
home, thy flesh thou must have aut hostem Fronti nulla fides.
aut socium, either a friend or an enemy, how like a friend does thy flesh
look? but how like an Enemy does he lurk? that he is an Enemy is without
all doubt, an Enemy I mean to thy salvation, for the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh and these are contrary one to the
other Gal. 5. 17. there is no Gal. 5. 17.
agreement betwixt God and Belial, and there cannot be any correspondence
betwixt the flesh and the spirit. One Nation being injured by another does by
way of Revenge make a Provision for war and then begins a fearful Battle
on both sides; so it is betwixt the flesh, and the spirit; the spirit assayles
the flesh, and the flesh by way of Revenge sets upon the spirit again, hence
is that advice of the Apostle, abstain from fleshly lusts 1 Pet. 2. 11
which war against the spirit. 1 Pet. 2. 11. here is now open war
proclaimed, no articles of Peace to be entertained, it No peace betwixt the
flesh, and the spirit.
must be tried out by strength of arms, it must be fought out to the last.
Since it is thus it is the highest point of Christian valor to overcome these
lusts of the flesh for in doing so thou art more then a Conqueror in Christ
Jesus, Ille quidem qui suam affectionem vincit, libidines refraenat voluptates
spernit, iracundiam tenet, avaritiam coercet, caeteras animi labes re^ellit,
etc. he truly which can overcome his affections, bridle his lusts, despise
pleasures, master his anger, etc. he only is the truly happy, and Cohibet qui
sua vota sapit.
courageous man; for these lusts of the flesh are they that war not only
against thy soul but against the Lamb, these are they which keep thee back
from praying, or praising God; these are they which make thee have such bad
success in all thy undertakings, that make all things go cross with thee, yea
these are they which deprive thee of life here, and eternal life, hereafter,
if thou live after the flesh thou shall die Romans 8. 13. Will thou then hug
such a serp^nt in thy Romans 8. 13
breast and not oppose him? nay not only hug but nourish him in thy bosom,
even him that will tear out thy heart, I mean pull away thy heart from God;
look then into the law of God, S. Paul had not known sin if the law had not
said, Thou shall not covet; Romans 7. if thou have Romans 7.
a desire also to know what these rebellious lusts are, thou shall know them by
their disagreement with the motions of Gods spirit. S. Paul saw another law in
his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive to
the law of sin, Romans 7. 23. Romans 7. 23
here is the law of the members that is the law of the members that is the good
m^tions of the spirit, the law of sin resisting the blessed No agreement
betwixt the flesh and spirit.
means of grace, here is rebelling against God one way; withdrawing the mind
from heavenly cogitations another way, so that when the blessed Apostle would
do good evil was with him, when he set before him self the law of God, and
thought to do accordingly then steps in the flesh and makes a Rebellion with
the spirit so that the evil that he would not that did he, Romans 7. Romans 7. 19
19. if thou then desire to have any part with Christ thou must crucify the
flesh with the lusts, and affections thereof Gal. 5. 24. for what good Gal. 5.
24.
action soever thou art about to do this body of sin the flesh will
intercept thee; does the spirit tell thee it is good to pray unto God, and
praise his The flesh an opposite to all^ good motions.
holy name? no says the flesh it will be too tedious, and wearisome so to do;
does the spirit bid thee fast, and bring thy body under by no means (says the
flesh) eat, drink, 1 Cor. 15.
and be merry, this course of fasting will pine away thy body too much; art
thou at any time struck Sermon sick that by reason of thy sins the very
flames of hell flash in thy conscience; come says the flesh, this is but a fit
of Melancholy, drink a Cup of wine to drive the sorrow from thy heart, here is
now the true difference betwixt the flesh, and the spirit, the one is willing
but the other is weak, Math. 26. 41.
the spirit draws to God, the flesh hasts on to the Devil: seeing then that
these fleshly lusts have such predominance he that does overcome his
corruptions daily standing strongly in the defense of Christ is a greater
conqueror then ever as yet lived.

The first advice then that I shall give thee shall be that Advise against
fleshly lusts.
of Socrates though an Heathen yet his council is good, Homo vince teipsum; O
man overcome thy self, how many are there that are able to bear a way great
Monarchs and Kingdoms by conquest, and yet are borne a way, and beaten down
by theit own lusts? Phillip the Macedonian, Alexander the great, Cyrus that
Monarch, Zerxes, Darius, and others very Valiant, courageous and stouthearted
men, they had won by force and power many Kingdoms, and Nations, had
devastated, and depopulated many great, and famous Cities, yet for all this
when they came to this point, the cheifest of all the rest they could not
overcome their own untamed and unbridled lusts, but were so swayd with the
concupiscence and desire of them, that I may very well conclude, Se ipsum
vincere maxima est victoria, It is the greatest victory to overcome thy self.
Bis vincit qui se vincit (Says another Heathen) he overcomes twice that
overcomes in such a victory as this is. Valentinian the Emperor said at the
point of death, that he did most of all glory in one victory, above all his
great conquests whatsoever, and being demanded by those that stood about him
his friends and acqua intance what victory that was, O says he, Inimicorum
nequissimum devici, I have conquered my most wicked enemy, my own flesh; a
most famous and noble conquest indeed this is that which made St. Paul come off
Victory over the flesh is victory indeed.
with Rejoicing, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course etc.
And for every man thus to do it is no easy matter, a man must undergo many a
hungry meal endure many agrevious afflicti on, sustain many a loss, suffer
many a cross, fetch many a groan, shead many a tear before he can fully over
come this unbridled flesh; Anger a notable Champion for the flesh.
I will instance but in one particular lust of the flesh, and that is, Anger;
for how manyare there that are so transported with Anger, and the desire of
Revenge that they have quite lost the nature though they still retain the
names of Christians, he is now a days in no request that has not a big
look, and a bold presumptuous carriage I mean to outface wickedness, and to
color it over with a fair gloss; nay this passion of Anger is so violent
that it spares neither man, woman, nor child, friend nor acquaintance, and
this it was that made Solomon confess that Anger is cr^ell, and wrath is
raging, but who can stand before Envy? Prove. 27. 4. What says the Choleric
man Prove. 27. 4.
if that he be but dishonored with any thing, or any thing has crossed him;
flesh and blood cannot endure it, it is true indeed flesh and blood of it self
cannot sustain or endure it; nnlesse the God of heaven, give patience to
support, and undergo it: O how irksome is a cross to flesh and blood, but if
the holy spirit of God were the director it would teach a lesson Matt. 5. 24.
even to pray for Enemies, that brought them, Moses prayed for the stubborn
and unfaithful Jews even then when they rebelled against him. Exodus 32. 11.
Exodus 32. 11. Blessed St. Stephen in the midest of torments prayed, for his
Enemies, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. St. Paul wished himself to
be accursed from Christ Act. 7. 60.
that his kinsmen the Israelit^s might be saved. Romans 3. 9. But above all, that
pattern Romans 3. 9.
of true patience, Christ Jesus himself, who so dearly Examples of true
patience.
loved us: even when we were Enemies, that he gave himself to the death of
the Cross for sinful man's sake, and as he hung on the Cross, prayed to his
heavenly father, not for his friends, not for the Angels, but for sinful man
who was his utter Enemy. Luke 23. 24. These are written for thy examples, Luke
23. 24
these are patterns for thy imitation, these being set before thy eyes, and
well considered will take off thy haughty and choleric spirit, suppress thy
dominering and swaggering carriage, and bring thee down to the depth of all
humility.

Now I have discovered this Enemy the Flesh wi^h some of the choicest of his
company, how strong they a^e, how they lie encamped, what seeming friendship
they make the easier to make way for their own victory and thy ruin, I have
also showed thee how hard it is to put them to the foyl, I will now use some
motives to encourage thee to the battle, then being well prepared, I will put
the sword into thy hand whereby thou may be able to overcome them all.

Then first of all consider with thy self that to harbor First Motive to be
armed against the flesh.
these lusts is a sin, and to be lead by them is a great Offense to the
Almighty, be advised then by St. Paul not to make Romans 13. 14. Care of the
main chance commended.
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof Romans 13. 14. thou may
provide for the flesh in seeking after mayntenance and providing meat and
drink for the body; but thou may not fulfill the lusts thereof when by
immoderate eating, and drinking thou surfettest with gluttony, and drunknesse,
thou may provide for the flesh in the diligent labor of thy hands to get
some competency of estate for thy better subsistence Esaias 3. 15.
in after times; but thou may not fulfill the lusts thereof when to increase
thy estate thou do it in the oppression of thy brethren, in the grinding of
his face either by cruel extortion, or biting usury again it is the same
blessed, Apostles proposition that thou may walk in the flesh 2. Cor. 10.
but thou may not war after the flest. 2. Cor. 10. 3. every child of God
has fleshly lusts in him, and diverse suggestions of his corrupt flesh
remaining, but he does suppress, and keep them down that they shall not rule
over him, he is always struggling, and striving against them, in so much that
if he offend at any time, it is not he but sin that dwells in him. Romans 7.
17. Sin may dwell but shall not reign in his mortal body Romans 6. 12. there
is in him such a combustion between the flesh, and the spirit that he cannot be
at Rest, nay he will not ly down in his sin and continue in his shame, can
two walk together except they be agreed? can thy spirit, and thy flesh, which
Amos. 3. 3.
are Enemies lie together, and be still without any resistance except they be
agreed? If it be so it is a certain sign that thou, and thy sin are well
Quam been convenient.
agreed together; it is the manner of lewd, and wicked livers thus to be at
ease they are ready to say, I thank God I have none of these troubles, my
heart is at ease, I have no griping in my conscience, but all goes well with
me, but let me tell them it is a sign that sin is the chiefest copesmat,
and The carnal man's security.
companion with them, that their fellowship is with the unfruitful works of
darkness; put then on a holy* resolution not to war after the flesh, no^ to
be lead by the lusts of the same; thou know how usual a thing it is if that
a friend would have thee to do Ephesians. 5. 11
any thing, or go any whither, which having resolved with thy self not to go,
or not to do, thou answerest, I am resolved otherwise, and so forbearest the
action accordingly, how could I wish that thou would but resolve if the
flesh provoke thee not to fulfill the lusts thereof, from henceforth to know no
man after the flesh 2. Cor. 5. 16. and as no man, so nothing that may draw away
thy mind from God, or lead thee to the performance of thy fleshly defires, but
rather to have no fellowship with them, and to reprove them. Ephesians. 11. 11.

In the second place to add Second Motive to be armed against the flesh
more courage unto thee that thou may bouldly stand out in defiance of the
flesh consider the end of all, the end, I say proves all, and indeed Finis
cor^nat opus.
the end will be without end never to end till thou co^mest to Hell there to be
in endless torment for ever; flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
heaven, there is an impossibility in it, it cannot; for in that place enters
no unclean thing, no dunghill cogitations can bring thee thither, then do thou
think to sow to the flesh, and reap in the spirit? thou can not do it be
not deceived with such windy hopes, if thou sowest to the flesh, thou shall of
the flesh, reap corruption. Gal. 6. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 5
not the Crown of immortality which is the fruit of the spirit; it is plain
then that he which makes his heaven here upon earth, not bettering himself in
the way to the true heaven is the worse and so the nearer to Hell, O what a
miserable condition that man is in that makes his flesh his guide there are too
many woeful examples already, be not deceived, thy corrupt lust being sinful
the Romans 6. 23
wages thereof must needs ^e death; cozen not thy own soul to expect any
better reward, to win the world, to pamper thy flesh and to loose thy own
Soul, will be but a sorry bargain in the conclusion.

Now having prepared, and encouraged thee to the The Christian Soldier in
battle against the flesh.
Combat I will put the sword into thy hand, wherewith I would have thee to lay
about thee, for the Enemy stands upon his defiance, and resolves to stand it
out to the Adultery the first Champion of the flesh
utmost, if he shall set upon thee with one of his prime Champions, Adultery;
fear him not he shall be surely put to death. Lev. 20. 10. if this will not
serve the turn answer him, that God is on thy side, and as he is the great
Judge both of heaven and earth so he will come to Judgment against him and all
his Companions. Mat. 3. 5. But if the Enemy shall be so audacious as to lift up
his head again, let him know that thou have nothing to do with him, that thy
conversation is in Heaven from whence Phil. 3. 22.
thou expectest a Savior, but for his part thou art sure that he has no
interest therein, God has spoken it, and you will believe it, that no
Adulterer 2 Cor. 6. 9.
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. if Idolatry should appear in the second
rank turn not to him. Lev. 19. 4. but fly from him. 1 Cor. 10. 14. and keep
^ot thy self from him. 1 John 5. 21. again if this great, Enemy shall at any
time bring Idolatry a second Champion of the flesh
that great General of his Army against thee, which is drunkenness tell him
that he is a woeful wretched leader, woe to the drunkards of Ephraim Esaias 28.
1. bid him awake, weep, and howl, Joel. 1. 5. as for thy part thou art
resolved Drunkenness the great General of the Army.
to take heed not to be overprest with him. Joel. 1. 5. nor to be drunk with
wine wherein there is excess. Ephesians. 5. 18. But if any of his pot company
shall yet stand out, tell them boldly, that there are twelve miserable
discommodityes that will arise from their society,

Imprimis.
The soul is endangered, The body is infected, Reason is troubled
Understanding dulled, 12 Discommodityes of inordinate drinking.
Commendations banished, Sustenance wasted, Letchery provoked, Manhood
defaced, Beastlynesse resembled:
And lastly God says, no drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

Over, and besides,
It spends the time vainly, Consumes money wickedly, It causes the drop^ie and
other diseases, It is the high way to beggary It causes friends forsake them
The godly to abhor them, Neighbors to shun them, Youth to mock them, Their
own household to despise them, None to regard them, God to forsake them, And
the Devil to take them,
Then who would be a Drunkard? This raging drunken Adversary with his
staggering troops has like a large tree almost overspread the whole kingdom,
nay almost the whole world, I could wish it to be cut down to the Root that
neither stock, stem, nor stump of it might once appear above Toto grassatur
in Orhe.
ground, I could wish that there were some course taken with those that make a
trade of drunkenesse, if there were a mulct set on every sutling boothe
belonging to the Comp, I mean a fine set on every Tavern and Alehouse out of
which any were seen to come Drunk then there would be speedy Reformation, if
the house were thus punished for selling of dunken cups there would be fewer
drunkards, if there were no Receivers there would be no thieves; It was a
strange law that if the Parent brought in his child drunk before the
Magistrate he was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 12. 20. By this it may appear what
hatred God has to drunknesse; As for those that will not be reclaymed I could
wish that as the poor BP. being taken by the Donatists had two dead dogs tied
unto him so they might have the like tied unto them and led about the streets
for he that gives himself to drink is no better then a dog that returns to
his vomit again. Justice for these things is already fallen on her knees and
it is to be feared will ere long fall upon her face in the continuance of such
wicked and debauched courses. Sweairng with his Ruffians.


If swearing with his ruffians shall aff^^nt thee in the next place, let him
know that the land mournes under him and therefore he shall be cut Jer. 23. 10
off Zach. 5. 3. as for thy part swear neither by heavan, or earth nor by any
other oath, let thy tongue be made the numpet of gods glory, let thy
communication be yea, yea, and (...) so thou ^^alt not fall into condemnation.
Math. 5. 34. To sum up all, if the Ringleader of all those ^roopes that Lust
the Ringleader of all the troops
is lust, whether it be fornication uncleanes or wantonness shall set upon
thee, take notice that he is a deadly dangerous Enemy, he that is lead by him
shall set himself against God the Father who ought to be gloryfied in his
body. 1 Cor. 2. 20.

Secondly, against God the son as he is head of the Church.

Thirdly against God the holy Ghost in regard of his body, whose Temple it is.
1 Cor. 6. 19.

Fourthly, against the Church, no such thing says Thamar to Ammon ought to be
done in the Church 2 Samuel 13. 12.

Fifthly, against the Commonwealth Jerem. 23. 10. The sin of lust aggravated.


Sixthly, against the Party whose Chastity is violated. Levi. 21. 7.

Sevently against friends, his own body whose vessel is to be possessed in
holiness and not in the lust of concupiscence 2 These. 4. 4. here it is that
many are visibly marked in the faces, and are never without an Almanac in
their bones.

Eighthly, against his own good name, he that commits, Adultry shall find
dishonor, and his Reproach shall never he taken away, Prove. 6. 34.

Lastly, against his own soul, whoredom, and wine have taken away their
hearts, Hos. 4. 11. thus runs he on like a fool to the stocks for
correction, Prove. 7. 22. and so he is excluded out of heaven, Rev. 21. 8. Is
it so then? walk honestly as in the day, not in chambering and wantonness.
Romans 13. 13. the Corinthians held lust to be such an indifferent Wicked men
make a mock of sin.
adversary that at the last they swallowed down incest; how common lust has
been with the Romanists let the discovery of the dissolution of Abbyes
testifye; Erasmus observing it to be usual amongst great ones terms it
Lusus magnificus the Noblemans Recreation, what duels have been about a base
prostitute? that's the cause why such a fogge has lately overspread us; as for
thy part when thou see this man do this or that if he be patronus causae,
he shall be socius poenae and thou shall never burn the less in hell for
having such company; then pray more earnestly, refrain bad company, thus did
Joseph or if thou chance to fall into such, demean thy self so that thou
may be like fish keeping it self fresh in the midst of salt water.

Secondly, look to thy Eyes, else the Enemy will creep in at those win^dowes,
thus Job Job. 31. 1.
made a Covenant with his eyes, have a care of reading Iascivious books,
viewing wanton pictures, freq^enting stage plays etc.

Thirdly, cast off Idleness, The way to shun lusts.
that is the pillow of lust, for he that is busy in his calling shuts the door
upon many a wicked temptation.

Lastly, meditate on Gods Judgments, fast often, make good use of what has
been all ready discovered, thus go on, and prosper, I wish thee good luck in
the Lord, up, and be doing and the Lord God of heaven be with thee.

The third grand Enemy to The third Grand Enemy, the Devil.
Man's salvation is the Devil, his dominion is great, the other two the world
and the flesh are under his command, whereas the one is within thee, and the
other without thee, so this is always about thee, the holy spirit of God has
set him out by diverse names, and titles, but more especially he is termed.

1 A roaring Lion. 1 Pet. 4. 8. 2 A Murderer. Joh. 8. 44. 3 A Prince of the
Air. Ephesians. 2. 3. 4 The accuser of the faithful. Rev. 12. 10.
First, he is a roaring Lion The Devil a roaring Lion.
seeking whom he may devour, and very fitly is he called a Lion for what
the world can not do by alluring objects, and 1 Pet. 1. 8.
the flesh by its enticing allurements the Devil (if he can) will do by his
Lyonlike invasions, he is also a roaring Lion, for as a Lion when he loses
his prey does swell, and roar for very anger; so this roaring Lion when he
does but loose, or rather when any child of God does make an escape out of his
paws then he roares, then he makes new fetches, then he is ready to fly in
the very face of God himself, how many assaults did he make upon the patience
of Job, how many Job 1.
cross blows did he give him one in the neck of another, if the Sabeans
theft and Verse 16.
murder of his Cattle and servants cannot moove him, then the Chaldeans shall
fill Verse. 17.
up the measure of their theevery, if this will not take, then the merciless
flames of fire shall consume his sheep and remaynder of his Cattle, Verse. 18.
nay the stone and timber out of the wall shall silence his sons, and
daughters in the midst of their eating and drinking, only one shall be left a
live to torment his patience with the sad Relation thereof, yet further if none
of all these will do it then he sets out a higher throat, and Nebuchad nezar
like heates the oven of his malice seven times hotter then before, he draws
an arrowe out of his own bosom to shoot at him, sets his wife upon him on
one side to pervert him, and his kindred on the other side to revile him, yet
for all this Job sinned not with his lips, n^r charged God foolishly Job. 1.
22. this is that which made the Devil roar aloude; The Ezekiel. 22. 25.
scriptures every where set out the roaring of the Lion to Esaias 31. 4.
be extraordinary, the Heart thirsts after the brooks of Ps. 42. 1.
water, the young Ravens cry unto God for meat, and all Ps. 147. 9.
other creatures in their kinds seek their meat at Gods hand, only the Lion
he roares when he has no pray, and the Devil Amos 3. 4.
he roares too when he has not some precious soul or other to feed on, nay
the Devil is worse then a Lion The Devil more cruel then a Lion.
who if credit may be given to history, spares those that fall down flat
before him, but if he should once catch thee at that advantage he would
trample thee under his feet and tear thee into a thousand pieces.

Secondly, as he is a roaring The Devil a Murderer.
Lion so he is a Murderer, Joh. 8. 44. not a murderer of one man, or of the
men of one Town, one City, one Kingdom, but of the whole world, of all
Mankind, It was the Devils malice that brought Invida diaboli mors intravit
Bonavent.
death into the world, it was he that brought sin first into the world, and
sin ushered in death, even eternal death; as for thy life natural how does
this murderer go about to take it away from The Devils aim at the life
natural.
thee how does he add Revenge to Envy, and persuade a man that if such a man
were dead then he should be a great man when that indeed many times he is a
happy man in his friends being, then having laid this golden bayte of
preferment in his way, he persuades to murder, so miserable is this life of
nature that by the instigation of this Murderer he that cares not for his
own life is made Master of thine to take it away at pleasure. Again if The
Devils aim at the life moral.
it be thy moral life. i. thy credit and good repute in the world how does
he labor to deprive thee of that too, how does he puff and blow to
extinguish those excellent lights which God has set on a hill to enlighten
others by their good lives, and Godly conversation; when the woman in the
Revelation was as one would have thought got out of his reach into the
wilderness, yet for all that his malice finds out a way to overtake her, he
casts out water as it had been a flood after her that she might be devoured
of the water, Rev. 12. 15. beiug got out of his fingers, he ^ends floods of
scandal, and opprobrious words after her to drown if it were possible that
good esteem she had in the world; nay he is the same still even to these
days, what blaspemy against Gods word it self, that it is but a trick of
state policy to keep fools in awe, that it has no more power then Aesops
fables, calling it a dead letter inkie Divinity, a nose of wax etc? what
damnable heretical opinions has he broached against that holy w^rd? what
Atheistical conclusions against the very essence of God himself in so much
that Ireneus in his time could reckon up one hundredth and od heretical
opinions what scandalous aspersions has he from time to time vomited against
the sacred Order of Priesthood, against the professors and practisers of Gods
word? witness the false Reports imposed on the deaths of diverse Theod. Baeza.
Joh. Calv. Will. Perkins.
that one dyed dispayring in Gods mercy, another raging mad with torment of
conscience, a third trusting in his own merits, and of late what adamnable
Legacy was forged, and foysted on that late King of Pre^chers, but sufficiently
vindica^ed by his son in a Joh. London.
public Auditory whereby the Devil was ashamed, and Dr. H. K: at S. Paul's
cross.
his Instruments abashed? as for the Professors of Gods word, if any man do
but (as he ought) make conscience of his ways, stand upon the sanctification
Religio nunc vocatur simplicitas, Bas.
of the Lords day, and other festivals, he is presently accounted more nice
then wise; one that desires to be singular, one of God Almightyes fools etc.
thus does the Devil whet his tongue like a sword and shootes for his arrows
bitter words. Psalm. 44. 3.

Lastly, if it be thy spiritual life, whether the life of grace here, or the
life of glory hereafter, how does this Homicide by sins of all sorts Si non
vi: tamen dolo.
of all natures, by the observation of all oportunities undermine to blow up
that too: he is his crafts master, his The Devil an old experienced Soldier.
experience is ancient; ab initio from the beginning of five thousand, and odd
years standing; It was he that first Bellum in caeto posuit etc. August form.
4.
made war in heaven, that first deceaved in Paradise, that made hatred and
murder betwixt the two first brethren, Genesis 3. 3 Genesis 4. 8
he was the Primitive Incendiary of all the world, and does he not try us in
all our The Devls aim at the life spiritual.
ways, watch our steps narrowly? it is he that sowes the tares of corruption
in all our Religious and civil undertakings, in prayers to God he strives to
cast in distrust of what is prayed for; he chokes the hearer of Gods word Luke
8. 9.
with the cares of the world, he labors to make the temperate man a glutton,
the continent man, luxurious; the Ruler, proud; the Governor to say with shame,
Bring ye; he Hos. 4.
has an Apple for^ Eve; a Genesis 3. 4.
Grape for Noah; a Bribe for Gebezy; a Golden wedg, and Genesis 9 21.
Babilonish garment for Achan, a Josh. 7. 15.
Bag for Judas he can apply himself to al co^ditio^sfital humors 2 Kin. 4. 12
Math. 24.
if it be matter concerning the People, he can so order it that just commands
shall be more questioned then obeyed, that sincere actions shall meet with
sinifter interpretations, that The Devil is for all humors.
common and easy burdens shall not be borne with dutiful chearefullnesse, nor
public cares sweetened with benign acceptance, nay that all possible
endeavors whereby people may lead godly quiet and p^aceable lives shall be
requited with murmuring in stead of blessing. In the heart he puteth evil
thoughts, in the mouth corrupt words, in the members, wicked operations; he
makes thy hands strike with the fist of wickedness, thy feet swift Esaias 28.
to shed blood, to conclude he strives to make the merry man dissolute; the sad
man desperate: he promises terrestrial preferment, that he may cheat thee of
thy celestial Terrena promittit ut coelestia erripiat Cyprian: de Zelu. etc.
inheritance, he shows thee mere shadows that he may cozen thee of the
substance, thus does he take away as near as he can thy life natural by some
malicious plot or other, thy life moral by base and defamatory scandalls, and
lasty thy life spiritual by making thee dead in sins, and trespasses, and so
in the conclusion makes a small separation between thee and thy God world
without end. Esaias. 59. 3.

Thirdly as he is a Roaring Lion, a Murthe^en so he is called Prince of the
Air, Ephesians. The Devil is Prince of the air
2. 3. he is not called Prince of the air for any Right that he has to that
Region, but he makes it his own by usurpation: As he is a Prince he has many
sworn slaves attendants but inespeciall manner he has some in service
ordinary.

1 Atheists, who say in their hearts there is no God Psalm: 14. 1.

2 Magitians, that bargayne The Devils Courtiers.
with him to acomplish their own wicked ends. 1 Sane: 28. 7. Psalm: 58. 5.

3 Idolaters, such as worship stocks and stones instead of the true God. 1 Cor:
10. 7.

4 Heretics, that aim at the very foundation of faith to overthrowe it. 2 Timothy 2. 18.

5 Apostata's, such as prove Renegadoes, and depart from the faith received.
Heb. 6. 6.

6 All Antichrists, such as are called false Christ's whereof (as Josephus
relates) there were great store in the Joseph: lib. 20. chapter 11. 12 14.
time of Christ, to this Regiment may be added all those that set themselves
against Christ who by their oaths and wicked practices crucify the Lord of
life again. Math: 24. 25.

These are the nobility, or rather ignobolity of this great Princes Court,
subordinate unto these are many infernal Officers all children of
disobedience, too many have advanced Ephesians. 2. 3.
his diabolical throne in their hearts, two shall be in a bed, two in the
field, two at the mill there is half in half for the Devil, one taken the
Luke. 8. 15.
other forsaken. Matthew. 16. The seed of Gods sacred word fell upon four sorts
of ground, and but one of them good, that is great odds three to one, three for
that infernal Cur one for Gods kingdom, The Devil has too many Servants.
three to be tied up in sheaves and burnt with fire unquencheable, one to be
gathered into Gods granary Luke 8. again there was ten Lepers cleansed, nine
of them clave to their ungrateful Mr. one only returned thankfully to his
heavenly preserver, here is nine to one Luke 17. 15. Nay Solomon found not one
in a thousand, nay there was not found in all Jerusalem one man that executed
Judgment, and sought the truth. Jerem. 5. 1. there was once but eight persons
in all the world yet there was one that set up the Devils throne in that small
company. Genesis 7. Nay the whole world lies in wickedness. Joh: 5. 19. So potent,
so great, so large a jurisdiction has this black prince of the air this
prince of the world and darkness, Ephe. 8.

Lastly as the Devil is a roaring Lion, a Murderer a Prince. So he is also an
accuser, of the faithful. Rev: 12. 10. The Devil an accuser of the faith full.
he spares no time from accusing for sin but that which he employeth in
temptation to sin, or inflicting punishment on the sin committed he is the
first mover to sin, and the first accuser for sin, he busieth himself only
in preferring bills of indictment against sin to the Judge of heaven and earth
who will not suffer it to go unpunishe, how like an Informer does he lie
sculking, and prying into the closest of man's heart that he might be able to
lay that sin to his charge which he himself tempted unto, thus dealt he with
our first parents, and this is his dealing with all the world at this time,
thus did he accuse Job unto God, Does Job serve God for naught? Job 2. There is
none that can be free from his most unjust accusations.

Is it so then? Is the Devil a roaring Lion? Does he compass the earth
seeking whom he may devour? well for all that he is but can is eaten a
ligatus, a dog tied up in a chain, latrare potest, mor dear non potest, well
may he bark, bite I am sure he cannot. All the world was indeed cowd out by
his power till Christ first broke his head in the wilderness but now the
meanest Christian through Christ that helps him is able to make a jest of him
Phil. 4. 13
and hell too. One of the sages of Greece said, that it was better to have an
army of sheep with a Lion for their Captain then a Company of Lions with a
sheep for their leader; what though thou art a filly sheep thou have the Lion
of the of Judah for thy Commander, it is he that has broken both the head of
his power, and policy at once, I am sure he cannot hurt thee.

Is the Devil a Murderer, does he by sin seek to take away thy life
spiritual? does he by Scandalous, defamatory reports go about to deprive thee
of thy life moral? does he by some malicious plot or other labor to put out
thy life natural? fear him not, what though he kill thy body he shall not
kill thy Math. 10. 28.
Soul the Lord of life will deliver thee, and blessed shall thou be when men
speak al manner of evil of thee for his name sake. Math. 8. 7.

Is the Devil a Prince of the air? God of Heaven is above him? has he a
large power? what though it be so, it is for all that limited; has he many
sworn slaves attendant on him? does he rule in the children of disobedience?
both he and they are at Gods command and when they have dominered to the height
then will that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords by his unlimited power clap
them up in Everlasting chains of darkness Jud. 7.

Lastly is the Devil an accusar of the faithful what though, God is the God of
truth, he is a liar. Job. 8. 44. cannot the children of God come to stand
before the Lord but he must stand perking up amongst them ready to upbraide
them. Job. 1. 6. Does he never rest from Gods elbow to give information, and to
file up bills of accusation? what of all this Christ sits at the right hand
of God interceding for thee, cancelling those hand writings of sin and
Satan, who then shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect Mark. 16 15.
it is God that justifies. Romans 8. 33. and for this accuser Col. 2. 14 Psalm.
68. 8.
pr^jectus est, he is cast out by the blood of the Lamb. Rev. 12, 11. Death
and the Devil are now swallowed up into victory 1 Cor. 15. captivity is now
led captive that Leviathan who makes the deep to boil Death, Sin, and the
Devil conquered by Christ.
like a pot has now an b^oke cast in his nose, and his jaws are pierced with
the angle. Job. 40 21. Christ's humanity was the bait which he nibled at many a
time in the wilderness and Isid: Hispal. Sent. lib. 1.
elsewhere, but not perceiving the hook, little thinking of his Divinity was
caught in the conclusion, nay Christ did not leave him so but chaced him down
to those chambers of death the grave, they are not now any longer prisons, but
dormitoryes, sweet places of repose for the Saints departed; thus by the death
of Christ the last Enemy is destroyed too, thou art not now captive to death
the sting is taken out; the death, of Saints 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 3. 14. Phil. 3.
11. Genesis 5. 24. Phil. 1. 23.
is called a sleep, a change; that of Enoch was a translation, that of Eli^h
an assumption, S. Paul called it a dissolution, every thing alters its
property where Christ sanctifyeth, he by the bitterness of his death has
sweetened the extremity of ours, the life gave himself to death, where as men
are usually buried after they are dead, Christ after his death laid death in
the grave, and hell in hell, the lake was buried in the lake, now h^ll where is
thy victory thanks be given to God which gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 57.

I have now showed thee what the Devil is, how ravenous for his prey, how
cruel in his intendments, how potent in mischeife, and how false in his
accusations what need have thou then to stand upon thy guard? do but guird
thy self with verity, and thou shall easily withstand his hipocrysie; put on
the breastplate of Righteousness; and thou shall soon oppose his
Viciousness; take up the helmet of salvation, and so thou shall evince
distrust, despair which all of them end in damnation; thou art not now to
wrestle against flesh and blood but against principalityes, Ephesians. 6. 12
and powers, against the Prince of darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places, thy Enemy is spiritual, and thy weapons must not
be caruall, 1 Cor. 10. 4. do thou but begin to fast and pray he will soon
be cast out Math. 17. 21. Anthony the Abbat being demanded of his scholars
with what arms he used to resist the Devil said; The cross of Christ, and
Athanasius in vitaejus
a steadfast faith its his passion are as a brazen wall against the fiery darts
of hell, and the Devil himself confessed thus Examples of holy men in
conquest of the Devil.
much of a learned man; Tume semper vin^is, etc. Thou art still too hard for
me, when I go about to r^yse thee in thy own conceyte, thou throwest thy
self down in all humility; when I endeavor to cast thee down with despair
thou lif^est thy self up by a lively faith in Christ's merits, so that let me
do what I can thou surely go beyond me; follow not then his commands since
another being demanded how he could be so patient in the midst of so many
gross affronts offered; O said he) I do not like the dog ^^^^e and bite
the stone that was thrown at me, but seize upon the party that threw it; I
do not whine and whimper under the cross that is laid upon me but bless God
by whose permission Siquis abinimico laesus in Diaboli caput ^ffun dat. Bas.
it is thus imposed, how ever I revenge my self upon sin, and Satan who
were the only occasion thereof, I set all upon the Devils score but never
strike tallyes with him till I am fully revenged; another man strikes me, an
innocent, shall I therefore strike a third who offended me not? shall I
presently in the vent of my passion fly in the very face of God and offend him;
no, no, I will leave Revenge to him to whom it appertains, who will one day
in the fullness of his wrath pay home that grand Enemy of mankind who thus
seduced me; this has been the constant practice of former times, and thus it
should be now, but alas the sun sets blushing at the folly of too many in
this Sted fast faith in Christ, a sure defense against the Devils assaults.
case, there is too much way given to the Devil. Is then a steadfast faith in
Christ an impenetrable bulwark against the Devils assaults? is humility by his
own confession, a ^ure way to go beyond him. follow not then his commands
since he commands to sin, be not bound to his trade since he trades to
deceive, be not a child in his government since he is a Father of lies, lastly
be not a subject in his kingdom since he is a Prince of darkness, but seek
to avoyde him as thou John 12. 11
would avoid the end, which is endless damnation.

Being thus prepared for the Battle, acquaynted with the power and malice of
the Adversary, as also the main The Devils aim to obscure God's word.
ways how to foil him by the Examples of Religious men in times past I will
now put the sword into thy hand, that sword of the spirit, the powerful word
of God, but how does the Devil strive to take off the edg of this sword?
Thieves when they steal put out the Candle, this thief does strive to obscure
the word for fear of discovery, how does he go about to roll a stone to
stop this Fountain of living waters? Jerem. 2. 13
how does be labor to obliterate these ancient Records of thy salvation?
lastly how does he endeavor to falsifye this last will and Testament of thy
heavenly Father? Heb. 9. 13.
but all in vain this sword has a double edge it cannot be blunted, this word
is lux mundi, not lux modii, it was formerly light only in Goshen when all
Egypt was dark besides, the Israelites only had it when all the world besides
had it not, the Heathens had some examples of this light, it shone unto them
through some chinks only but it is now sol mundi, all about our Horizon, we
have it in a full Godsword shines in fullness of light.
Meridian, this Church of ours (God be blessed for it) excels the state of all
other Churches whatsoever, they had it in expectation, we in active exhibition,
they longingly desired to see it but mist it, but now it knocks at our doors,
it is but opening the windows, and it comes in upon us, such a sunny light as
this is can never be obscured; this spiritual Fountain is Puteus
inexhaustibilis never to be drawn dry, that which can make Rivers to flow out
of the Joh. 7. 38.
bellyes of believers must needs be full, hither it is that all believers come
to bathe and refresh themselves, it is not like that poole of Bethesda scanted
Joh. 5. 7. Joh. 20. 25.
^^r want of room here is room enough, not for a finger as Thomas put in, but
for the whole man to turn himself round, such a Fonntayne as this then cannot
easily be s^opped;

Lastly these Records of thy salvation, this last will of Christ Jesus thy
savior are written with the blood of the Lamb, and kept in the Roles of
heaven, so that heaven itself, and earth shall pass away Math. 24. 35.
but not one jot of them shall fall to the ground, is it so then? 1 Cor. 16. 13.
take up the sword of the spirit, stand fast quit thy self like a man, and if
in the first place, the Devil shall dishearten thee by laying thy sins to
thy charge, let him know Math. 24. 35. 1 Cor. 16. 13
that the accusar of the faithful is cast out. Revel. 12. 10. If he charge
thy conscience with many heinous sins, ask him, who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen Romans 8. 33. The onset.


I but (says he) thy sins are so many that they cannot be pardoned, answer
him, that the blood of Christ is able to cleanse thee from all thy sins; 1 John 1. 7.

I do confess (will he reply) that many sins may be pardoned, The Comba^
against the Devil.
yetnot thine because thou live in crying, and notorius sins, the very
guilt whereof does cry to Heaven for vengeance: bid him avoid, and tell him
with St Paul that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners whereof thou
art chief 1 Timothy 1. 15. as for the guilt of thy sinues though they were as red
as Scarlet yet God will make them as white ^^ snow. Esaias. 1. 28.

Being thus foiled out at his own weapon then he will begin to make a new
bout at thee, and tax thee of Presumption, saying; why do thou presume thus
of Gods mercy being so notorious a sinner, and that having not repented of thy
sins it is now too late tell him again, that At what time soever a sinner
shall repent of his sins God will blot out all his misdeedes. Ezekiel. 18.

Then will he seek to cast a mist before thy eyes, how know thou (says
he) whether God will accept of thy repentance or no: since formerly thou have
been so backward in this work of Repentance; let him understand, that thou art
assured that upon acknowledgement of thy sins God is just and faithful to
forgive them, Joh. 1. 9.

When all this will not The main battle against the Devil.
serve the turn then he lifts up his arm to give the fatal blow, to
challenge thy Faith that it is dead, and false; bid him keep off for thou will
show him thy faith by thy works Jam. 2. 18.

Alas (says he) thy works, what do thou speak of them, thy charity is
vaineglorious, thy obedience, feigned, thy Religion formal; and the best of
them but hypocritical; answer him that thou art no hipcorite thou know
nothing of thy self yet art thou not thereby justified. 1 Cor. 4. 4.

Yea, but perchance ^he will tell thee, that it is a great sign thou have
been a notorious offender in regard that thy afflictions, and corrections lie
so heavy upon thee, let him know that God does scourge every son whom he
receives, and by this thou ^^ther know that thou art a son and no
bastard. Heb. 12. 7. 8.

He may perchance proceed further, and say whereas thou look for p^^ce at
the hands of God thou art deceived for thou can have no peaece so long as
thou do endure Afflictions. Answer him with the Psalm mist The Lord speaks
peace unto his people, and to his Saints that they ^urne not again to folly.
Psalm. 85. 8.

When all this will not prevail then he comes on afresh. Thou talkest (says
he) of Faith, and good works but what is all this if thou art not elected:
tell him thou art sure the Lord has elected to himself the man that is godly.
Psalm. 4. 3.

Being thus pinched then he is ready to challenge God The heat of the battle
against the Devil.
of inconstancy, Gods will (says he) may change, and alter. It is false; the
gifts, and callings of God are without. repentance. Romans 11. 29. God was
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13. Nay let him know to his
fatal downfall, and overthrow that the mountains shall remove, and the hills
fall down but Gods mercy shall not depart from thee, if thou live in peace,
nor shall the Covenant of my peace (says the Lord himself) fall away which
has compassion on thee.

I but says Satan if there Es. 54. 10
be no alteration in God, yet sure I am that thou art a changer, changing thy
good promises to evil practices, and though God is strong yet thou art weak.
Answer him; thou art not kept by thy own strength but by the power of God unto
salvation Romans 1. 16. And for all thy weakness thou art strong enough to
overcome Rev. 12. 11.
the great Dragon by the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus.

Then he labors to make thee distrust in God power, what (says he) how dare
thou depend on Gods strength since thou art so wicked a creature? what, have
thou Gods grace, and assistance at command? faint not for all this, but tell
him boldly; that thy sufficiency is in God, it is true thou can not approach
to Christ ^xcept the Father draw thee, without him thou can do nothing Joh.
6. 44. but on the other side, through Christ that helps thee thou art able to
do all things. Phil. 4. 5.

Well (says he) though thou d^st trust in Gods strength yet thou do not know
whether God will help thee or not because his grace is free, and not at
command; for answer show him thy aff^rance, and covenant which God has
confirmed, and sealed with the blood of Jesus Christ, I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will, never turn a^^^y Jer. 31. 33.
from them to do them good, I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall
not depart from me. Exodus 26. 26. however Satan I will not require help of
thee, for hardly can The retraite.
thou help another when thou can not help thy self.

Lastly, whatsoever it be that he shall lay to thy charge whether it be pride,
malice, taking Gods name in vain, etc. plead Christ's suffering upon thy
repentance as a general release from all thy sins, this, if nothing else,
will stop his mouth, and make him hide his head being utterly ashamed of so
fearful an overthrow.

Thus I have showed thee how to repel the Devils assaults as he is thus
furious in the encounter, so he is also The Devil observes his times.
very cunning in the observation of his time, In times even of prosperity he
knows how to come upon thee David in his aboundnce found it more hard to
resist his pleasures then to vanquish great Goliath Hezekiah was safer on his
sickbed then he was congratulated for his recovery, it is ease that slays
the fool. Pr. 1. 32. That man had need to have astrong brain which the liquor
of prosperity cannot overcome, hence it was that Moses chose rather to keep
his Fathers sheep then to enjoy the pleasures of the Court for a season but
well does the Devil know that he was one of a thousand; when the wind sits in
a corner blowing in profits, and preferments, then is the time of trvall, the
Devil Time of Prosperity the Devils opportunity. Luke 14. 16
lays about him, timidus in inalis tumidus in secundis, it was the yoke of
oxen, the wife and the farm that hindered the ghests from the supper of the
Lamb, these are the Devils ^aytes, have a care then and look about thee if
riches increase set not thy heart upon them they will betray thee to the Enemy,
hinder thee in the combat, and so deprive thee of life everlasting.

If this will not take, he can undermine thee with afflictions, sure I am that
in afflictions man is then at the weakest, when his body is distempered with
sickness his In time of affliction the Devil most violent.
mind cast down through present calamity nay his very soul drencht in sorrow
for sin committed, then is the Devil at the very height of his strength not
that he is stronger in his own nature but that he is so strong over man's
nature that is then so weak. It is with the Devil as with an Enemy seeing
that by the help, and power of Gods spirit within thee thou have oftentimes
foiled him out: he does as it were give thee over, but when God shall but once
lay his hand of affliction on thee then does he lay his hand also to make thee
despair of the protection of that arm which has thus afflicted thee.

But thus much for thy better encouragement, and further comfort take alonge
with thee these several consolations many in Comforts for poor afflicted
souls.
the right use of them have come off clearly and my life for thine they will
make thee also in this combat, victorious.

First to be afflicted is the coat of a true Christian the very Portion of
Gods own Afflictions are the Saints Liveryes.
Elect; why does the Devil labor to sink down the afflicted man into the
pit of despair? no man seeks to obtain that which he already possesses;
it is plain that the afflicted are not regist^ed in the black roles of
damnation, because the Devil does so much endeavor to enter them therein, the
Dragon in the Revelation did not fight with his own soldiers, Rev. 12.
the Devil rayseth not wars against those of his own Regiment, if he
should his kingdom Luke 11. 8. 12.
would not long stand. all his aim is at the disconsolate soul, he there
thinks to get over because the hedge is low, but he is deceaved; calamity is
the true Christians Coat, and the cross his Cognizance, by it he is known
under what Captain he is, in what hand he is listed, whether he be a
Christian, and if a Christian Soldier whether one of Christ's own Soldiers and
all this by the cross, and more then this, in hoc signo vinces by this, sign
shall thou overcome. It was the hard-ship of Christ^ thy Captain to endure the
cross that thou mighst wear the Crown, he lay not in Pavilionibus fed in
praesepio not in a Pavilion but in a Manger, do thou then look for a bed of
down in a field of war? do thou think to he sleeping in the tent whilst
thy Captayn is fighting in the fro^t? it will not be, let the trumpets sound,
cry out unto the Church militant ^eamus and nos ut moriamur oum^illo come let
us go and wenter our lives with him; thou art a member of that head Christ
Jesus, the Captain of thy salvation, he fights, and so must thou do too,
follow him thy Leader, set thy eye upon him, Christ's corrections the
Christians instructions.
behold his wonds make them thy study let his scarres, nails, and lashes be
thy contemplation, and in this school let thy whole lesson be scirt Christ^^^
crucifix^m to know Christ Jesus and him only crucified, no man will look for
heaven at a cheap rate that sees his Savior bleeding, can the servant be
greater then his Lord, or the S^^ldier Nil desperandum Christ^ duce.
greater then his Captayn follow him then through the Desert with Moses; seek
him with the three children in a fiery furnace; O how God delights to see Job
upon the dung hill scraping himself with a Posheard! Niniveh in sackcloath,
and ashes, a true Christian tempted, that he may be tried currected that he
may be amended, and afflicted that his soul may be eternally saved.

Consider how large the Spirit of God has been in the probate of this p^yn^,
that Afflictions are the portion of Gods Etect. As many as I Rev. 3. 19. Exodus
3. 7.
^^v^ (says God himself) I ^ebuke and ch^sten, and in another place, I have
seen the afflictions of my People, a Rebuke then is the sign of Gods God
tries those that belong to him.
love, not his anger, and the Israelites did undergo much affliction, and yet
for all that they ceased not to be Gods people, they were afflicted but not
rejected; corrected, but not confounded; but why does God thus afflict his
people? That he may refine them as silver is refined, and try them as gold
Zach. 13. 9
is tried, and how is gold tried but in the fire, and how Gods children? but in
the furnace of affliction; God never reveals himself but by the way of
trial, if it be in God appears in trials.
the giving his word it is to try how men will conform themselves unto it; if
in taking it away it is to try how they will deport themselves in the loss of
it, if he heap on Riches, honors, Preferments it is to ^ry whether they will
be puf't up or not; if he come with a backblow of Adversity it is for a trial
of Patience, try man thus? does he not search the very reins, and hearts? does
he not know whereof man is made? probat non ut ille sciat sed ut home seipsum
sciat, would have the child to know it to be so also; God knows that
afflictions will scorch, but he would have man also to be sensible thereof
again probat. (says another) Ambros.
non ut inveniat hominem sed ut homo seipsum inveniat, God knows that the
heart Jerem. 17. 19.
of man is deceitful above all things, that it is full of intricate
Labyrinths, and winding Meanders, God knows very well that man is little
better in his natural condition then a Vagabond Rogue that had rather ramble
any way then with a Passeport to his own Country, rather surfeit here with the
pleasures of sin for Heb. 11. 25. Luke 19. 22
a season then to take up the cross and follow him into life eternal; God
knows all this and much more, but he does try man that he may know it also,
that being thus lost he may find himself again: trial. gold then there were
no need of trial, if all dross the trial were to noe purpose, but man is
part gold, part dross, part Spirit, part Flesh and therefore must be tried;
does the Goldsmith cast a piece of Plate into the melting po^ that it may be
consumed? Does God put his children into the fire of affliction that they Gods
especial favor in the trial of his children.
may be confounded? no, right precious in the eyes of the Lord are the lives of
all his say^ts he does it that they might be tried and purifyed from the dross
and corruption of sin, so to rise more gloriously out of the flames then when
at first they were put into them, that in the end being thus tried, thus
cleansed, and thus purified they may be vessels of honor here, and vessels of
Romans 9. 21
glory hereafter.

In the second place does not God the son, that great Captain of man's
salvation, Math. 16. 24.
bid him take up his cross and follow him? he that desires the benefit of
Christ gloryfied must first undergo the hardship of Christ crucified, this was
the point wherein S. Paul and Barnabas confirmed the An injunction from Christ
to take up the cross.
faith, and patience of the Disciples, telling the^ that through many
tribulations, they must enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Act. 14. 22
as if they should have said; if ever you will come to the kingdom of God, or
joys of heaven, if ever you expect heavenly exa^tation it must be through
earthly tribulation; and thus also S. Pa^^ tutord his scholar Timothy that he
should not be ashamed of the Lord, but be partaker 2 Timothy 1. 8
of the afflictions of the gospel, here is the kingdom of heaven locked in with
tribulations, here is the profession of the gospel hedged about with
afflictions, but for thy comfort the holy spirit of God will sanctifye all
these afflictions unto thee, assure thee of a free admission into those
celestial places; let the dam of opposition be made God in his mercy will
comfort all that are afflicted.
never so high, never so strong, the holy spirit will cause the great deepes of
Gods mercy to be broken up, the windows of heaven to shoure down all
celestial graces, that in the end this poor weather-beate^ barque of thine
shall triumphantly ride over that dam of opposition, and carry all impediments
before it, which brings in the second consolation, that,

As afflictions are the Portion of Gods children so God Second Consolation.
will protect them in all their troubles.

He that has God for his protection needs not care Romans 8. 31
what man can do against him, he that has God on his side needs not care
what afflictions he suffers; David found it so. God was a shield for his glory,
and the lifter up of his beaed, such a defense, and protector that he could
lie down and sleep in the midst of all his troubles, Psalm. 4. ult. when was
it ever seen that the righteous were forsaken, or their seed begging their
bread God in affliction a sure protector.
Psalm. 37. 25. God himself tells the Church, when thou passest through the
waters I will he with thee, and through the Rivers they shall not over flow
thee. Esaias 43. 2. troubles may come upon Gods Church, and people, but by Gods
protection they shall not overflowe them, persocuted they may be, but not for
saken, cast down but not destroyed; are 2 Cor. 1. 9.
there not many ^cular demonstrations of Gods protection? how many have been
with Hezekiah at the very pits brime with one foot in the grave yet have been
restored to their former health againe^ In time of Gods visitation.
was it not a great protection that the heavy hand of God should be in one
house, and not so much as touch the next adjoining to it? was there not the
same combustible stuff in the one to fire it, as well as in the other?
certaynely there was, but the protecting hand of God was in the deliverance,
look up then thou drooping soul, lift up thy eyes to the hills from whence Ps.
94. 17.
comes thy help, there is no true help but from those hills, no protection but
from heaven, it is God that does bind up thy wounds, and heal^ thy sickness,
Psalm. 147. 3. build not up No true help but from God.
then to thy self Castles of despair, trust in Gods help, lean upon his
protection, thus much I will assure thee that troubled thou may be on every
side, but not distressed, perplexed but not in despair 1 Cor. 4. 8.

Consider thirdly, tha^ Third consolation.
God will hearken to the prayers of his servants, an^ give them a gracious
answer in their afflictions.

This is that which give^ Christian audacity in the time God will answer the
prayers of the afflicted.
of trouble, it is a great comfort that God will protect a man in his
afflictions, but is a far greater comfort to be asured of that protection by
the Receipt of a gracious answer to his petitions commenced the Prisoner
desires freedom; the afflicted desires ease; the Captive desires liberty; the
distressed desires comfort; what a comfort is this that they should be all of
them answered in the fruition of their several requests? take Gods word for
it, that he will answer th^se that call upon him, nay he will be with them
in trouble, satisfy them with long life, and show then^ his salvation. Psalm.
91. 14. here is a gracious answer to Petitioners prayers, what could God have
said more? Invocaverit me eum exaudiam, he shall call, I will answer, here is
no need with Baals Priest to lanch thy self with knives, no man can say that
God is a sleep, here is quick dispatch he is ready to hear the prayers of his
servants, he is nigh to all them that call upon him in truth, he will fulfill
the desires of them that fear him, he will also hear their cry, and save
them. Gods readiness to answer the afflicted man's prayer.
Psalm. 145. 18. 19. nay stand still, and wonder; Behold (says the Lord,
before they call I will answer; God is so nigh that the expression of the heart
does cause deliverance, Go^ sees the very preparations o^ the heart, and makes
answ^^ accordingly; Mary was earl^ Joh. 20. 1.
at the sepulcher but Christ was th^^^ before her; he mus^ rise betimes that
goes beyond God. David was very early when he confessed that his eyes
prevented the nights watch Ps. 119. 148
yet for all that God prevents David, thou have provented me (says he) with
thy liberal blessings; God is so ready to hear, so nigh to answer that Ps.
41. 4.
he stays not for verbal expressions, a sigh, a sigh, a sob, a tear of
sorrow are all of them in heaven before that words are passed out of the mouth;
what great inestimable love is here that every prayer whether men^all, or
vocal, every cr^, every sigh, every groan, shall be heard, and have the
re^urne of a gracious answer? this being well considered will make much for the
comfort of all troubled consciences, this being well applied will set an edge
on Christian fortitude, it will make thee to be in love with God, and
powerful to withstand the violence of the Devil who tells thee that God does
not love thee, which introduces the fourth point of consolation, which is;

That, God will not only give Fourh Consolation.
a gracious answer in the midst of afflictions, but will give a pardon for all
thy sins, and transgressions.

To be protected in afflictions is comfort, to be assured of that protection
is a great comfort, but to have sins pardoned which were the cause of that
affliction is the greatest comfort of all, it is the prayer God pardons the
afflicted man's sins.
of every good Christian to overcome his sin, and to have his offenses
pardoned, knowing that sin is the chief cause of crosses and troubles, so
that if they would remove the judgment, the cause of it which is sin must be
first removed, that must be done by prayer, then doubt not of an happy issue,
David found it to be his comfort, Ps. 32. 5. he did but confess, and the
iniquity of his sin was forgiven, consolamini populum meum (says God
himself) comfort ye, comfort ye my people, and spe^k^ comfortably to
Jorusalem, and cry unto her, that her warf^re is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned. Esaias 40. 1. here is comfort upon comfort, but wherein lies
it? first in speaking comfortably unto her, then telling her that her warfare
is ended, but the chiefest comfort of al was that her sins were pardoned, but
what man is it that has this comfort? he that sits down in the dust; who
is it that shall be Job. 5. 9.
thus refreshed? the heavy, and Math. 4. ult.
weary laden; whose sins shall be thus pardoned? the Penitent man's; who
shall find ease to their souls? those that are in affliction; nay let but the
wicked for sake his way and God Esaias 53. 7.
will abunda^tly pardon him too; shall the wicked upon his repentance be
abundantly pardoned? then much more he that suffers for Righteousness Math.
5.
sake, he is the vessel that God will power consolation into, it is he that
shall be anoyn^ed with the oil of gladness, it is he only that in the end of
a paynfull harvest shall bring home his she aves rejoicing; consider then
seriously Ps. 126. 5.
these things with thy self, see now whether these afflictions that God has
laid upon thee have brought thee on thy knees for mercy, if they have here is
comfort in thy troubles, here is refreshment for thy heavy heart, here is ease to
thy penitent soul, lastly here is pardon and that in abundance for all thy
sins committed, what can I say more to make thee happy? here is mercy
abounding, and comforts surrounding, sins forgiven and the pardon sealed with
the blood of the Lamb^ Christ Jesus which shall never be disanulled, but this
is not all the pardon of sin is but an entrance into the perfection of grace,
which brings in the fifth consolation; That God Fifth consolation.
will perfect the work of grace in all his children.

What by our selves is defi^ient, in God is sufficient, God will perfect the
great work of deliveverance.
that which was before imperfect is now through him made perfect who is
perfection it self, God commanded Israel that they should not fear any thing,
for (says he) I am thy Lord, and God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will hel^e
thee, yea I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my righteousness, here is
a Esaias 41. 10, 11, 12.
gradation of encouragement till all end in perfection here is a procession from
strengthening to helping, from helping to upholding; man through sin lies
grovelling on the ground with his mouth in the dust, God omnipotent steps in and
gives him strength, having some strength to rise he helps him up, sets him on
his legs again, but does God then leave him to stand to himself? Alas he
would then soon fall, no, God will perfect the work begun lays his hand
under him, and daily by his protection upholds him causing him to grow from
strength to strength till be become a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Esaias that
Evangelicall Prophet begins one of his Chapters with a divine Rapture Cautate
coeli cxulta terra etc. Sing O Heavens, and be joyful o Earth, and break
forth into joy, o mountains, let that heavenly quire of Angels chaunt out the
prayfes of God, let all the Creatures on the face of the earth make up the
consort, nay if there be any place on the earth nigher to heaven then the
mountains, fuller of light then the mountains, if any mountain better then
that of holy Syon, let them all come and take a part in this celestial song,
what is the reason of all this musical harmony? why this general rejoicing? God
has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his afflicted, yet for all
this Syon is not contented; the Lord 'saith Syon, has forgotten me; thou art
deceived O Syon, can a woman forget her sucking child that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yes; she may witness the exposall of
diverse spurious issues; but yet for all that (says God) I will not forget
thee, for a woman to forget her child is unnatural; but I that am
supernatural will not forget thee, let what will come that can come, if thou
be forsaken of thy friends, forgotten of thy acquaintance, lost to the Gods
anger is but for a moment
world, yet I will be thy fast friend, I will never forsake thee, never forget
thee, I will stick close to thee, till I have perfected the great love I have
conceived toward thee what though for a small moment I forsake thee, yet in
great mercy I will gather thee, in a little wrath I may Esaias 54. 78
hide my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
be: here is wrath, but it is a little wrath and that terminated, but for a
moment; what then? God will perfect the comforts of his children with
everlasting kindness and mercy; for a little wrath, and momentary punishment
he will bestow ever lasting kindness and favor for ever; The Lord (says
David) will perfect that which concerns me, the mercyes of the Lord endure
for ever, forsake not the work Psalm. 138. 8.
of thine own hands, what is that which God will perfect in David? his
everlasting mercies; when is the time it must be done? even in afflictions,
forsake not the work of thine hands; this it was that made St. Paul fillip off
adversity, to glory in his infirmity, what is the Reason? God says he is made
perfect in my weakness, here is Gods 2 Cor. 12. 9
strength made perfect in weakness, man at the lowest ebb of misery made the
subject of Gods perfection, there may be comforts in misery, Man's extremity
Gods opportunity.
by the access of friends, by wholesome counsel etc. but miserable comforters
are they all, and imperfect, there is a mixture in them of carnal corruption,
every good gifts, and every perfect gift comes from above. Jam. 1. 17. God is
the perfect Operator, it No perfection in any earthly thing.
is he that perfecteth that gracious work in the heart, such perfection cannot
be found in nature Philosophy cannot do it, Morality cannot; Lypsius in his
book de constantia may persuade thy unsettled affections, Seneca in his book
de tranquilitate animae may allay thy raging passions, Boethius in his book de
consolatione may somewhat raise thy drooping soul, these volumes alas are too
little to cover thy No book so perfect as that of Gods word.
nakedness, look for perfection in the word of God, there is holes enough in
that rock to hide thy self, there is the true fountain of purity, and
perfection, it is Gods own word who is perfection it self, and without all
doubt he will be as good as his word, he will make his strength known 2 Cor.
12. 9
in thy weakness, whom he loves, be loves to the end, Joh. 13. 11
there is the perfection; no crosses, no losses, troubles, nor afflictions shall
ever be able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus,
nay God will not only follow thee with his love, and fatherly kindness, give
a graciouss ans^er in the midst of Romans 8. 35. ^
thy afflictions pardon all thy sins, but he will also helps thee out of all
thy afflictions, and deliver thee from all thy troubles.

When a man is sick the Physician prescribes some choice preservatives to
prevent the malignity of a worse disease which might endanger the life, but
afterward upon hopes of recovery, he administreth restorative cordialls for
the better recovery of his health, thus God that great Physician of souls
makes use of the former consolation (as the Physician of his preservatives) to
keep man, grown faint and heart sick with sin, from a more dangerous
disease of despair which may bring on him the God the perfect Physician. Rev.
20 2.
second death, but now he gives him the restorative Cordial, takes him by the
hand, tells him that the pulse of his faith beats well, assures him of the
recovery of his health, and bids him be of good comfort, for he will bind up
all his wounds heal his backsliding, help Mark 10. 49.
him out of his afflictions, and deliver him out of al his troubles; Jerem. 30
17.
Health is the thing every sick man looks for, joy is that Hos. 14 4.
which the grieved spirit breaths after; every afflicted man long's for ease,
every troubled spirit for help; here is health for the sick, comfort for the
mourner, ease for the afflicted, and deliverance for the troubled spirit; David
had a comfortable experience in all this, though in afflictions God was his
deliverer, though poor and needy yet the Lord thought on him, though
afflicted, dejected, rej^cted, though a very abject in Ps. 119. 153 Ps. 40. 17.
the world, though table friends forsook him enemies oppressed God a sure
deliverance
him and overwhelmed him, yet here was his comfort that God was his helper and
deliverer; did not God thus deliver Noah from the deluge of waters? was not Lot
like a Firebrand snatched out of S^dome? Psalm. 54. 4.
Abraham was in agreat strait when he had like to have lost both his life and
his wife at once, yet God relieved him by plaguing the heathenish Genesis 19. 22
King and all his household; but Abraham was harder Genesis 12. 17
beset when he was commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac, his only Son,
that Son in whom all the promises of blessedness were contracted, yet even
then whilst he was lifting up his hand to give the fatal blow, God stepped in
with deliverance, Isaac that Lamb was preserved, Abraham did but lift up his
eyes, and behold there was a Ram catched Genesis 22. 13.
by the horns in a bush behind him, him did Abraham take up, and offered in
the stead of his son Abraham's extremity was Gods opportunity, so that it is
become a Proverb: In monte videbitur Examples of Gods deliverance.
Deus, God will be seen in the mountain. Thus Jacob was freed from the
service of churlish Laban, and delivered from the malice of his brother Esan;
Joseph from the cruelty of his brethren; Moses from killing, drowning, Exodus 2.
and starving; Eliah, from the malice of Abab, and Jesabell, being sed by an
Angel, and the Ravens; Job 1 King. 17. 4. Job 41. 13. Dan. 9. 22. Jonah. 2.
10. 2 King. 19 35.
from the dunghill; the three children from the fiery furnace; Danyell out of
the Lions den; Jonah out of the belly of the whale: Hesekiah from the wicked
intendments of Zenacherib: but above all how many, and how great have been the
deliverances of the children of Israel? from the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, in their miraculous passage from Egypt through the red sea,
many were their deliverances during their forty years abode in the
wilderness; being come from thence and planted in the land of Canaan, how were
they infested by the Aramites, Amorites, Philistims, Zidonians, Amalekites? and
afterward were they not carried captives into Babylon? nay did not Haman
conspire to root them out that they might be no more a nation? yet for the
this God was still their deliverer; but is not God the God of the new, as well as
of the old Testament? was he so great a God the God of the new as well as of
the old Testament.
savior under the law, and is he not the like under the Gospel? he is semper
idem, there can be no shadow of change in him, he is yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever; his arm is not straightned, did not he deliver Paul and
Silas, out of prison by the means of an Earthquake. Act. 16. 28.
was not S. Paul after that rescued from the malice of the Jews at Damascus?
was he not preserved from the Tyranny of Nero that boore who sought to root
up that small plantation of the Church? yet in despite of him God preserved a
Church in his own house, under his very nose, Salute (says S. Paul) the
saints that a^t Phil. 4. 23.
at Neroes house; during those ten persecutions of the Primative times what
cruelty was not committed? what torture was not exalted? one boiled in a
caldron of oil, S. John. S. Laur. S. Ignat.
another broyld on a gridiron, a third devoured of wild beasts, a fourth flead
alive, etc. but what of all this? God the Lord to whom belong the issues from
death did so Ps. 68. 20.
order it though there was a power to kill the body, yet there was no power to
kill the soul, Math. 11. 28.
these torments were but as so many viands to wast them into a better life, and
that blood of theirs thus inhumanely spilt was made the Churches seminary;
look but still downwards unto these days, what an unexpressable deliverance
has this Church of England had in the expelling of those Romish fogs, and
mists of supersti^ion which for many years obscured the light of the Gospel,
and sincere profession thereof? how is the candelstick removed of late in some
parts of Germany? Amos. 8. 11.
what a famine not of bread only but of the word of God, that bread of life is
now amongst them? how is that country depopulated? their cities wasted, and
what the devouring sword has passed over, biting famine has overtaken; we in
the mean time stand as lookers on, surfetted as it were with the many and
miraculous deliverances both of Church, Gods deliverance to England.
and state, witness the deliverance from that Armado of Spain (falsely termed
invincible) in the year 1588. that of the powder plot hatched by a company of
S. Peter men (salt Peter men I should say) in the year 1605, that of Gods
heavy hand of visitation by the plague of pestilence in the year 1625, and in
the last years 1636. 1637. besides many others, so that now this kingdom
sits like the Queen of nations, every man in peace Rev. 17. 8.
under his own vine, and under his own figtree, this is the Lords doings and
it is wonderful in our eyes; but to come yet nearer home, to our selves; I
appeal unto any man living that has not at one time, or other, had a large
taste of Gods protection, and deliverance from some danger, or other; how many
had been swallowed up quick whilst men rose up against them if God had not
been on their side: what shall I say then? Our fathers (says David) Ps. 22. 4.
trusted in God, they trusted, and he delivered them, they called upon him,
and were delivered, they trusted on him, and were not confounded, go thou thy
ways and do likewise; depend on Gods protection, recount what he has done
for thy soul, bless the Lord god of thy salvation who leads thee thus with
his benefits Ps. 68. 19.
bless him in his infinite essence, and power; bless him in his unbounded,
and just sovereignty, bless him in his preservations, bless him in his
deliverances, take heed of offering hollow observances to the searcher of
hearts, they that proclaimed Christ at Jerusalem had not only Advice to bless
God for all his deliverances.
Hosanna in their mouths, but palms in their hands too, if thy hand bless not
the Lord, thy tongue is an Hypocrite; away with the vast complements of vain
formalityes, let thy loud actions drown the language of thy words, for God is
thy deliverance, he is the God of thy salvation, thus the bitter waters of
Mara shall be made as sweet as honey, crosses shall be made blessings,
corrections made instructions to fortify thy self against all the deceipts of
the world, the flesh, and the Devil; when thou look to thy own fleshly
hands there is nothing but discouragement, when thou look to thy Spiritual
enemies there is nothing but terror; but when thou castest up thy eyes to thy
mighty God there is nothing but confidence, nothing but comfort; comfort thee,
comfort thee therefore o thou feeble soul, send thy bold defi^nces to the
Prince of Darkness, heaven is high and hard to reach, hell is steep and
slippery, thy Flesh is earthly, and impotent, Satan strong, and rancorous,
sin subtle, the world aluring, all those yet God is the God of thy salvation,
let those infernal Lions roar and rampe upon thee, let the gates of hell do
their worst, let the world be a cheater, thy flesh a Traitor, the Devil a
Tyrant; faithful is he that has promised who will also do it, God is the
God of thy Salvation, blessed be his holy name world without end. AMEN.

Thus having showed the use of every piece of Armor belonging to the Christian
warfare, the furious assaults, and subtle carriage of the several Enemies, the
time of their onset, and the means how to come off with credit, I will now use
three motives that may stir thee up to take arms, and being in the field to
lay about thee.

First, the consideration of death that thou must dye, then there will be no
time to fight.

Secondly to consider the cruel torments of hell that Motives to take up arms.
they may enforce thee to fight.

Lastly, to consider the Crown and Reward (the joys of heaven that they may
allure thee to fight.

There is an Act of Parliament First motive.
in heaven never to be repealed Statutum est omnibus semel mori. dye thou must,
death knocks equally at the hatch of a cottage, and the gates of a Palace, he
can top the highest Cedar as well as the lowest shrub; there is no man but is
naturally walking down to the chambers of death, every sin is a pace
thither, only Death unavoyable.
the gracious hand of God stays him, every man living must be reduced to the
first principles of dust and ashes from whence he was first taken, dust thou
art, and to dust thou must return. Is there not an oppoynted time Genesis 3. 19.
for man on the earth? yea but when is that time: hora nihil incertius, nothing
more uncertain, that is in Gods hand, he that is the Lord of life has set the
period of thine, his omnipotence so contrives all events, that neither Enemy
nor casualty nor disease can prevent the hour of his appointment; there is no
holding of the breath if God call for it; a Nothing more uncertain then the
hour of death.
man may have some power over his outward members, but none at all over the
inward he may command the eye to see, the ear to hear, the hand to work,
but he cannot command the heart to move, the liver to sanguine, the longues to
blow breath, he may swallow down meat but cannot make the stomach to digest
it, that's Gods peculiar; a pair of bellows will fall of themselves but never
rise to blow again without assistance; the hour glass will God is the Lord
of life.
run out of it self but never run again except it be turned, a man may
send out his breath at his pleasure but not take it in again without God, for
in his hand is the breath of all mankind, Job. 12. 10. if that King of fear
(death) be charged with a warrant from God, he does not return with a, non
est inventus, sometimes he is sent in the night when man is most secure, thus
he came upon all the first borne in the Land of Egypt at midnight. Exodus 12.
29. sometimes in the height of power thus he came also upon the Egyptians in
the midst of all strength whilst they were pursuing the poor Israelites, even
then when they were in the ruff of all their glory their chariot wheels drew
heavy, and they were all choked in the red Sea. Exodus 14. 27. Sometimes death
comes whilst a man is at his Table, he comes indeed to many great men's tables
but he is welcome to a few, thus did he salute Belshazar in the midst of his
Cups quaffing in the bowls of the sanctuary. Dan. 5. 3. as a surgeon hides his
lancet in a sponge, or his sleeve that he may the more secretly use it, so
death hides himself sometimes in meat, other whiles in drink, sometimes Genesis
7.
he lies under the Table, when they of the old world were eating, and drinking
then came the flood, and overwhelmed them; in the morning was the King of
Israel destroyed. Hos. 10. 25. the shunamites child dyed at noone. 2 King. 4.
20. Ezekiels wife dyed in the Evening. Ezekiel. 24. 18. Sometimes death comes as
he did upon the Rich fool witha, Stulte hac nocte; so whether it be in the
day, or night, in the morning, or evening, in prosperity, or Adversity; whether
full or fasting, the time is still uncertayne, some are taken away suddenly,
many in their infancy, some in their youth, others in age, many dye young, and
the old cannot live long, hence it is that man's life is compared to a flower
not for the stalk it grows on, that is too strong a simile, but to the flower
which the breath of a child may blow off, nay not every flower neither, as the
blossom Man's life compared to a flower.
of a tree that may stick fast two or three days, nor the flower of sonie
strong herb which may continue longer, nor the flower of the garden that may be
preserved, but the flower of the field^ subject to all wind and weather. Psalm
103. 15. Such is the brittlenesse of man's nature; if he were made of glass
(says S. Augustine) there were more security, let him be never so charily Man's
life more brittle then glass.
kept he must dye, a glass is subject to nothing but a fall, it fears no
fever, nor age, nor plague, but man is subject to a thousand accidents, he
finds but one way to come into the world, but may easily see a thousand doors
to go out at; It is not policy nor Riches nor strength that will carry it out,
Goliath had an helmet of brass upon his head, a Coat of brass upon his body
weighing five thousand shekels of brass, (a burden fitter for an ass then a
man) he had also boots of brass upon his legs, and a shield of brass upon
his shoulders when this beast was thus set out 1 Samuel 17. 15.
with all his Caparisons, he might be rather termed homo aereus, then homo
carneus, a man of brass then a man of flesh, yet David found out a place in
his fore head where there was no brass, and so killed him, if death come with a
Commission to break up this house of clay, no man can say to him as he says
to his Neighbor, come again tomorrow; is death thus unavoydeable, is the time
so uncertain? do men so number Ps. 90. 12.
their d^yes that they apply their hearts unto wisdom? Alas men live as
though there were no death at all, like those that go to the India's, never
take notice how many have been swallowed up in the waves but what some few
have got by the voyage, look only upon those that are now surviving, not upon
the many Millions that are gone down into the grave before them, they think
on death as the Athenians did treat of peace never but when they are in
blacks, It is a Custom in Constantinople that on that day the Emperor is
crowned one presents unto him many stones out of which he is to choose his
tombestone; Philip of Macedon had a boy to say unto him on all occasions,
Memento Philippi, etc. Remember Philip thou art but a man; shall Turks and
Heathens do this, and shall not Christians remember their end? It is reported
that the birds of Norwey fly faster then any others birds of the air, not that
nature has given any agility to their wings more then others but they knowing
the day to be very short in that climate make the greater have to their nests,
this is that which God himself complaynes of, the storcke knows her
appointed time, and the Turtle and the Crane and the Swallow observe the time
of their coming, but my people know not the judgments of the Lord. Jerem. 8.
7. Strange that birds shall make such practical use of their knowledge, and
that man who is the Lord over all the Creatures should not make use of his
time, and so Psalm 8. 5
mend his pace to his long home the house appointed for all living, he that
has a great journey to ride, and a short time to ride it in, must needs ride
the faster; he that has a great task of work to do, and but a small time
to work in must work the harder; here is no abiding place; where then? the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 13. 14.
that's a great Pilgrimage, a long way thither, many rubs in the way, and but a
very short time to go it in, a short life which in the twinkling of an eye,
may be taken away, there is need then to pluck up the heels, and to mend the
pace thither, and as it is a long way, and but a short time allotted so there
must be a great deal of work done in the way too, that great work of
salvation, the greatest work of all other, a work that will make that a man
sweat at it, a work that must not be done by starts not be wrought only but
worked out, not easily Phil. 2. 12.
neither, but with fear and trembling; set on then upon this great work, the
time will come when there shall be no working, boc est momentum unde pendet
aeternit as,; the time past thou can not recall, the time to come thou art
not sure of, the time present is that thou must make use of; Christ that good
man of the house has not yet shut too the door, yet it stands open do but
knock and it shall be opened unto thee, now is the time, to day if thou will
hear his voice, this present hour, this very instant is the fair kept (as I
may say) of forgiving of sins: It Time present to be used.
may be now had at an easy rate, only for forgiving them that trespass
against thee, but if thou tarry till the fair be ended; and who knows how
soon it may be; seeing it has lasted so long already there will then be no
pardons to be purchased at any rate but thou must pay for thy improvidence with
the uttermost farthing; put not off then from day to day, least thou come as it
is said a day after the fair, but while it is called to day, call thy self to
an account, and let not the Sun go down upon thy impenitency to God, or upon
thine anger to thy neighbor, defer not til the last, and hope to creep into
heaven with a Lord have mercy upon me, there was never but one that leaped so
soon thither, he was one, that no man might despair, and but one that no man
might presume; at that time there will be but a little sand left in the glass,
the hour of mortality will be soon run out, then will the Devil like a
subtle Logician come upon thee with his best argument, casting such a mist of
darkness betwixt God, and thy soul that thou will hardly discern the throne
of grace, would thou not then sell all that thou have to buy that precious
pearl of time? the Rich man took care for the enlarging his barnes but God
would not stay the building of them, yet it is not certain that thou shall
have the warning that fool had, do not the weekly bills inform thee of
sudden death? there is, thunder without lightning, death without a warning. A
great manlying on his death^bed sent first for his Physician to advise with him
about the recovery of his health, no means was left untryed but all in vain,
the Physician gave him up for a dead man, then he sends for his Advocate, or
Lawyer, much time was spent with him in the making of his will where A true
story of the misery of these times in the neglect of spiritual means.
in the first place he bequeath? his soul unto god (a legacy usually left to
God but he does not many times claim it) then he settles his estate on friends
and kindred, strives to make the Inheritance of his Land, sure to his heir, and
in the Interim neglegct his own inheritance in heaven; yet however if it be
but for fashion sake, he will not seem to be utterly careless in that point,
therefore in the last place he sends for the Physician of his soul to consult
about his spiritual estate, even then when he was hardly capable of any advice
at al; his fool standing by desired him to give him the staff he usually
walked with abroad, his Master gave it him but on condition that he should give
it back again to the next he met that was a veryer fool then himself) nay
then said the fool) Master here take the staff again, for a veryer fool
then you are shall I never meet again, that did first send for the Physician
to strengthen your body, then for a Lawyer to settle you estate, and in the
last place for the Priest to comfort your poor soul which should have been
the first work of all; what the fool put on his Master may be verifyed in too
many who ravell out their precious time tormented with the cares of this world,
putting the evil day from them till it come to the last pinch when they are
not able to digest the bitter pill of Repentance, or take the potion of
humility; A man that keeps an Account book Advice to use time present.
having written it quite through, looks it over, and finds many blots, and
blurres, and crooked lines so they having past their lives to the point of
Death then in taking a survey of their whole life they perceive many blots of
sins, many blurres of Iniquity, many crooked lines of transgressions, but
what book is that which shall be found thus obliterated? the book of
conscience, that book which shall be one day laid open when both great and
Dan. 12. 12
small shall stand before God; all the books thou read are to reform this
one book, no book shall be carried along but this book, what care had there
need to be then to keep it fair? to look it over every day not to post the
account from day to day, least thou prove a Bankrupt in grace, and there be no
time left to compose the great differences betwixt God, and thy poor engaged
soul; when thou see the sun going down say as people ^se at the departure
of a friend, God knows whether I shall ever so you again, and God indeed
only knows whether thou shall ever see that sun rise again, let then the
present light of that sun move thee to mend thy pace, not like the sun on
the dyall of Ahaz; to go 2 King. 20. 10. Josh. 10. 12. S. Ambrose.
backwards, not like the sun in Joshna's time to stand still, but like the
sun that David mentions as a giant delighting to run thy course, now is
the time or never, adhuc constitit theatrum, adhuc instat certamen, adhuc
pendet praemixm, thou art yet upon the stage thou may come off with comfort,
thou art yet in the race, the Reward is yet before thee, cry aloud unto God
that in this thy Christi^n Combat he would teach thee the ways wherein thou
should walk, call unto the Captain of thy salvation Christ Jesus that he
would teach thy hands to war, and thy fingers to fight, implore the holy
Ghost to give a gracious assistance to all means undertaken therein, and
lastly that thou may have a breathing time to lay about thee speak out in
the voice of the Church from battle murder and from sudden death good Lord
deliver me.

One branch of that unrepealeable statute of Heaven is that all men must dye
but that is not all, there is yet another branch of the statute bebehinde, a
bitter one, but after death the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.
there is more follows after death then the body, friends, After death judgment
kindred, and acquaintance to see it laid in the dust, there is works that will
be followers Rev. 14. 13
too whether good or evil, the good ones to justify, the bad ones to
condemn, one pleades through Christ for justification, the other sues for
condemnation, one stands ready at the throne of grace, the other at the bar
of Justice then shall there be a reward There is a general day of doom to be
expected.
proposed according to the work, but that is not all neither, there is a
general day of judgment too; that is the day that shall pay for all, Christ
has but six memorable days to be remembered, and he is cozend in the honor
that belongs to five of them who is it that truly values Christ has 6
memorable days.
that great day of his Nativity as it ought? that great, that splendent, that
glorious day that day above thousand of days, ever to be renewed never to be
forgotten, worthy to be set in the almanac not 1 Christmas day.
with red but with golden letters, are there not some that would raze out the
blessed memorial of this day, and choose rather to be held foolish then not to
be singular, and profane? are there not too many that make the honor of this
day seem rather an Hea^henish Bacchanall then a Christian Festival? whereas
every day to a Saint of God is a Christmasse day, and it is to be doubted that
such will hardly keep every day that so much stumble and vilify one day? The
second day of Christ is that of his circumscision, now it was that he made Col.
2. 14.
himself a debtor to the law, and by this means has cancalled 2 Newyeeres day
the Chyrographum, the hand writing of Ordinances against us, the knife of
Circumsicion, was on this dulled, take a knife and cut a stone the edge will
soon be off, and petra erat Christus, Christ was the Rock having once touched
him it would never out again, if this day were regarded there would not be so
many uncircumsized hearts as there are amongst us.

The third remarkable 3 Goodfriday.
day is that of his passion that day when the price of man's Redemption was
tendered down and the sum paid on the Cross not with crosses of silver, but
with drops of blood that issued from his precious side, but how is the
Memorial of this day regarded? how is this great love of Christ ^equited. The
drunkard, and the glutton give him vinegar and gall to drink, the proud
ambitious man sets a crown of Thorns upon his head; the swearer pearceth his
side; the scorner buffets him; and they that abuse his Saints do nail his
hands, and feet; thus is the Lord of life daily crucified afresh. Heb. 6. 6:

The fourth day is that of 4 Easterday.
his Resurrection, that day whereon like a sun of Righteousness he rose from
the dead, and by the virtue thereof, to this day shines in the hearts of men
regenerate, did he not Psalm. 68. 18
on that day lead Captivity captive? triumphantly insult over hell death, and
the grave? 1 Cor. 15. 12
does not the Sadduces deny the glory of this blessed day? do not men lie
sleeping in their sin? and not arise from the dead that Christ may give them
light, they lie grovelling Ephesians 5. 14
in the graves of Corruption not regarding that Christ dyed 1 Cor. 15. 3.
for their sins, and as on this blessed day rose again for their
Justification? this is the rising of this sun eclipsed, the blessings of this
glorious day abused.

The ^ifth day of Christ is 5 Holythursday.
that transcendent one of his Ascension when he was taken up into Heaven,
opened the kingdom thereof unto all belevers, and now at this very instant
sits at the right hand Magnificat.
of God the Father Almighty, interposing himself betwixt his Fathers just
conceived wrath, and sinful man's transgressions, suing out pardons for poor
repentant sinners, and laboring by all means that they may become members of
that mystical body whereof himself is the head blessed for ever; what return
is made for the many benefits of Christ's Ascension as on this day commenced,
and to this very day and moment of time continued? Alas men do not lift up
their eyes unto the hills from whence comes their salvation, their
conversation is not there from whence they expecta Savior their mind is not
placed on the right object, heaven and heavenly things, they creep upon their
bellies (as though the curse of the Serpent had light upon them) licking the
dust of the Earth Genesis 2. 4.
which will one day choke them, their dunghill cogitations are settled only
upon the world and worldly things, but let them know that as Christ ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father Almighty, so from
thence he shall come to judge both the quick and dead, at whose coming all men
shall rise again with their bodies and shall give account for their own
Athana^ius Creed.
works, and they that have done good shall go into life everlasting, and they
that have done evil into everlasting fire; this is the day of doom, the day
that will pay for all, the day of Christ's Nativity may be slighted, the 6
Doomesday.
day of his Circumscision not regarded, the day of his passion undervalued, the
day of his Resurrection lightly set by, and that of his Ascension too much
vilisied, but the honor and Justice in the proceedings Doomesday a great day.
of this great day shall be acknowledged both by Men and Angels; nay the very
damned souls in hell shall confess, saying; Lord thou art holy and just in
all thy ways, and we are by reason of our sins deservedly punished; Dan. 7.
9.
This day is called agreat day, first in respect of the Judge who is the
Ancient of al days, the King of Kings and Rev. 19. 16
Lord of Lords, the great Creator both of heaven, and earth, he that is
faithful, and true that judges and fights righteously.

Secondly, it is a great day in regard of the train that Dan. 7. 9.
shall come along with this Why Doomes day called a great day.
great Judge, thousand thousands of Angels shall stand before him ready to
execute his just commands.

Thirdly, it will be a great day in regard of the Prisoners that then shall be
arraigned; all must appear, none exempted, the Kings of the earth, and the
great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, Rev.
20. 12.
and every bond man, and every freeman, all the sons and daughters of Adam
from the highest to the lowest must then make an account for the works they
have done in the flesh; it may very well be called a great day, because of the
great things that shall be in that day, the great and universal judgment of
the whole world, the great division of the good from bad, the glorification of
the one, the condemnation of the Mat. 25. 33
other, then shall be the great separation of the sheep form the Luke. 3. 17
goats, wheat from chafe one to the fold, the other to the slaughter, one to
the barn the other to the fire; that day shall be the Horizon, both of time
and eternity, time shall then cease and be no more, eternity shall in that day
justle out all time, the joys pronounced to the Godly shall not be temporal,
but eternal, the pains assigned to the wicked not for a season but for ever,
time which has been so much abused, that has brought such things to pass
shall then surrender to Eternity, believe it, God has sworn there shall be
then no more time. Rev. 10. 6. The proceedings of that great day, the joys
pronounced, the judgments denounced shall be recorded and dated, but how? not
with the day of the month, or month of the year; but with Eternity for ever
and ever, lastly it must needs be a great day that shall be the close of all
No day like that of Doomesday.
days, no day like it, in the day of Isreal's departure out of Egypt the course
of nature was but inverted; Jordane was turned back, the mountains leaped like
Ramms, and the hills as Lambs; in the day of Ps. 114. 3. 4
Joshua the Sune stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down
for a whole day, in the day of Hezekiah the Sun went backward ten degrees in the
dyal Josh. 10. 13
of Ahaz; in the day of Christ's Passion the vail of the Temple rit through the
midst, the earth shook the graves opened the dead arose the Sun was totally
eclipsed 2 King 20 9.
so that there was darkness over all the land for the space of three hours; but
in this great day there shall be neither Sun nor Moon, nor Stars, the Sun of
Righteousness but once appearing Mat. 27. 51
they shall all vanish; terratremet, mare mugiet, the air shall ring, the world
burn, the Sea roar, if the whole Earth shall be shak^n, then surely the
Pillars shall tremble, and if they stand not fast how shall man appear who is
but a clod of that earth? if the powers of heaven shall be shaken what shall
become of those me^ whose muddy minds Luke 21. 26
have not a thought of heaven? if Angels shall be the^ at a gaze, how shall they
be aghast whose portion is with the devil, and his Angels? if the righteous
shall hardly be saved it must needs go hard with the ungoldly. S. Cypria^, so
much feared the day 1 Pet. 4. 18.
of judgment that he quite forgot the day of his martirdom; holy S. Hilary
having spent 70 years in devout contemplation was yet afraid of the
Judgment-day, the Remembrance Job. 23. 15.
of that day was Jobs trouble and terror; if these be in such a case ad quos
Index to whom the Judge appears in mercy, what shall they do contra quos
against whom he comes in Judgment? if stars of such a magnitude begin to
twincle, what dimnesse will there be then in those of a lesser body? if such
pillars shrink under the burden, what will become of slender tressles? surely
they'lbe crush't in pieces; if this be done in the sappy green tree what will
be done in that which is more zere and dry? my advice shall be that of Moses to
the Israelites be ready on the third day, and on the third day when it was
morning there was thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and
the sound of the Trumpet exceeding loud so that all the People that were in the
Camp were afraid; though there be many days Exodus 19. 15.
assigned to Man yet there are three days in especial, his birth, life, and
death, that of his ingresse into the world, progress in the world, egresse out
of the world; but this last day is the third day, look to that day above all
days, stand ready for it, then it is that God who formerly came as a loving
Father will appear as the great Judge both of heaven, and earth, then shall be
heard the thunderings of accusations, then shall be seen the very flashy
lightning of hell fire in the consciences of most men, then shall the thick
Cloud of their sins interpose betwixt them and the throne of grace; the
Trumpet shall sound, the air shall rattle, the noise shall be the awakening of
all flesh, in so much that the very elect who are within the camp of Gods
predestination shall be afraid, what then will become of them which are without
the Camp? such as never took up arms against the common Enemy, they shall
then stand amazed at the bar being accused by the Heavens and the Earth and
all the Creatures therein, contained, convicted by a Jury of Heavenly, and
Earthly Inhabitants the blessed Saints and Angels, their consciences pleading
guilty in stead of a Conscintia mill testes.
thousand witnesses, then does the Devil and sin, the world, and the flesh
cry out for sentence to be pronounced against the Offenders at the bar which
is no sooner desired but performed, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, a sentece most fearful because intolerable
because irrevocable; intolerable because of the quality of the punishment
pinching cold, scorching heat, more greevious then the cursed water to the
suspected woman that caused her thigh to rot, her belly to swell, and made her
detestable to all the People; ibi erit fletus etc. there shall be Number 5. 18.
weeping for the fire that shall never be quenched, gnashing of teeth for the
worm that never Pains of hell intolerable.
dies, if we be sick here in this life we may have soft beds to lie on,
Physicians to advise our health, friends and kindred to come by way of
comfortable visits, and though all these fail yet there is to be had a good
and gracious God to have mercy on us, one that will lay his hand under our
heads, and comfortably support us, but there is no soft beds but fire the most
cruel of all other elements to wallow in, and not a drop of cold water to
cool the scorched tongue, no Physician to advize, but Devils to torment, no
God to have mercy on us but hell and despair to seize upon us, thus shall it
be with them that forget God, miserable shall they be at their first ingresse
into hels torments, there to hear the yelling, the howling, the crying of
damned spirits, there is no comfort, no solace, no ease, no help, but horror,
and vexation on every side, Bern. Med. cap. 19.
always burning yet never consumed; always dying, and never dead; the best
sights, and cheifest companions shall be Legions of damned ghosts, and furies;
the diet and fare shall be pinching hunger, and famine; the drink shall be
lakes of fire and brimstone Rev. 14. 10
mingled with the pure wine of Gods wrath; and to make up the meal there shall
be music too, curses shall he the Hymns, houling the tunes, blasphemy the
ditties, lachrymae the notes, lamentation shall be the song, and shricking the
strains, sighs sobs and tears shall be the doleful descant and division;
the Purple Rayments shall there be flames of fire, the hand shall there be
seared, the heart wounded, the eyes blinded, the ears dulled, the feet
scorched, and Paena sensus.
all the body utterly confounded, this shall be the state of the body in that
day, but shall the soul go free? No; It was to the body as Simeon to Levi, a
brother in iniquity and shall therefore participate of punishments with the
body; The memory shall call to mind that which is past, the understanding shall
consider that which is present, and does shall join together to disquit
themselves; then shall it be thought upon how many good motions have been
neglected, how often God knocking at the door has been disregarded, what
joys are Paena damni.
lost, what sorrows are found how easily they might have been avoided and how
impossible it is to abtayne the least mitigation this of all is the greevous
punishment of the damned in hell; hitherto I have showed but the skirts and
suburbs of hell, but this is the entrance within the walls, and the very gates
of hell; that punishment of the body was paena sensus, a pain sensible enough,
but this of the soul paena damni, though it be but a privative punishment yet
it has a miserable positive effect, if ever misery deserved weeping of eyes,
if ever loss deserved Horresco referens.
gnashing of teeth this is the misery, that there shall be No loss like the
loss of Gods favor.
never any comfortable fight of the blessed face of God, and this is the loss
that there shall be an exclusion from all society with saints and Angels; if
when the Ark of God was taken old Eli was so overtaken with grief that he
fell backward, and dyed; what a loss shall they be at that have lost the
presence 2 King 14.
of God? Adam did but Genesis 2. 15.
see the apple to be good for the taste but to be turned out of Paradise he
found it very distasteful, what greater grief even in this life then to live
in M^sheck, and Psalm 84.
sojourne in the tents of Kedar? it was David's well day so to do; can the
Israelites be merry in their Captivity? there is no music with them; Psalm 127
they cannot sing under a strange king, their harpes hang upon the willowes as
sad and silent as themselves are, their thoughts are upon Jerusalem, they
cannot forget Syon; It was the greatest grief that ever Tully had to be
banished from his native Country, and though he met with many friends in Greece
yet still did he cast his eye toward Italy, here was some comfort to meet with
a friend in Roma relinqaenda est, etc.
trouble; but miserable is the case to be sent with Ovid from Rome to Scythia,
from heaven to hell, from the company of Saints and Angels, to the society of
Devils and damned spirits, this is the loss of all losses, and then for
aggravation of the punishment to see others sporting, themselves toyling; the
Saints rejoicing themselves mourning; their concord their own discord; them
exalted above the highest heavens, their selves cast down into the nethermost
hell, and therefore unto them who in old time were condemned ad lapidiciv as
this was some comfort that they neither saw so much their own misery nor the
happiness of others; thus shall the wicked be tur^ed into hell and all they
that forget God; but how long shall this state of the damned continue? for
ever; that must needs be a long day that has no end; Eternity of punishment is
the hell of hell, to all men in misery there is some hopes of an end, The
mariner when he has The pains of hell end less.
been long weatherbeaten hopes for a safe arrival; the Prisoner after much
durance for a Goal delivery; the Apprentice after a hard service for a
freedom; the Soldier after much bickering looks for victory, but in hell
nulla res, nulla spes, no hope, no comfort at all; the bondage there is not
like that of Israel in Egypt Exodus 12. 40.
to last only 430 years; nor like that of the Captivity in Babylon to last
but 70 years, but like that of Israel in Syria never to return again, from
thence there is no Redemption, the greatest cross that can befall a man in this
life is to be cast in prison, to loose lands and goods, to want the Company of
wife, and children, yet he lives in hope to come out at last, or that God will
raise up some comfortable supply of money, meat, or good counsel, but in hell
there is no hope of any end of Punishment, if a barn were full of corn and a
bird should every year fetch one Kernel there were some comfort that in time
it would be emptied; if a Mountain twenty miles about should have one shovel
f^^ll every year taken away, it would at last though long first be made a
Molehill; but hellish torments never have an end, their years never come out,
the longer they continue the lesser hope, when as many years are expired as
men in the world, stars in heaven, as many thousand years, as there are
stones, and sands by the sea shore, yet still there be ten thousand more to
come, for the misery shall last as long as God himself forever and ever world
without end.

Is that day of the Lord so 1. Cor. 15.
terrible in judgment? then judge thy self beti^es that thou may not in that
day, be judged; is that place of the damned so horrible? the society of Devils
so comfortless? the pains to be endured so remediless, so endless? what
then remains but to buckle on thy Armor, set the world, the flesh and the
Devil at defiance, beat them off, keep them at a distance, they are all of
them marked out for judgment, the world shall with the frame thereof be
consumed, neither flesh nor blood shall enter into the Kingdom of beaven, as
for the Devil he is bound in everlasting chains of darkness till the
judgment of the great Jude 7.
day, then shall both he and they and all such as adhere unto them, or march
under their colors in this life taste of the fullness of Gods wrath in
torments for evermore, join thy self therefore unto the Church militant,
strive not so much to know what manner of fire that of ^ell is, as how to shun
it; in all thy doings remember thy end, and Eccles. 7.
then thou shall never do amiss, in this thy spiritual warfare follow closse
thy leader Christ Jesus the Captain of thy salvation and in all thy prayers
join in the humble voice of the Church, In all time of tribulation, in all
time of wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of judgment good Lord
deliver me, Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

If the certainty of death, Letany.
and the uncertainty, of the hour does not move thee to buckle on thy Armor,
yet let the horrors of that great and terrible day, and the judgments to be
denounced against all faint-hearted Renegado's enforce thee to enter the field,
if none of these will do it, look up wards; there is a Crown laid up for every
Conqueror let that allure thee, this if any thing will do it. Reward is the
Plu^met that sets all Actions a going, especially the Reward of Heaven, a
crown of life, not that Heaven is a Reward in a proper but analogicall sense,
it is a great dignation when God does call that a Reward which is his own free
gift, if a man should fulfill all the Commandments yet heaven is more then he
has deserved, if (says Macarius) I should play the soldier in the Christian
combat yet the Reward is far above the trial, if a man should afflict his body
a thousand years, yet one day in heaven goes far beyond all his troubles,
heaven is therefore, not of debt but of grace non Remuuer at i^ laborumsed
merces liberalit at is, if it be of grace it is no more of works Romans 11. 6.
does God then propose heaven as the wages of his bountiful grace? what will
not a man do to enjoy it; what toil will not the husbandman undergo for a
plentiful crop at harvest? will not the Soldier march up to the very mouth of
a Canon, enter a breach, lie upon the cold ground p^r dieu, stand Sentinel
exposed to wind and weather, and all this to get renown, and credit? but what
is a good harvest to the Labourer, or credit to the Soldier? things merely
momentary, here to day, gone to morrow, but whosoever he be that shall but
fight the Christian fight, and therein vanquish the world, the flesh and the
Devil, with all their temptations, provocations and assaults, here is a Heaven
is the Conquerors Reward.
kingdom and Crown too prepared for him, which as it is immutable so it is
immortal, even a Kingdom Luke 1. 33.
eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. ^ Kingdom whereof there shall be no
end, a Crown of Righteo^s^esse, no earthly thing comes within the 2 Timothy 4. 8
compass of it, they are not to be found in the texture of this Crown, it is
Eternity that makes it up, temporals come in only by way of superaddition; it
is in this life reposita laid up only for S. Paul, but it shall in that which
is to come, be impositae set upon the head of S. Paul; and not upon his head
only but upon all their heads that shall with him fight the good fight of
faith, then shall be imposed the golden Crown of Christ's approbation, Euge
bone serve well done thou good and faithful servant enter into thy Masters
joy, joy unspeakeable, there is no diving into the depth of it, the felicity
cannot be imagined; the blessings cannot be numbered, so incomparable that they
admit No joy like that of heaven.
of no equality, the tongve may express much the ear may hear more then the
eye can see, and the heart of man conceive more then all of them, yet put all
together they cannot apprehend the greatness of those joys eternal, here
only it is bare Earth that is enjoyed under the first Adam, but in the second
Adam Christ Jesus there is Earth enlarged, every thing that we enjoy is an
essential heaven, our meat and drink is manna, our clothing white Robes,
our Company Angels, the Place, Heaven; there the King is verity; the laws,
Charity: the honor, Equity; the Peace, Felicity; the life, Eternity: there is
joy without sadness; health without sickness: light with out darkness: life
without death: ease without labor, wealth without wam: an Ocean of all
selicity without the least drop of misery, Joys of Heaven in utterable.
many, and glorious things are spoken of thee o thou City of God, whilst I am
thus describing the Kingdom of heaven, oh that I might with the holy Apostle
be taken up into the third heaven: and whilst that I shall endeavor to blazon
out the bliss of that caelestiall place: oh, that the light of that glory
might shine into my sinful soul, that my thoughts being winged with the
contemplations of Angels I might in some sort comprehend the excellency of that
glorious place which far surmounteth every humane estimate, oh, that I were
to parley with those blessed Spirits above, those vessels of glory the Saints
departed; tell me, oh tell me ye noble Army of Martyrs what is that joy
whereof ye are now made partakers that my soul being ravished with the glory
thereof my pen might distill the Nectar of comfort to inflame the hearts of all
those that shall at this time join with me in this sweet meditation; but
alas how shall he that ever was in darkness be able to describe that light
that is so inaccessible? how can he that is of the Earth measure the heavens?
no more surely then he which is a slave by birth, and base by his continual
habitation is able ingeniously to describe the m^jestick state of Princes, if
Nichodemus understand not the manner of Regeneration how shall he be able to
conceive the excellency of glorification; of the infinite happiness in that
celestial life how shall I then speak? Earthly Jerusalem was pourtrayed by
Ezekiel upon a tile so cannot the heavenly Ezech. 41
be, the joys prepared for the Elect do exceedingly surpass all humane
apprehension, obtained they may be, valued I am sure they cannot: he in Tully
said truly, that it is an easier matter to know what God is not then to tell
what he is, Tully de Not. deorum lib. 1
so may I say it is much easier to tell what is not in heaven then what is
there: S. Augustine wrote two and twenty books of the City of God, how shall I
then bring into the last gasp of these my Meditations the unity, the plenty,
the beauty, the holiness, the felicity thereof, when he himself confessed
after all his endeavors, all that can be said is but a drop to the Sea, and a
spark to the fire: what is this world to heaven? a man may go Sr. Fr. Drake.
round about it in three years, and odd days, it is less then a point in
comparison, what is an acre of Land to the world? the light of a candle to that
of the sun? the life of a child to the years of Methusalah? what is the
conceyt of a fool to the expeience of Noah who saw two worlds? such is the
world to heaven, such our life to Eternity, a thousand years in heaven are but
as one day; O while I write of those joys eternal, how am I silenced! feign
would I declare them but cannot conceive them, I am in a maze when I begin to
think of them, what then shall I say? what shall I write? Haven is a place of
Rest, a City of excellent beauty, a Jerem. 6. 16. Rev. 2. 1. 4. 15. Luke 22. 30
2 Pet. 5. 4
rare Paradise of Pleasure, a kingdom of Majesty, a crown of glory, and life
everlasting! O joy unspeakeable! O happiness unconceiveable! O pleasures
indurable! O triumphs admirable! what shall not such a prize as this make thee
to fight? why do thou stand still? has the glimmering pleasures, and
delights of the fading world so benumbd thy limbs, and bewitched thy senses
that thou can not see pain from pleasure, misery from majesty, deceits from
delights? for such and no better is the worlds chiefest joy compared with that
of heaven; buckle on thy Armor, labor very earnestly to conquer, and subdue
thy own corruptions, the words allurements, and the Devils temptations; he
that will reign must conquer, and he that will conquer must fight valiantly,
then for thy comfort S. John has chalked out thy way to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, he has Rev. 21.
found twelve gates in it open day and night to entertain departing souls
repairing thither in the true faith, there shall thou be entertained by the
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; by the Prophets Moses, and Elias; by
the Kings, David, Hezekiah and Josias; by the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul;
by S. Stephen, and the noble Army of Martyrs, by the innumerable society of
Saints and Angels, a multitude of Heavenly Souldie^s shall give a volley of
acclamations at thy entertainment, then shall be great joy in heaven, then
shall the wedding garment be The Christian Soldiers welcome to Heaven.
put upon thy body the Ring upon thy finger, a crown upon thy head thus shall
thou be led out to the supper of the Lamb, God the Father shall take thee by
the hand, God the Son shall place thee at his own right hand, and God the
holy ghost shall fill thee with the graces of his spirit, thus shall thou see
the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the li^ing, and thus shall it be with
all those that have fought the good fight, finished their course, kept the
faith, they shall with S. Paul and all these heavenly spirits receive the
Crown of Righteousness which God the Righteous Judge shall give them in that
day.

Thus I have set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore
choose life that thou and thy seed may live, here is the horror ofhel Deuteronomy. 30.
19.
for thy terror, the joys of heaven for thy encouragement, if the intolerable
pains of the one will not enforce thee, let the unspeakeable happiness of the
other allure thee to fight, O the Joys of the heavenly Canaan! O the Riches of
those Diamonds that are set in that Crown which shall impale the brow of every
Conqueror! loose not then the hold of such a Crown for a rappe on the fingers,
vincenti dabitur do but overcome, and thou shall surely have it; to shut up
all, look behind thee there is h^ll; look before thee there is heaven; if
thou go backward hell will receive thee, and if thou stand still hell will
overtake thee, but if thou run forward Jehovah will crown thee, which he
grant for his mercye's sake, for Christ Jesus sake the Captain of thy
salvation, and hereunto let all the Church militant throughout the whole face
of the Earth say AMEN. AMEN.

Glory be to God on high.
FINIS.
Men's works had faults since Adam first offended.
And those in these are thus to be amended.

ERRATA.
Epist. Dedicat. line 12. read these. ibid. l. 34. r. your Counsel. Epist.
Reader l. 10. read I put. ibid. l. 43. read from t^^t.

Page 7. line ult. read. thus, page 16. lin. 21. r. estis. p. 18. l. 23. r.
him. p. 30. l. 15. r. thy. wages. ibid. l. 18. r. ^et. p. 31. l. ult. r. hard
page 32. l. 23. r. Confession p. III. l. 4. r. wine. p. 121. l. 14. r. him.
page 125. l. 7. r. inveneris p. 145. l. 3. r. keep thy self. p. 162. l. 14 r.
forth.

IMPRIMATUR.

October. 4. 1638. GUIL. BRAY.


