A FIt Guest for the Lords Table.

Or, A Treatise declaring the true use of the Lords Supper.

Profitable for all Communicants, as a preservative against all profanesse and
sundry novel opinions.

Macarius. Homill. 27. Offerrur in Ecelesia panis et vinum (...) carnem eius et
sanguinis, et sumentes de visibili pane spiritualiter carnem Domini manducant.
LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde, and are to be sold by H. Rockit, at his shop in
the Poultry, under the Dial. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Noble and Honorable Gentleman, HENRY CAREY, Son and Heir to
the right Honorable John Lord Hunsdon.
SIR,
THere are (you know) three different opinions* (wherew^th the Ch^^stian World
is much distracted) concernng the presen^^ of our Lord in the holy ^^charill;
one orthodoxe and ancien^, the other novel and unwarrantable.

The first teaches that Ch^^st is in his Ro^y ^^d Blou^ there present* (...)
an^ really* in respect both of the Signs and of the Communicants. In respect
of the (...) he is present, (...); that is, not in regard of place and
Coextstence, but atione sacram^n^^li, by a ^acramentall reason or relation. In
respect of the C^mmunicant^, his presence is not (...) or local, but
spiritual, ^eally presenting himself unto all prepared persons, who by faith,
receive and apply him to themselves: Nam fide tangitur Christus, non corpore.
Ambros.


The second is of Italian A^chymists, that imagine a corporal presence (though
not visible and pe^m^dum quant^) by reason of a substantial trans^uration of
the ^^emense into the very holy and blood of Christ, after the recitation of
the words of co^^ecration. But this opinion was first forged upon the Anuil of
their own br^ines, and at length determined of innocenc^us the third, by name
of Transubstantiation in the Laterane Council 215 years after Christ. Neither
is it so new as ^augh^, being directly contrary both to Philoso^^y and
Theo^^gie. Po^ first ^ne and the (...) body cannot occupy many distinct places
at ^n^ and the self^^same instant. One man cannot be circum^^^stible and
incircum script^t ^in one Articl^^^time. And (as Da^ascen^ truly speaks
(...) nature is not capable of co^^^^itant ^ssentiall ^^fferences. As for
Mirac^^^, they be not ((...)) Against nature but ((...)) Above nature. Neither
does God always that which he can do. re^ue potest (...) Secondly, the heavens
Act. 3. 21
do contain him ^the scriptures name no other place: neither can there be
^^^si^able of holy writ, with a genuine construction produced to confirm their
conceit. The word (^st) whereat they st^ble be tokens only a sacramenta^ Esse,
and is as much as Ret^^t, Re^^asent^t, si^mficat, as will be cleared by the due
di^e^^ssion of many texts of Scripture. In tranoe^ legis ^^cit, que salues
(...) le^^^ sen^entiam eius circumue^^^ Thirdly, by this opinion a very
Repr^bate may receive the Body of Christ. But S. Augustine truly says Nullos
comede^e corpus Christ's n^sicos, qui sunt in corpore Christ's. Besides that
which enters in at the mouth, goes down into the belly, (...). But the body
Mark. 7. 18. 19
and blood of our Lord are no belly cheer, they enter not into the Belly, but
into the Heart. therefore the Apostle says that Christ does dwe^l in our hearts
by faith. And albeit the Fathers called, Ephe. 3. 17
the Bread and Wine the Body and Blood of Christ, yet did they not mean that
they were so proper^y by transubstantiation. But analogically by divine
ordination, through which they do become the sea^es, and symbols of them. And
to conclude, if this must needs be held for truth, what shall we think of
Greg^ry the seventh, who thr^w the Eucharist, (that is by their doctrine
Christ's body) in a rage into the fire, because it did not answer to his
questions? And what will they say to the death of Pope Victor, and of 1154.
William Archbishop of York, and of Henry of Lucemburgh the Emperor, all
which were poisoned, the two former with that, which was in the Cha^^ce, and
the third with the Host. which a Monk had poisoned. Here, against all reason
we see the Body and Blood of our Lord, made Venen^ Vehicu^^, and subject to
cruel entertainment. But our faith does teach us that he lives in the heavens
in all honor, happiness, majesty, and glory.

The third opinion is theirs, that think the Body and Blood of Christ, is In,
With, Under, or about the bread and wine. But our Savior says not, My body is
in, with, under or about this bread: but he says expressly This (that is, this
bread) is my body. And if there were such a bodily presence, as is imagined,
why should this holy feast be celebrated as a memorial of him? Finally, this
opinion gives him (...) a bodilesse body ouerturning the charachteristicall and
essential properties of a body, which are as inseparable from it, as heat from
fire, moisture from water, and light from the sun. True it is that the
faithful recei^e Christ in the bread and wine, as a thing signified in the
sign. (non (...) co^^entum ^n continen^e) but not as gold in a bag, or as
water in a pot. Thus a possession may be said to be given a man in a Deed or
Writing, because the Deed does assign it to him, and not because the
Possession does exist in, With, or About the Deed.

Now the ready way for a man to discern the truth in this warfare and
diversity of opinions, is to seek to God by prayer, to walk in humility and
sincerity with fear and trembling, and not to be perverse, turbulen^ and
contentio^s for The seccret of the Lord is revealed to them, that Psalm. 25. 24
fear him, and his covenant to give them understanding. The froward is an
ab^ominationto him, Prouer. 3. 32
but his secret is with the righteous.

To this end, but especially that we might be furthered and furnished to the
lawful and audable use of this blessed Sacrament, and so may safely ^aile
betwixt the arroneous doctrines of some, and the profane practice of others, as
between two dangerous and almost inevitable Rocks, I have been bold to publish
this little book, where in the nature and right use thereof is succinctly and
with perspicuity described. The success vvherof I commend unto the Lord,
humbly desiring his Majesty to honor you with all noble virtues in this life,
and to crown you with eternal glory in the life to come. And thus notdoubting
of your kind acceptance of this my boldness, I take my leave, remaining ever,

At your honorable command In Christ, THOMAS TVKE.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
N. T.

(...) H. Graij ad Authorem.
Edatur; Momi cur namque Verebere dentes?
Hic liber, a cambus, nil quod edatur, habet.
Eiusdem (...) ad Lectores.
Quaeritis a Domino qualis conuiua prob^tur?
En vobis qualem finxerit iste liber.
Lotus cas, etlaetus edas, g^atusque recedas;
Scilicet hos mores caelica mensa petit.
Ad Lectorem.
Christi Christi-colis conuluia lauta parantur,
Hic recte vt comedant pagina quaeque docet.
Georgius Taylerus.

Errata.
Page 7. line 21. read him.

Page 18. line 21, read destroy.

Page 19. line 1^ read by.

Page 24. line 3. read to a. line 7. read Fifh.

P. 91. l. 21. read fifth. p. 136. 5. read commended

1. Cor. 11. 28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this drink.
CHAP. 1.
THe holy Apostle Saint Paul having reprehended the Corinthians for sundry
misdemeanors amongst them; one whereof was their disorderly receiving of the
Lords Supper; he does in these words prescribe a remedy for the same. For
correction is not enough without direction, and reprehension is defective
without instruction. A kind Chiruigian will not only discover the wou^d, but
apply the salve. A faithful friend will not only show his friend his fault,
or error, but he will also give his best advise unto him, that he might see to
correct and prevent it for the time to come. The office of a true teacher is as
well to teach the truth, as to confute and refell falsehoods: and as he must
reprove and condemn evil manners, so should he also be careful to show what
is good and how the evil may be prevented, and amended. We count him a bad
Guide, that only tells the Travelers of their wandering, and not of their way:
and we judge it the duty of a Maister-Mariner, to show his folowers in the Art
of Navigations, not only syrts, and sands, and rocks, and the danger of them,
but also the course to escape them: so a good Minister ought not only to show
his people their sins, and the danger of them, but also the means to mend,
and the way to perform their duties, as GOD requires. This Paul has done.

The Doctrines follow,

THat it is our duty to search and to prove our selves before we come to
the Lords Table,

I will here show first, the reasons why we should make this trial: secondly,
by what we ought to make it: thirdly, whereof it must be made: fourthly, how it
ought to be done. The reasons that should move us to make this trial are many.

First, it is the express commandment of God, Let a man examine himself. Now
the will of GOD must be the rule of our works. What God bids, that must we
bend our selves to do: And in his service wantes no solace. For as Paul says
(1. Cor. 7. 19.) Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of Gods commandments. And the Scripture further says (Revel. 22.
14.) Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their right may be in the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City: Now one of his
Commandments is, that we do examine our selves before we come to the Lords
Table.

Secondly, another argument may be borrowed from the verse next before going,
and next ensuing, and may be thus framed.

If he, that shall receive this sacrament unworthily, be guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, and shall eat and drink his own damnation, then it
behooves every man to search and examine how he stands, and in what manner he
comes: this will all men grant. But he that receives this sacrament
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ (a heinous sin) and
eats and drinks his own damnation (a fearful punishment.) Therefore it
behooves all men to try their standing, and to examine in what plight they
come.

Thirdly, a wise man will not come to the banquet of an earthly Prince without
some competent preparation; why then should any man presume to present himself
in the presence of God and his Angels, and to come to the banquet of the great
Prince of all the world, there to eat the flesh and drink the blood of his
only Son, without due preparation, and fitting of himself, which cannot be
without this search and examination.

Fourthly, as preparatiues are necessary before physic for the body: so this
examination prepares a way by Gods blessing for ou^ right receiving of those
sacred elements, as the physic of our souls. For by it we shall know our
estates, and discern our hearts: by it we shall know how to discern the Lords
body: and we shall perceive the love of God in Christ unto us, who ordained
this Sacrament for the confirmation of our faith; and the most entire affection
of Christ unto us, in that he gave himself to a shameful and cursed death to
redeem us, being in bondage to sin and Satan, as the Israelites were to the
Egiptians, and to Pharaoh their King.

Fifthly, this examination will occasion in us both thankfulness, and greater
heed and watchfulnes. Thankfulness I say; for after examination, if a man
perceive his estate to be good, and that he comes fitted and furnished in
some competent measure, he is stirred up to magnifye the Lord, who has
vouchsafed them this grace. If on the contrary he find himself wretched or
unfit, he has occasion to praise the Lord, that gave him grace to search and
see his condition, and that he has winked (as it were) at his wickedness and
vnpreparednes, and has not dealt with him, as he has deserved. And will it
not also be an occasion of greater heed and vigilance for the time to come? For
even as a man viewing and considering well by day, how dangerous a Bridge over
some very deep water, he had safely passed in the dark, will be stricken with
amazement, and will be made more careful thence-forward of his way; so when a
man after examination of himself, shall perceive what infinite danger by
reason of his sins, he has escaped through the mercy of the Lord, he shall be
provoked to admire the goodness of God and to become more circumspect in the
time to come.

Sixthly, we are bound to search and examine our selves at other times: and in
truth we ought to do it daily; for we sin daily, and Satan siftes and
shakes us daily, and with the Sun we do still either ascend or descend, and
with the salt waters continually either ebb or flow. Now if we ought to prove
our selves at other times, how much more at this, when we are to converse and
deal, not with mortal man but with God, and that more nearly, and in a most
special and weighty business? Men should make the weightines of their
affairs the rule of their care and labor.

Lastly, a man will not build an house, but he will examine and search his
ground to see whether it be firm or false, sound or sandy.

There is no good husband but will survey his grounds, and search their nature:
a faithful Shepherd will duly observe and search his sheep: an honest Lawyer
will truly examine his Clients cause: and a skilful and careful Surgeon will
thoroughly search his patients wound: wherefore then should not we exactly and
curiously search and examine our selves, that we rush not without reason, upon
these holy mysteries? He that comes without this examination, may partake of
the type, but not of the truth: he may meet with the shadow, but he misseth the
substance: Christ will not be eaten of those that come with foul hands, and
filthy hearts: He will not give him self to them, that give themselves from him
to serve sin, and Satan, and their sinful lusts. To conclude this first point;
The wicked proceed from one degree of wickedness to another, Cain (Genesis 45. 8.
9) was offended that God accepted not his offering: then he grew in dislike
with his brother: after that he show him: after that he told God a lie, in
saying that he knew not where his brother was: thence he fell to saucy language
with the Lord, Am I my brothers keeper? And after all this to despair, My
sin is greater then can be forgiven. So likewise Herod (Act. 12.) killed
James, and clapped Peter up in close prison, and after this approved the wicked
and atheistical acclamation and applause of the people, to Gods great
dishonor. Now if it be the mark of the wicked, thus to add sin unto sin,
ought not Gods chosen to add grace unto grace, one good motion, and one good
work unto another? To desire to come to the Lords Table is good in it self,
and will be also good in and unto thee, if this thy good motion and intent, thou
second with another work as good; by examining thy self, and searching thy
state, and so preparing thy self unto it. In a word, as no wise man will
undertake any business, unless he perceive himself fit to go through with
it; so let no man here assembled be so bold as to meddle in these matters,
unless he find and feel himself in some good sort prepared, which no man can
be without serious search and examination of himself: For as Merchants cannot
without searching of their books, know nor make a just account of their debts
and loanes, of their receipts and expenses, of what they have sold and bought;
so is it impossible for us without search and examination of our selves to know
our estates. Our memory is weak, and our eyesight bad: our debts are many, our
receipts are many, our accounts are great. We have to answer for many
cogitations and many counsels, for many works, and for many more words. But when
we come to this. Trial, we shall find it like Salomons 1. King. 3 24. 27.
sword, which found out the true mother of the child. It may be God lays
claim to thee, it may be Satan also does the same: perhaps the Church
challenges thee for hers, it may be the world does so too: Thou can not be
both theirs: they are not both thy father (at one time) nor both thy mother.
But search thine heart, and thou shall perceive by the spirit and grace of God
whose thou art, and to whom thou do belong. By trial men find out the
nature of metals: so by trying thy self, thou may know the metal whereof
thou art made, the founder that has moulten thee, and the mould wherein thou
wast cast: The husbandman by searching his ground may come to know what is in
it, and for what it is fit: so we, by proouing and searching the ground and
garden of our souls, may know their quality, and what grows in them most,
whether the sweet and pleasant flowers of Gods graces, or the stinking weeds
of sin. From these similitudes these two points are illustrated; first that
without examination of our selves we cannot know our estates: now where this
knowledge fails, there can be no due preparation for the coming to the Lords
Table: and where due preparation is wanting, it were better to stay, then there
to be. Secondly, hence appears, that by this examination we may come to know
our selves, which is an excellent benefit, and a preparatiue to much good. A
Captain cannot be said to have prepared himself to encounter with a stout
and puissant Prince, unless (besides other duties) he have first tried his own
strength: so no man can be said to have fitted himself for this holy business,
till he have first examined himself. And as every sick person that is
discreet, perceiving the danger of Ad medicam dubious confugit aeger opem. Ovid.
his disease, will seek abroad for a remedy: so every man of understanding,
perceiving by his examination the corruption and crazines of his condition,
will stir up himself to seek a cure, that his state may be bettered and
himself amended.

Pharaoh no sooner perceived a Exodus 8. 8, 28. and 9, 28 and 10, 17
plague, but he was by and by upon Moses, that he would be a suter unto God for
the remoouing of it. When Elymas was smitten blind, that he could not see the
Sun, he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand (Act. 13. 11.) and no
doubt but desired his eyesight with all his hearts; and shall not we when by
this examination of our selves we find the wretchedness of our states, as that
spirits of uncleanness, like those Frogs of Aegipt, (Ex. 8. 3. 9.) have crept
into the chambers of our hearts, and that we are pestered with whole swarms of
sins, as the Aegiptians were with swarms of Flies and Grasshoppers; that our
souls are polluted with the botches and blisters of iniquity, as their bodies
were with scabs (Ex. 9. 10.) And that worse then Elymas his blindenes, we are
destitute of the eyes of our minds, unable to behold the Sun of righteousness,
and to look upon and let in the light of Gods love: and finally that we are as
blind of mind, and ignorant (as concerning true light, and saving knowledge)
as Aegipt was black, when it was covered with darkness, which might be felt,
(Exo. 10. 21.) I say, shall we not, nay can we but seek about for comfort, for
counsel, for cure, and for recovery? Have we not good cause to go to Christ
our Moses: and to fly to God by earnest suplication, that he would remove
these plagues, eiect those spirits, disperse those Frogs, dispell those
swarms, salve those sores, and restore our eyesight? As he permitted that
strong man Satan to work these works within us, so he is able to unarm and
bind him, to cast him out, and to cast down his works.

Thus we see the benefit of this examination, and the reasons, which should
persuade us to make it.

CHAP. 2.
THe second point to be considered, is the thing, by which we must examine
our selves. For if the Mason build by a wrong line, or the Carpenter cut by a
wrong squire, their labor is but lost, and their time consumed: so if we try
our selves by a false Touchstone, and examine our estates by partial or unfit
judges, we shall delude our selves, and deceive our souls: we shall wrong our
cause, and shall not see our case. Therefore especially take heed of these
three that follow: try not your selves by them, neither in their sentence,
nor example.

The first is within thee, but not of thee, neither over thee, if thou be
Christ's, and if Christ be in thee: and that is thy Flesh, thy Concupisence,
thy Corruption.

This seeks for shelter in thy soul, and for harbor in thine heart, and
therefore cannot endure that thou should search thy self, least finding of
her out, and perceiving her noy somnes, thou should either turn her out, as
a saucie guest: or seek to kill her as a secret foe.

Secondly, Paul says (Romans 8. 1.) that those which are in Christ Jesus (as we
al profess our selves to be) do not walk after the flesh, but after the
spirit: like men that are absolved by the Judge, and have discharged what the
law requires, who do now no more walk in the prison, but in the open air,
and are no longer ruled by the Iaylor, but live at liberty; yet perhapps
sauouring of the Dungeon, and carrying the prints of their Bolts and fetters,
and not wholye stripped of their prison garments.

Now, if we be in Christ, as we say, and if we either do or (at least) ought
to walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh or corruption of our hearts,
what reason have we to make her our Judge in the trial of our states?

Thirdly, we promised God in our Baptism that we would forsake and detest
the flesh: but if we make her our Judge, we show that we do not forsake
her, but favor her, and that we do not hate her but rather harbor and
hearten her.

Fourthly, the wisdom (even the best part) of the flesh is death, To. 8. 6.
and therefore her sentence can in no wise be just and good. Who would meddle
with that which is the cause of death, and make it his Judge? and if the
wisdom of the flesh be folly with the Lord, as sure it is, then is the flesh a
very fool, and makes those foolish, that are ruled by her; therefore wicked
men are termed fools in the Scripture.

Now, who would be judged or examined by a fool, whose wisdom is folly, yea
and death; working death and destruction, to those that subscribe unto it and
will not renounce it?

Fifthly, Saint Paul says, Romans 8. 5 That they that are after the flesh, do
savor the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things
of the spirit. But if we will needs be tried by the flesh, and will be content
with her determination, we plainly demonstrate that we savor not the things
of the spirit, but that we are bewitched with the flesh, and therefore that we
are not guided by the holy Ghost but governed of the flesh.

Sixthly, the very wisdom of the flesh, is not only an enemy, but enmity
against God, Romans 8. 7. wherefore doubtless if the flesh be our judge, her
sentence will be against God, not for him, but most odious in his sight.

Furthermore it is no childe-like affection, nor property of a gracious son,
to rest in her, who is a flat, fierce, and irr^^onciliable eenemie to his
father But such is our flesh to God: yea, and he also, that in will and work
does with a full resolution subscribe unto it, cannot but be an enemy unto him.

Seauenthly: the wisdom of the flesh is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can it be, Romans 8. 7. Now such is the tree as are the fruits:
the wisdom of the flesh is an utter and most desperate rebel against the law,
therefore also the flesh it self. For, for what any thing is thus or thus,
that thing for which the thing is so, is it self much more so. Now if the
flesh rebel against the law, and cannot be ruled by it, we must needs
confess that it is an vncompetent Judge for us; for it will not condemn it
self, nor speak well for the law: it will not discover her own works,
which are bastard plants set by satan in the seminary of our souls, and
fructifiing in our lives: no nor let us see the works of God within us (if
any be) nor commend them to our love.

Eighthly, they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. But he that
makes his flesh his Judge, or the Touchstone to try himself withal, and does
with full consent of heart, subscribe unto her judgment, and live acording
unto her lust, this man is in the flesh, therefore he cannot please God. Now
what true pleasure can any man take, when God the fountain of all true
pleasures, is not, nay can not be pleased? what pleasure ca^ Man take to live
in that estate, wherein God the Lord of life cannot be pleased? what peace can
please, or what joy can any man enjoy, while he has no peace with God, and
while the wel-spring of all constant joys is grieved and displeased with him?
If thou would not be in the rank and roll of those, that can not please
God, and do not serve him, then make not thy flesh thy Judge, subscribe not to
her sentence, and live not as she lusts.

Ninthly, the flesh makes us do that we would not, and leave undone that we
neither would nor should omit. Paul calls it a body of death, and cries out,
O wretched man that I am I who shall deliver me To. 7, 24
from the body of this death? It is the bane of the soul, and the poison of
the sinner. It is like the worm that eats the wood, wherein it was bred.
Pliny writes that the Leontophone breeds in no country but where there be
Lions, and Plin. Naet. Hist. 8. and 38.
sin among all corporal creatures is inge^dered in none but in man. And as that
little creature is so venomous, that the Lion (king of beasts) dies
presently, if he taste never so little of his venom: so our flesh (the
corruption of our natures) is so corrupt and deadly, that as so one as man (the
chiefest of creatures) is polluted with it, he becomes obnoxious unto death,
both temporal and aeternall.

Therefore as the Lion does abhor that beast, and crusheth him with his
paws, so soon as he does espy him: so ought we to detest and hate this
Sin, abhor this Flesh, accurse this corruption, and labor to crush and kil^
it; so far we ought to be from electing her to be our judge* This were not
to hate the flesh* but to honor it, and not to figh^ against it, but to foster
it. Moreover, Paul accounted himself wretched, because he was turmoyled with
his flesh; as with a yoke about his neck, a chain about his leg, and a
burden upon his back, and wished to be delivered from it; as the tired Ox
does from his yoke, the prisoner from his fetters, and as men wearied do from
their burdens which they bear.

It is therefore against reason, right, and all religion, for any man to give
consent unto his flesh, or to try his state and to prove himself by her.

Nay, rather as Christ scourged those out of the Temple, which did profane it:
so we Ioh. 2, 15.
should scourge this Sin, and also scowre out this corruption out of the
temple of our hearts, which ought to be (as they were by creation) Houses for
the Lord to dwell in, and not Holes for this Thief to lurk in, this
deceitful and double-harted Delilah, which beguileth and abuses us, as she
did Sampson. Iu. 16. 18


It is true that Paul says, Ephesians 5. Chapter, 29. verse. No man ever yet
hated his own flesh: but yet we may, yea, we must hate and detest this
flesh, for it is the Seed of that old serpent Satan, whereof he does
engender children like unto himself. If the Jews iniustlye stirred up sundry
of the chiefest Citizens in Antiochia against Acts. 13 15
Paul and Barnabas, for preaching of the Gospel, and expelled them out of
their coasts; with good reason may we by prayer made in the name of christ
incense the Lord against this sin, and strive our selves by our spiritual
armor to subdue and drive it out of our hearts. If the king of Ammon did
disgrace the Messengers that David did in courtesy send unto him. 2. Sam. 10.
2. 4. Well may we both disgrace and deface our flesh, (this original corruption)
the messenger and minister of Satan, an utter enemy to the glory of God, a
rebel against his law, a burden to the soul of a true Christian, and that
which works the death and destruction of al men by desert, but of the
reprobates indeed and truth.

Tenthly, The flesh lucteth against the spirit, or the illumined and regenerate
part of man: and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to
another. Gal. 5. 17. First, it is said to lust or strive against the spiritul
part of a man regenerated by the holy spirit; like two mortal and implacable
enemies, and this conflict is without limitation of time: so long as they live
together, so long they do one lust against another, only death does end the
combat, making a full and final destruction of the flesh.

Now shall we take part with our flesh against our spirit? with the work of
Satan against the work of God? This we shall do if we choose her for our
Judge, and listen to her voice, who like a Gnat begins with singing, and ends
with stinging, soothing us up with her Syrenian songs, but seeking indeed to
destroy our souls, and to quel the Graces of God within us: yea, rather as the
Lord promised his people (Exodus 23. 30) to drive their enemies out of their
land by little and little, so we ought to desire his Majesty to consume and to
drive out this euemy out of our hearts.

And as the Israelites were in express terms forbidden to make any covenant
with those their enemies (verse 32.) so we must make no covenant with our
flesh, no contract; no peace at al, neither of amity nor of concord, if I may
thus speak; which we cannot avoid, if we try our selves by her, and rest
in her determination.

Secondly, Paul says that these are contrary one to another, as fire to
water, and light to darkness: and yet mixed together in one man, as heat and
cold in lukewarm water.

If now the corruption of our hearts (the flesh) be flat contrary to the work
of grace, within us, created in us by the holy Ghost, it were great impiety
for us to show the least favor unto it, how much more wicked were it to set it
on the Bench, and to lend our ears unto it? Does Paul count it a fault in the
Corinthes to try their 1. Cor. 6. 6
causes under heathen Judges, and shall not we co^dmn it as a capital and
grievous sin to try our states, and prove our selves by our flesh, which
makes men heathen, Athists, and aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel? Have
we none to be our Judge but her, that is an enemy to God, and to his grace
within us? The flesh is contrary to the spirit, not in condition only, but in
practice also: not so much in name, as she is in nature.

Eleuenthly, Paul reckons up Gal. 5. 19
(not seven, but) seauenteen mortal sins, which flow from the flesh as from
their Fountain. All which are Make-bates betwixt God and man, and are full of
pestilent and pernicious effects; therefore it is unfit to make the flesh our
Judge. For undoubtedly, she will not condemn her own works, neither can she
endure to see them despised and forsaken. Besides, considering that her fruits
are very poison to them that taste them, we ought rather to labor that she may
be stubbed up, then to shade our selves under her bows or to show her the
least grace or smallest courtesy. Lastly, they that are Christ's, have crucified
the Gal. 5. 24
flesh with the affections and the lusts. We do all profess our selves to be
Christ's: but if we make the flesh our Judge and follow her desires, we shall
not crucifye the flesh, but rather indeed take her from the cross, and put
life and spirit into her, yea and promote her highly. For to be a Judge or
Counselor, is a state of dignity and honor: and if we follow her fancy,
and do as she prescribes, we plainly show that we are not Christ's, but hers:
not his servants, but her slaves: Neither have we crucified her lusts: If we
will needs be ruled by her, and set her up for a Judge in the trial of our
states. For it is her desire that we should so do, and it is her work, if we
either will so, or work so.

Thus we have heard many reasons why we should not try our selves, and examine
our estates by our flesh: against whom I have much contended, because very
many are carried headlong by her into a gulf of security, flattering
themselves, and accounting their conditions good enough, because the laws can
take no hold upon them, being in the mean while most miserable, destitute of
true faith, and the filial fear of God; yet crying out peace, peace, and
being ready to say as AGAG said to SAMVEL, Truly the bitterness of death is
passed, when they are in danger to be hewed in pieces with the sword of
vengeance, as AGAG was indeed by SAMVEL, 1. Sam. 15. 32. 33. Thus much for the
flesh.

CHAP. 3.
SEcondly, in the Examination of our selves, we must take heed that we be not
led by the counsel or custom of the world, and multitude of Professors. in
those places wherein we live. For first, what is the world but a Labyrinth of
error, a Mirour of madness, an Ocean of iniquity, a shop of deceit, and a
Theater of wickedness? JOHN says that this whole world lies in 1. John. 5 19.
wickedness. Therefore the world is no fit touchstone for us to try our
selves by. Secondly, the multitude (as common experience teaches) is usually
most ignorant, profane and godles, having the form of godliness, but denying
the force thereof, and making a profession, but yet hating reformation. They
hear the word audible, and receive the word visible, without examination or
preparation. Many cannot, their ignorance is so great: many can, but will not,
their corruption is so violent: many can, and make show of will, but do not,
their negligence is so rooted: many do examine themselves, but yet very
superficially, and minsingly, as if they were to go over a quag-mire. And it
may be well supposed that the most which do receive, come utterly unfit,
unfurnished, and eat and drink to the dishonor of God, and increase of their
sins. For Christ says, Mat. 20. 16.
Many are called but few are chosen: if the elect be few in comparison of those
that are called, then but a few in comparison can come prepared; for it is
impossible for any of the reprobate to prepare himself aright, and to examine
himself as God requires, seeing he wants true faith and refined affections.
Neither do all the elect come fit them selves; because some that are elected,
are not as yet effectually called and converted: and yet no doubt many of these
presume to come. And of those that do indeed believe, come some without meet
preparation, now and then through negligence and oblivion of their duty, as
some in the Church of CORINTH did. Therefore we must take heed that we do not
as the most do. If the most be perverse or careless, I must not be so. If DAVID
commit adultery, and though PETER deny his Master, yet I must not. For we are
to live by Legibus vinitur ^on ex^m plis. Ex 23. 2.
laws and not by examples: neither may we follow a multitude in or unto that
which is evil. Thus much for the multitude.

CHAP. 4.
THe third enemy to be avoided in this our examination, is the Church of Rome,
and that for two weighty reasons; For first she is not the Church of God, but
a Sinagogue of Satan: not the Spouse of Christ, but the Minion of the Devil,
out of whose brain she did proceed, as Minerua is fained to have proceeded out
of Jupiters.

She has bewitched the world a long time, with her sugared enchantments: she
has made drunken the inhabitants of the earth, with the wine of her
fornication: she has corrupted and adulterated the holy Scriptures with her
partial, blasphemous and rediculous interpretations. Her allurements are
pleasant, her voice is sweet, her face is amiable: and as wisdom says of the
strange woman; Her lips drop as an honey Pro. 5. 3. 4. 5.
comb, and her mouth is softer then oil, but her end is bitter as woormewood,
and sharp as a two edged sword: her feet go down to death, and her steps
take hold on hell. Therefore as the holy ghost says in the case of indiscreet
suertiship, so let me speak concerning this Church; Deliver thy self from her
as a Do Pro. 6. 5.
from the hand of a hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Make her
not thine vmpire, thy Judge, thy Touchstone. Suspect her voice, for she is
long since deuorced from the Lord, and has long ago contracted, yea and
wedded herself to the Devil. It is true indeed that she speaks some
truths; but therefore it does not follow that all her words are true. For
even the father of lies does speak the truth sometimes: and if all her words
were false, she could not have so many friends. Moreover, we do not believe an
harlot or noted Iyar, when they speak the truth, because they do speak it,
but because we know it to be so: so we must not believe that skarlet harlot,
when she speaks the truth, because she says it, but because by Gods word we
know it so to be: we must therefore be wary and try before we trust.

PLINY writes of the Fox in Thracia, that he will not pass over any river
that is froze^, before he try the thicknes of the ice, by laying his ear close
unto it, and so gessing how thick the water is frozen: so ought we never to
approve the sentence of that Church, till we have examined it by the word of
God, that so we may do with it as MOSES did Exo. 4. 3.
with his rod, which whilst it remained a rod, he used it familiarly, but when
it was turned into a Serpent he fled from it.

Secondly the Church of Rome is haererical and erroneous, in the chiefest of
those points, whereof we are principally to make our examination: as may
appear by the consideration of these her opinions following.

First, concerning the sacrament it self, her chiefest champions teach. 1.
that it does not only seal and signify, but also properly confer holiness
and righteousness (ex opere operato) even by the work wrought. 2. That the
entention of the Priest is essential to the sacrament: so that if the Priests
intention be absent, when the words of consecration are read, there is no
sacrament; so that the receivers worship they know not what, being ignorant of
the Priests intention, whose mind may wa^der from his work, though his tongue
be on it. 3. That the bread and wine by virtue of the words of consecration,
are truly turned into the very body and blood of Christ. 4. That the true and
substantial body of Christ, is truly received and eaten of All the
Communicants, though profane and unbelieving: Indeed they confess that they
do themselves hurt thereby. 5. That this Sacrament is to be adored with divine
worship, whersoeuer it is seen. 6. That Christ in his own person does offer
up himself by the Priest, to God the Father, a true, real, and external
sacrifice for our sins, truly and properly, and that under the forms of
bread and wine, but yet after an unbloody manner.

Secondly, concerning faith, she teaches that it is no confidence in Gods
mercy, or special application of Christ's merrits to a man's heart in
particular, but a mere and pure assent unto the word of God. 2. That no man
can in this life be certain of the remission of his sins, by the certainty
of faith, but only by a coniecturall persuasion. 3. That true iustifiing faith
may be lost totally and for ever. 4. That it is proud presumption in a man to
say that he is certain of present grace and future glory.

Thirdly, as touching repentance, she teaches, 1. That it is a sacrament of
the new testament 2. That co^trition is a meritorious cause of the pardon of
sins. And for sin it self she teaches. 1. That original sin after Baptism
is so abolished, that it neither has the nature, nor may properly have the
name of sin; being now but as tinder, apt to receive the fire of sin, or as a
punishment of sin. 2. That some sins (mortal indeed) are in their own
nature venial, and being not properly against the law and love of God, and
that they are not perfectly and simply sins.

Lastly, concerning the works of obedience and love, she teaches 1. That the
works of righteous men do merit eternal life, in respect of their own
dignity. 2. That works of men justified, do deserve increase of grace, and
inhaerent righteousness. 3. That alms done without love have power to prepare
us to our Justification: but being done in faith and love, are truly
satisfactory before God. In a word, her chiefest champion (and now a Cardinal)
affirms that the confession of sins, made by the communicants in the
Priests ear, and the Priests absolution, is their only lawful probation of
themselves, or praeparation which they ought to make, that they may be fit
receivers. And which with the former I should have set and said before) he
teaches that the communion under both kinds, is not only not necessary for
the layty, but also nowvnlawful, seeing the church (of Rome) has so decreed,
Bellar. Tom. 3. P. 3. c. 18. 19. 20.

This is the Roman lauguage: this is the tongue of Babel: these are the
doctrines of the greatest Papists; most false, blasphemous, and abominable, as
may by the word of God appear, to any that have not tasted of the Romish
grape, and do not pin their faith upon that harlots sleeue. Therefore as
Solomon says of the woman with whorish behavior, Let not thy heart decline to
her ways: wander thou not in her paths: So say I concerning this Church,
decline not to her ways, listen not to her voice, atend not to her doctrines.
She is another MEDEA, or GIRCE who by her sorceries and spiritual
incantations, transformeth men into Monsters: therefore beware of her, and
eschew her. CIRCE could not metamorphize Ulysses, as she did his companions,
because he had about him the herb Moly. But surely if we do carry with us the
word of God, and wear it about our hearts and heads (believing, remembering,
and understanding of it) as an amulet or counterpoison, she shall not be able to
transform or bewitch us, to pervert or change us. And although she tell us,
that we can not choose but perish, unless we will subscribe unto her judgment,
yet we are to respect her speech no more, then their opinion that said, men
could not be saved except they were circumcised, Act. 15. 1. Thus now we see
the things to be rejected and avoided in this our examination. In the
discussing of which point, I have been something long: for as a captain seeing
a town or Castle committed to his custody to be begirt of the enemy, does
spend most care and pains on that place which is most subject to invasion, and
against which the adverse General has pitched his fiercest and strongest
soldiers: even so, considering Satan, the arch-enemie to man's felicity, does
endeavor to hinder men in the performance of this duty, by these his surest
and strongest instruments, by the Flesh as by a Cananite and traitor within
them, and by the example and custom of the multitude, the tentations of the
world, and the damnable doctrines of the Romish sinagogue, as by Philistines
without; al being tied together by the tails like Sampsons foxes, though loose
in their heads; I have used the more labor to fortify our selves, and to
dissuade us from yielding to them, or any way to withhold our selves through
them from the performance of so weighty a work. These are all pleasing in
appearance, like the fishermans bayt, but there is a hook enclosed in them,
wherewith Satan seeks to take us. They are not much unlike a Fowlers Call, for
as by it he draws the birds into his net, or to his bush: so by these the
devil draws us from our duty, and allures us to his nets, that he might
destroy us. He that makes any of these the Rule of his Examination, does much
abuse himself: he may sow in mirth, but he shall reap inmourning: pla^t he
may, but his fruits shall set his teeth on edge: build he may, but it cannot
stand: he may * receive Pane^ Christi, non panem Christum.
but no Christ, no comfort, no growth in grace: a shadow, but no body: bread
but no strength: wine but no refreshment: corporal creatures but no spiritual
nourishment. And so much for them.

CHAP. 5.
IT remains now to show by what we ought to examine and prove our selves. A
Shepherd must not only keep his sheep from briars and rotten grounds, and
from other things which may annoy them: but he must also lead them into
wholesome pastures, and hold them there. The thing then by which we must
examine our selves, is the word of God, contained in the sacred scriptures. The
reasons are these. First, the word of God will afford us help to reform both
the Head and the Heart. The former, because It is profitable to teach us the
truth, and to convince, and to batter down (like a warlike engine) the walls
of errors, and the muniments of all falsehoods. The latter, because it serves
to correct and amend Psa. 119. 9
the corruptions and sins of heart and life, as also to instruct in
righteousness, and to teach us those 2. Tim. 3. 16.
things which are pleasing unto God. It shows us what is virtue, Romans 2. 18
and what vice: what we ought to love and what to leave: what we must respect,
and what we must reject. The Philistines by DELILAH found out where SAMPSONS
strength did lve, Judge. 16. 5. So we by Gods word may know wherein consists
the strength and sting of death: to wit, in sin, which will appear by proouing
of our 1 co. 15. 56
selves; even as dross by melting metal. And as DAVID took out 1 Samuel 17.
40. 50.
of a brook the stone where with he slew GOLIATH, so may we have stones in
abundance out (of the brook) of Gods book, wherewith we may smite down sin,
and put to flight al those our enemies which would hinder us from the due
performance of this present duty. Secondly, the word of God is sufficient to
make the man of God absolute, and to furnish him for every good work. 2. Tim.
3. 17. Therefore it is fit to be our direction in this good work of trying our
estates, and preparing us for the Lords table.

Thirdly, Thy word (says DAVID is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto
my paths: SOLOMON says, The Commandment is a lantern, and Instruction a
light. But this examination is one of our paths, wherein we are to walk: and
we stand in need of a light or lamp to guide us; therefore it is wisdom to
choose the word, being a shining Light and a burning Lamp, flaming always
maugre all adverse blasts of the Devil and all his Accomplices.

Fourthly, this examination requires wisdom and discretion, and we by nature
are too too simple and ignorant; easy to be deceived, and to deceive our selves
in the performance of our duty. Now, the word of the Lord is sure, and gives
wisdom unto the simple. Psalm. 19. 7.

Fifthly, considering that we are corrupted in sin, we had need to prove our
selves by that which is void of all corruption, and which is no way partial:
But the words of the Lord are pure, as the psa. 12. 6
silver, tried in a furnace of earth, fined seauenfold. The law of the Lord is
Ps. 19. 7. 8.
perfect: the statutes of the Lord are perfect. All thy commandments are Psa.
119. 86. verse 140.
true. Thy word is proved most pure. Gold had need to be fined, but Gods word
is without all dross. And therefore it is the fittest rule for all our actions.

Sixthly, The word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then
any two-edged sword, and enters through even unto the dividing asunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrowe, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and the intents of the heart. Heb. 4. 12. Therefore fit to be our
Judge, and the Touchstone of our trial. As in a Non co^itationes solum, et
me^tis tuae consilia, sed actiones etiam, et vi^aeinslituta, adeoque te ipsum
tibi tanquam aliquod illustre specuiu^ oftendet et demonstrbit.
Mirror or looking-glass, a man may discern his face, so by the word of God
we may discern our selves and see the faces of our souls. As the Goldsmiths
does judge of gold by touching it with his stone, so by viewing our selves by
Gods word, we may judge of our states: As the Corn-dresser may by his Fan
discern the wheat from the chafe: so we by the word of God may distinguish
betwixt vice and virtue, and see whether there be more wheat of grace or chafe
of sin, in the heap of our heart: and whether the chafe of fin and dust of
corruption, as ashes ^o the fire so^times, and as chafe does wheat.
does * cover and ouer-lay the good corn of Gods graces; and whether they be
mixed together, as light and darkness in the twilight. When REBEKAH felt the
twins struggling in her womb, she went to ask the Lord: so when thou art in
conflict with thy self, when doubts arise within the womb of thy heart, not
knowing what to do, or what to determine or think of thy self, ask counsel
of the Lord in his word, and thou shall in due time receive an answer, as by
Oracle from heaven. David says that the testimonies of the Lord were his
Counselors, Ps. 119 24. To conclude; would thou know whether thine
examination and preparation be right and good? then consider the word of God,
for it is the * mouth, the tongue Vox summi sensu^que Dei, quem fudit abalta
me^te Deus.
the voice, and sentence of the Lord: the line of our love, the rule of
repentance, the squire of obeience, the touchstone of faith, the determiner of
truth, and the surest Judge both in and of our examination. The word of the
Lord is Pro. 30. 5 Ps. 59. 8. Lex Ctristi est lux Christiani, et speculu^
humanae animae.
pure in it self, and gives light unto the eyes of those that search, believe
and obey it. It is as a bright shining torch, or candle, in a dark night,
lending us light both to try our selves, and to discern whether our trial be
as it should be; right and good. And so much for the second general point; By
what we ought to prove our selves.

CHAP. 6.
THe third point is, of what things we must examine our selves. For it were
absurd for a man to seek he knows not what, or to cast his angle into the
water, not knowing why. A Magistrate cannot examine a man of nothing: neither
can we make trial of our selves of nothing. Examination presupposes as well
the thing to be examined, as the person upon whom it is to be made. The
things then whereof we ought to examine our selves, that we may come well
prepared to the Lords Table, are these especially, which I will propound in
order, and do commend to your christian consideration. They are in number
eight. First we must examine our selves concerning our knowledge; for it is fit
that every receiver should have a threefold knowledge. First of God: to wit,
that there is a God, a Jehovah, that there is but one God; that he is a spirit;
that he is infinite for goodness, mercy, justice, wisdom, power, time and
glory, that he is the Creator and Governor of the world; that he is
distinguished into three persons, the Father begetting, the Son begotten, the
Holy ghost proceeding from them both: that these three are one in nature, and
essence, and will, but three really distinguished in their manner of subsisting:
the Father of himself, the Son of the Father, the holy ghost from both, and
this from all eternity; finally, that all these are one in worship, and will
have only that worship performed to them, which is prescribed in the holy
scriptures, and that in spirit and truth.

Secondly, it is meet that he should not be ignorant of the three fold estate
of man; the state by creation, the state of the fall, the state of grace. As
first that man was created righteous and good yet mutably: Secondly, that he
fell Eccl. 7. 31.
voluntarily away at the suggestio^ of the Devil, and so lost his original
purity, and withal plunged himself into a gulf of misery. First, in that he
is become prone to all manner of wickedness: secondly in that he does now
daily transgress against God, both by omitting good and committing evil:
Thirdly that he is now subject to the curse of the law, Gal. 4. 10.
both in this life, and in the end of it, and in the life to come. In this
life, in the body to diseases, in his goods to losses, in his good name to
ignominy; in the end of his life to death, which having cut asunder the thread
of life, and made a deuorce between the soul and body, does immediately set
open Hell gate for his soul to enter in. In the life to come, in a dying life
and a living death, even to ever lasting confusion of soul and body from the
presence of God, living always (like flesh) in the waters of Gods wrath, and
never drowned: living always in Hell fire (like a Salamander) and yet never
consumed, always in dying and yet never dead, always alive and yet always
dead. Thirdly, for the state of Grace, we must first know that we are redeemed
from this misery only by Christ, who fulfilled the law for us, and by his
death has defaced death, and sin the sting of death, and satisfied for all our
sins to the full.

Secondly, we must know that we are regenerated by the Holy Ghost, who is
therefore called the Spirit of sanctification or holiness. It is he that by the
fire of his operation Romans 1. 4.
eats out the dross of sin, and purges our souls from wickedness. He is
the water which washes away the filth of our hearts: and as salt, he
seasonethvs throughout with saving graces. If we either will well, or work
well, it is of the Lord only, who works in us both the will and deed Phil.
2. 13
of his own good pleasure, and not for any present, future, or foreseen merit
of ours. If we conquer our selves, or offer up any sacrifice acceptable unto
God, we must give the praise to Christ, who has made us Kings and Priests unto
his Father. He is the Altar that sanctifies all Re^. 1. 6.
our sacrifices: he with the veil of his most precious blood does cover al
their imperfections. And by his death he has changed the nature of our death,
so by the virtue of his death he does conquer sin within us, the cause of death
unto us.

Thirdly, we must know, that those that are in this state of grace redeemed by
Christ, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, shall so continue (without final or
total falling away, till they atteine to the full fruition of the state of
glory. For the gifts of God are given without repentance. Christ's To. 11. 29.
sheep shall never perish: for he gives them everlasting life. Satan may
batter us, but he cannot beat us down. Peccatem in est, non praeest, sin is in
the regenerate, but Io. 20. 28.
not over them: Viuit, non vincit: it lives, but subdues not: Remanet^ non
regnat: it remains but rules not: Bellat non debellat, it wars but wins
not, For God vpholds Psalm 37. 17. 24.
and defends them by his grace: his love is Ieri. 31. 3. and ^2 40
constant, and his covenant everlasting. The Sun shines always, though it be
not always seen: so the light of Gods love John 13. 1
continues constantly to all his children; though they do not always discern
it.

The graces of a man regenerated may be covered, as a Rock may be with water
in a mighty tide, and yet remain as touching their habit or nature, as well as
the Rock does remain a rock: A knife may scrape the adamant but not cut it:
and Satan may vex him but he cannot vanquish, cut but not kill: because the
Lord of Heb. 13. 5.
life will not forsake him.

CHAP. 7.
THe third part of knowledge, which becomes every co^municant, concerns the
sacrament it self. And here it is requisite for every such person to know, 1.
What a Sacrament is, 2. what this Sacrament is, and why it was ordained;
otherwise he shall take in hand he knows not what, and come like an unbidden
guest to a banquet before he be invited. And yet it is to be feared, that many
do, coming and know not well about what, nor why; like that confused concurse
of people at Ephesus, who for the greater part knew not wherefore they were
come together, Act. 19 32. But to the point in hand: a sacrament is a visible
sign of Gods invisible and saving grace, or a corporal, a visible and outward
sign and seal, instituted from above to represent and ratify Gods grace unto
us in Jesus Christ.

There be two Sacrament is ^n a sacra^do dicitur: quia per sacramenta deo
quasice^secramur.
Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. It is
called a Supper ((...), caena) first in respect of the time, when it was first
instituted, which was the night before Christ was crucified: secondly because
it is a sacred feast or banquet for the soul. Now in old time their feasts
were usually at night. The Greek and Latin words above named, signify not
only a bare supper, but also a solemn feast, or night-banquet. Furthermore,
it is called the Lords supper: First, because it was instituted by the Lord.
Secondly, because it was ordained for to be a memorial of our Lords death.
Thirdly, it may be also because it was wont to be celebrated on the Lords day.
Act. 20. 7. Now the Supper of the Lord is a Sacrament, whereby God does
signify unto, and assure every one that comes aright prepared unto it, that
as he receaueth, eats and drinks the bread and wine, so surely he shall be
made partaker of the body and blood of Christ, yea of whole Christ with all his
merrits, for his preservation and spiritual sustentation and food unto
eternal life.

The Author, and principal efficient cause, of this Sacrament, is the Lord
jesus, the high priest and the king of his church. The ministrant Efficients,
are only the Ministers of the word lawfully called, to whom the Keys of the
Church are committed. The matter of this Sacrament, whereof it does consist, is
twofold, one earthly, outward and visible: the other is heavenly, inward and
spiritual. That is commonly called the sign, and this the thing signified. By
the sign we are to understand both the element or corporal substance seen
with the eyes, and also the actions or rites used according to the divine
institution.

The Elementary signs in this sacrament are two, Bread and Wine, which two
make but one sacrament: for they do declare but one action of Christ, to wit,
our whole spiritual nourishment: and we know that in one feast there may
diverse dishes and variety of drinks be used. One man has two parts; one body
many members; and one tree sundry branches: moreover, that is not only said to
be one, which is simple and indivisible, or continued, but that also which is
perfect. Now this sacrament is one as touching perfection; in as much as by
those two signs our perfect food or relief is signified and sealed to us.
More signs need not, because these are sufficient to show perfect refection:
and again if one were wanting, the sacrament of perfect nourishment were maimed
and defaced. It is an hungry dinner where there is no meat, and a dry feast
where there is no drink.

The Actions used in the lawful administration of the Lords supper are of two
sorts: some are of the Minister, some of the Receiver, and all significant and
lively: The action of the Minister is fourefold: the first is his taking of the
bread and wine into his own hands. The second is his blessing of them. The
third is the breaking of the bread and pouring out of the wine. The fourth is
destributing of them.

The action of the Receiver is twofold. The first is his taking of the bread
and wine of the Minister, the second is the eating of the bread and drinking of
the wine: and thus much for the sign. The thing signified is that which is
meant by the sign, and it is twofold: the former answering to the corporal
and elementary signs: the latter answering to the foresaid actions. Of the
first sort are the body and blood of Christ, signified by the bread and wine.
Neither must we exclude his whole person, for neither the deuinitie without the
humanity; nor the humanity without the deuinitie can perform the work of
mediation. But because he suffered only in his humane nature, therefore it is
only expressly resembled; though whole Christ and all his merrits must be
understood and not excluded: For the merit and efficacy of his death flows
from his deity, and from the dignity of his person, as from their proper
fountain. And the scriptures by the death of Christ do sometimes mean by a
figure his whole obedience active and passive, and the benefits that arise from
the same. The second kind of things signified, are those things which are
resembled by those actions of the Minister, and communicants.

According to the foure-folde actions of the Minister, four other things are
signified.

First his taking the bread and wine into his hands, does represent an action
of God the father, by which he did from all eternity separate and elect his
son to perform the office of a Mediator betwixt God and man.

Secondly his blessing of the Elements, wherebe he does prepare, destinate and
sanctify them to be a sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, does signify
a second action of the father, by which he did in the fullness of time send his
son to execute the office of a Mediator, unto which he was before ordained.
Thirdly the breaking of the bread and pouring of the wine, does signify the
bitter passion of Christ, the piercing of his body, and the shedding^ of his
blood, and the rending (as it were) of his soul for our sins: for (as Esaias
speaks he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities:
he was plagued for our wickedness. Isai. 53. 5. 7.

Fourthly, his destributing of the bread and wine unto the communicants
signifies an action of the Father, offering his Son to all, but giving him
only to the faithful. To proceed; according to the two-folde action of the
communicants, two things are resembled. First the receiving of the bread and
wine, signifies a spiritual action of the receiver; to wit, his receiving of
Christ by the hand of faith. Secondly their eating and drinking of them,
signifies and seals their application of Christ to their hearts by faith, or
their inward and spiritual eating and drinking of his body and blood, and
feeding upon him (as upon a most delicate and wholesome dish) for the
nourishment of their souls: For as there are two parts of man, body and soul;
so there are two sorts of feeding; the one outward or sacramental, the other
inward or spiritual: the former is ordained of Christ to resemble and express
this latter. So much of the material cause of this Sacrament.

The internal and proper form thereof, is the relative and sacramental
conjunction of the signs and things signified, whereby they are made one, in
respect of resemblance, proportion, and a reciprocal relation and affinity one
with another.

The end of this sacrament is manifold. 1. That the death of Christ may be
retained in remembrance, 1. Cor. 11. 24. 26. Luke 22. 19. Do this (says
Christ) in remembrance of me. By which apeareth first, Christ's love unto us;
for the property of love is to make the lover desire to live in their memories
whom he does love: secondly his faithful foresight is hereby cleared, in
providing that his benefit conferred might truly profit us: for as by
forgetting, benefits are lost: so by remembering of them they are conserved.

2. That God might visibly represent his invisible gifts to our outward
se^ces, our sight, taste and touch, that the whole man being stirred up both in
soul and body, might with great chearefulnes and joy celebrate this sacred and
sumptuous banquet.

3. That it might be a sign, seal and confirmation of our communion,
conjunction and incorporation with Christ our head, and by him with the father
and holy spirit. 1. Cor. 10: 16. Ioh. 6, 56.

4. To signify and seal unto us our spiritual feeding upon, and food by
Christ: provided that we come prepared. For as meat or medicines for the body
are not only unprofitable but also hurtful, if they be not taken as they
should: even so it is with the supper of the Lord, a meat or medicine for the
soul; if it be not aright received, we harm our selves.

5. That it might be a token and seal of the new testament or covenant
between God and us, wherein God does testify that he does receive us to
favor, and remit our faults for the righteousness of Christ, and for the merit
of his death, lively set forth and shadowed by this sacrament.

6. To signify and seal unto us the resurrection of the soul from sin, and
the body from the grave.

7. That it might be a token and John. 6. 54
pledge of our communion one with another. We all eat of one bread, and drink,
of one cup or drink; as fellows in one family, and servants of one Lord.

8. That it might be a public testimony of our profession, and separation from
pagans and Infidels.

Thus we see the nature of this sacrament: these things we ought all to know:
and we ought to prove our selves before we do receive, whether we do know
these things, or the substance of them yea or no. If not; we must use means to
get this knowledge least we come unprepared, and so provoke the Lord against
us: thus much for the first thing whereof we must examine ourselves.

CHAP. 8.
THe second thing whereof we must examine our selves, is true faith: which is a
certain and particular knowledge of, and confidence in Gods special mercy: or
a sure apprehension, and application of Christ and his merrits unto our selves
in particular. Prove your selves (says Paul. 2. Cor. 13. 5) whether ye are in
the faith. This duty is at no time unnecessary, but then very necessary, when
we are to come to the Lords table. For faith is the eye whereby we look upon
Christ hanging upon the cross, who is that brazen serpent, which cures our
souls, in ridding the^ of the stings of sin, and of the poison of the serpent
Satan. Faith is the hand which apprehends Christ in the sacrament, the mouth
which receives him, the tongue that tastes him, the teeth that chew him, the
throat that swalloweth him, and the stomach which digests him. Therefore it
must in no case be wanting in those, that intend to receive the Sacrament. Now
as a tree may be known by her fruits, so may faith be discerned by the fruits
and signs thereof. He that goes up the river may in time come to the spring:
and he, that follows the heat, may soon perceive where the fire is. There
are three infallible tokens of true faith, that I may not number many. The
first is Love, which as Paul teaches 1. Timot. 1. 5.) proceeds from faith
unfeigned. The second is Fear: for if a man be persuaded that God does love
him, and that Christ was crucified for his sins, he will be afraid to displease
them by his sins, and will stand in a reuerentawe. The third is a vehement
and constant desire to have perfect fellowship with, and a full fruition and
sight of God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. When a man shall understand that
some great Prince did so affect him, as that he gave his only son to death,
to save him from death, and that he continues in his affection still unto him;
he will long to see him, and will willingly bestow himself upon him that he
might enjoy his presence, and have continual conversation and company with
him; he does so co^^et to see his face, and to have his fellowship. So if a man
do truly believe and know that God the Prince of all Princes did give his own
and only son to death, to preserve him from death eternal, and that this
his son did die most willingly for him, and that the Holy Ghost does
regenerate and sanctify him, flinging the gates of Hell from off their hinges
within him, and refining his soul from the dross of sin, and printing a
fresh the image of God within him; he can not but sincerely and incessantly
desire the society of this blessed Trinity: He cannot but e^rnestly covet to
see God: He will wish with all his heart to see Christ, and to bemore
familiarly acquainted with him. The consummation of the world and his coming
to Judgment would be most welcome to him, as being much wished of him.

CHAP. 9.
THe third thing whereof this examination must be made, is our Repentance,
which is a turning from all evil unto God. For auersion from sin and
conversion unto God, are the two poles or hinges, whereon Repentance turns.
Now repentance is meet to be made at all times of sin: For sin ingendreth
death, buthe that repents of his sin shall not dye, but live, Eze. 18. 21.
But if a man repent not, God remits not. God gives pardon only to the
penitent. Pliny Hist not. l. 16. c 34
says, that Iuy is good only to harbor serpents, and most comfortable for
their cold constitutions: so the heart of man, before he do unfeignedly repent
of his sins, is in a manner fit for nothing, but to make an harbor for the
serpent Satan, and a lodge for unclean spirits. But especially must we repent
or renew our repentance, when we come to the Lords Supper; For otherwise we
shall come unprepared. He which comes in his sins, comes to his sorrow; He
does not rightly remember Christ's death, that dies not to his sin, but
lives therein without repentance. He makes himself unworthy to receive Christ,
that does offend him without remorce, and sin without sorrow for sin. The
paschall lamb, was commanded to be eaten with sower herbs, Exo. 12. 8. They
that would feel the sweetenes of Christ's blood, must the tartnes of their own
sins. David says I will wash my hands in inno ency, o Lord and compass
Psalm. 26. 6
thine alter: so must we do before we come to the Lords Table. Men do not
usually receive their bodily food without washing their hands from bodily
filthiness: so we ought to wash our hands and hearts from the filth of sin,
when we are about to receive Christ Jesus, our true spiritual food and
heavenly M^nna. No profane person is fit for this business: Proc^^ hinc,
pr^culite propham. Men provide not good meat and dainty dishes for Kites or
Crows to feed upon; c^ryon is good enough for them. No uncircumcised Exo.
12. 4^
person might eat of the paschal lamb: so none that are of uncircumcised
hearts, ought toreceiue the Lords Supper. It is therefore requisite that before
we receive we examine whether we repent or no whether we be dead to sin or dead
in sin: whether we b^ in sin or whether only sin be in us. This will apeare, if
we find in us these three works of the Spirit appropriated to the penitent.
First, if we hate sin because it does ((...)) hurt, being an utter enemy to
Gods glory and our own salvation: secondly, if we do heartily desire God to
for give it, and to rid us from it, that it may neither condemn nor conquer
us: thirdly, if we do strive against it, and labor to leave it, if we take
heed of all occasions and causes thereof, being also grieved that we do forsake
it no more. And in one word, if we Scel^rum si been penite^ Eradenda cu^idinu
prauisunt a^imenta. Hor.
be careful to prevent and avoid falling into the same sins again, laboring
against the custom of many men, who return like dogs to their vomit, and fall
to their old trade and bias, resembling the Lizards called Stelliones, who Pli.
18. c 31
cast their old coats (as Theophrastus writes) and after that eat them up
again. He that has performed, and as yet does perform these things truly,
may assure himself that he does truly repent of his sins.

CHAP. 10.
THe fourth thing whereof a man must examine himself, is of his spiritual
hunger and thirst. For it be hooueth every one that comes to this banquet to
come with a good stomach or appetite. The more hungry and thirsty a man is, the
more welcome he is to the Lord. He that comes with a good appetite, shall not
return empty. The way to get this good stomach is to pray to God for it:
secondly, to labor to feel the want of grace and goodness: thirdly to consider
what a danger it is to famish, or to pine away for lack of food to sustain or
relieve the soul: fourthly, to consider how virtuous and wholesome the body
and blood of Christ are to feed and refresh it, how pleasant they are to the
taste of the soul, and how comfortable and refectory to the heart. Lastly, as
the emptying of the stomach of phlegm and bad humors procures an appetite to
meat, so if we would p^rge our selves of our sins, and cleanse our stomachs of
the phlegm of wickedness, we should have a great deal better appetite to the
food of our souls.

CHAP. 11.
THe first thing whereof we must make our examination, is of our hum^lity. For
we must come in all lowliness of spirit. First, therefore we must humbly
confess with Nehemiah, that we have Nehe. 1. 7.
grievously sinned, and with Dani^l that we have committed iniquity Dani^l. 9. 5
and rebelled against God, and that we are by nature children of wrath, Ephe.
2. 3
as Paul a^^irmeth; nothing belonging to us but open shame and confusion of
^^ce, as Dani^l confesses Dani. 9. 7
of himself and his countrymen. Secondly, we must ascribe all good things in
us (if any) to the grace of God, from whom they ^low as from their fountain.
For we are naturally con^eiued in sin, (as David acknowledges) and borne Psalm
51. 5
in iniquity, and are dead in trespasses, as Paul does testify. Thirdly, Ephe.
^. 1
we must go out of our selves and must strip our selves of al supposed
righteousness, and opinion of personal merits, and wholly rely upon Gods mercy
and christ's merits. We must freely confess in all humility, that we are
utterly unworthy of Gods love, and of the benefits procured by the death and
obedience of christ, and that we are unworthy to partake of those elements
consecrated to such an holy use. I^co^ ingeniously confesses, that he is not
worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. Finally, Genesis 33. 10
we must humbly confess that our purest actions are pudled with sin, and that
we do but our duty, if we examine and prepare our selves before we receive
this sacrament: yea and that God (if he pleased) could find matter enough for
his justice to work upon, for the final confusion of our souls out of our
best preparation and strictest examination: and that it is his grace and not
our goodness, his mercy and not our merit that his wrath does not kindle against
us, while those creatures are in our mouths, and consume us, as it did against
some of the Israelites whiles the flesh they coueted was yet between their
teeth vnchewed, as Nom. 11. 35
Moses has recorded: For our sins are great and grievous, and our worthiness is
worthy of no better.

CHAP. 12.
THe sixth thing whereof we must examine our selves, is thankefulnes. For it is
meet that we should thank God for ordeining his son to be the ((...)) price
of our redemption from sin, Satan, and hel-fire: Secondly, we ought to praise
his name for proffering and offering his son unto us in the Sacrament, and
inuiting us to come and feed upon him for the preservation of our souls.
T^irdly, we must give thanks to christ for giving himself voluntarily to
death for us, and for being content to be eaten or received of us by faith for
our spiritual relief: as also for instituting this sacrament for the
manifestation of his love, the memorial of his death, and confirmation of our
faith. Fourthly, we ought to thank the Lord for directing us in his word, how
we may receive the Sacrament aright, and showing how great the danger is of
unworthy receiving, thatso we may be terrified from offending in this business
by unworthy receiving, and also provoked to prepare our selves in some
acceptable manner. Lastly, we must search (...) selves whether we come with a
purpose to be truly thankf^ll unto God for his kindness, and unto christ for
his love after we have received, and to manifest our thankefulnes afterward by
the reforming of our lives, and co^forming our selves to the will of God,
revealed in his word. Unthankfulness is In^ra^^t^ d^ ^s^ m^^^ ruin metropo^s et
^^^ou^ fasciculus.
a mother of much evil. As the root conueieth nourishment to the branches, so
does ingratitude afford food to many sins, which are as branches o bows
thereof. He that is not thankful for the foresaid benefits is like the Hog
that eats the mast, but looks not up to the Oak, and makes himself unworthy
to receive christ, who has done so much so many, and so great things for him.

CHAP. 13.
THe seventh thing whereof we must make our examination, is whether w^ do
seriously purpose to serve and obey God. This obedience must be sincere, not
hypocritical; therefore David prays 2. Chr^ ^121
(Psa. 119. 80.) Let my heart be up right in thy statutes, that ^be not a
shamed: Secondly, it must be speedy, without delay: David says I made bast and
delaied not to keep thy commandments. Psa. 119. 60. Thirdly, it must be
performed willingly and with delight. David commands 2. Chro. 139.
his son Solomon to serve God with a perfect heart and a willing mind.
Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist) that delights greatly in Psa. 112. 1
Gods commandments. David says, I have had as great delight in the way of
thy testimonies, as in all riches. Ps^ 119. 14
Fourthly when it is once begun, it must be performed with all diligence. David
says, thou have commanded to keep thy precepts Psa^ 119. 4
dilligently. Fifthly, it must be vniuer sall and absolute, to all the Luke 1. 6
commandments of God: walk ye in all the ways which I have commanded you,
Ier. 7. 23. David says Psam. 119. 6. Then should I not be confounded, when I
have respect unto All thy commandments. Lastly, it must be constant,
continuing the whole course of our lives. Blessed are they that do righteousness
at al times, Ps. 106. 3 Gods love is constant toward us therefore our
obedience ought to be constant unto him. It is a shame to begin in the spirit
and to end in the flesh: disobedience does deserve death at all times, and
rebellion is always as the sin 1. Sam. 15 23
of wich-craft. The obedience of children to their earthly parents, (so far
as it is in the Lord) must be constant, therefore much more ought our obedience
to be to God our heavenly father.

CHAP. 14.
THe eight and last duty whereof we ought to examine our selves, is our Love.
We must prove our selves whether we be in love with all men yea or nay. For, he
is unworthy to receive the head, that hates any of his members. If a man be
out of love with his neighbor, his love is crazed toward God himself: do we
think that he loves Christ, that co^temneth his servants, that derideth,
maligneth, or hates them? does not the Sacrament pict ture out the death of
Christ? does not his death declare his love? and does not his love unto us
deserve that we should love one another, yea and all, for whom he dyed, and
whom he loves? Are not those then forgetful of his love, and unmindful of
his death, and therefore unworthy of the sacrament, that are not in love with
their brethren? We must therefore repent of this sin, and turn our hatred or
non-loue into true love, if we mean to keep in Gods love, or if we desire to
be guests for the Lords Table. It is the only debt which God would have Romans
13. 8
us owe one to another; therefore we ought to be continually paying it, as we
must continually owe it. Moreover our Savior Christ says, (Mat. 5. 23. 44.)
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy offering before the Altar and go thy
way: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. The
like we must perform before we offer up our spiritual sacrifices of prayer
and thanksgiving unto God, which we use to make at the receiving of the Lords
supper. With what face can we desire God to forgive us our sins, while we lie
in any known sin and will not leave it? How dare thou sue to God for his
love to thee, whilst thou art out of love with thy neighbor? How dare any come
to this banquet of love, and there present himself before God, who is Love it
self, carrying a cankered and rancorous heart toward his brother, the image of
God, the work of God, and the redeemed of Christ? How dare we pray, forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, if we shall with
a spiteful spirit seek to be revenged of those have injured us, and will not
forgive them? Let every man therefore before he comes to the Lords Table
there to pray to God and to praise him, and to receive the signs and seals of
Gods grace, and Christ's love, and the benefits proceeding from the same, leave
and lay down all hatred, spleen and malice, and take up the spirit of
meekenes, mercy, ge^tlenes and love. Obi. Then it seems a man may not receive
the sacrament, if he be at law with his neighbor. Ans. Yes if he go to law as
he ought to do; without hatred of his neighbors person, and only to defend
his just cause, to try the truth, or to maintain it, neither suing his
neighbor for trifles and toies, nor using the law when a remedy may be had
without it, nor intending to beggar his poor neighbor by holding him in
suite. Obi. If I may not come to the Lords Table unless I forgive and forget
injuries, and purpose to let pass all revenge, I will abstain from coming.
Ans. If thou do not come because thou will not leave thy grudge, thou
offendest God: for thou must rather forsake thy malice then forbear to come,
because thou would be malicious. And secondly, the longer thou reteinest thy
malice, the more unfit thou make thy self to repent of it and to forsake it;
the longer it tarrieth, the deeper root it takes. Thirdly, so long as it
lasts Sath a leapeth, thy flesh rejoices, thy grace is foiled, and thou
make thy self unfit to perform any duty in any acceptable manner. Lastly
death is Nilcertius morte, h^^ a mortis nil incertius. Barnard
certain, the coming of death is uncertain: now judge what a dangerous thing
it were to be taken away by death in thy malice. How can thou expect Gods
mercy, that woldst not forsake thine own malice? How can thou look for pardon
of him, who would not pardon thy brother? How can thou hope that he will
forget thy many-fold and grievous offenses, committed against him, if thou will
not forget one, (it may be) and a small offense admitted against thee? Or how
dare thou desire him, that he would not bear the least ill will to thee, or
withdraw the light of his countenance from thee, though but for a moment, if
thou will not strive with all thy strength against thy venomous and reuengefull
spirit, but wilt retein and foster it? Let all men therefore as they tender Gods
glory, or as they respect either his grace or their own peace and welfare,
relinquish and with speed abandon all hatred, malice and spite, and withal,
embrace and cherish the spirit of concord, love, patience, and humanity. This
shall suffice for the third general point, to wit, for the things whereof we
ought to examine our selves.

CHAP. 15.
THe fourth, concerns the manner how this examination should be made. For the
manner of working does help much to the making or the marring of the work.
God requires that all our work should be both good and Bonae. Baenc.
well wrought. An action good in it self may be evil in the agent, and indeed
is, unless it be well acted. A good work ill wrought, a good deed ill done, a
good word ill uttered, a good speech ill spoken, is no better at the bestthen
(Splendidum peccatum) a beautiful sin; like a tree without pith, like a bone
without marow, a body without a soul. First therefore, this examination must
be made in faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. To. 14. 23
But we have warrant sufficient out of the word for this examination so that in
performing of it, we contain our selves within the compass of the word, and
take direction from thence for right performance of it. Moreover we ought to
believe assuredly that God will for the sake of Christ accept of our
examination, and will wink at the imperfection of it, Or at least we ought to
believe that God can pardon our weakness in the doing of it, and to desire with
all our hearts that the weakness may be pardoned and the work approved.
Secondly we ought to examine our selves in conscience of Gods commaundment,
even because God would have us to do it. Obedience is better then Sacrifice,
and to 1. Sam. 15 22
hearken is better then the fat of Rams. Now the best obedience is, when the
person that obeies, performs the work commanded in the way of obedience,
that is with an intent and purpose to obey the person that does command it.

Thirdly our examination must be made in truth; truly, not feinedly, or in
show only. Our mind must be upon it, we should have a heart to examine our
selves. Sincerity is as Salt to season an action, and to make it sauory: it is
the ax-tree whereon it turns, and the wheel whereon it runs. A work
wrought without sincerity is like a scul without brains, or to a painted
Sepulcher, fair without but foul within. There is none more vilde the^ an
hypocrite, his heart is false, his punishment horrible, and his hypocrisy most
abominable. His conscience accuses him, God does accurse him, and man does
abhor him. Let us therefore in all our actions beware of hypocrisy. Peter
would have all the faithful to lay down all deceit 1. Pete. 2. 1
and hypocrisies.

Fourthly, our examination must be made in love to God, and in fear of his
dreadful name. The child works upon his fathers commaundment, because he
loves his father and fears to displease him. So we, that profess our selves
to be the children of God, must do this duty here enjoined, because we love
God, and because he shows his love to us, and because we are afraid to offend
him by our disobedience herein; as being unwilling to loose his love or
loue-tokens, or to venture his displeasure, and so to kindle the coals of his
wrath against us.

Fifthly, we must prove ourselves thoroughly: our trial must be strict and our
search narrow: we must so prove, as that we may approve our selves, which
cannot be by partial and superficial examination. The heart is deceiptfull
and wicked above Ieri. 17. 9
all things, who can know it? Sin is so smooth, our flesh is so false, Satan
is so subtle, and we so simple and so silly, that unless we search our selves
to the quick and examine narowly, we shall never truly discern our estates.
Metal lies in the bowels of the earth, and sin in the bowels of the soul; a
man must dig deep that means to find it out. We must be wise as Mat. 10. 16
Serpents: but it is a maine point of wisdom to try thoroughly before we
trust, to prove well and warily before we do approve: we must turn thoroughly
from all our sins, we must turn out of all our sinful ways; it is therefore
necessary that we should examine our selves thoroughly: we must keep Prou. 4. 23
our hearts with all diligence, so we must examine them with all diligence.
Job says, that when he knew not the cause he sought it out dilligently. Job
29. 16, So, that we may see our case and know our selves, let us examine our
selves dilligently with all care and conscience. When a Magistrate examines any
matter or any man loosely and but superficially, it is by reason of ignorance,
negligence, or partiality: so we shall bewray one of those evils in us, if we
do not diligently and thoroughly try our estates, and examine our selves. Thus
we see how we ought to examine our selves. As Christ says Take heed how ye
hear: so I say take heed how ye examine. There is Luke 8. 18
an ill manner of hearing, and an ill manner of examining: he that will examine
and try himself aright, must not only try by the right touchstone, but in
the right fashion. It will not be here amiss to declare also the end why we
must prove our selves. The end is two-folde, principal and inferior. The
principal end is the glory of God, which ought above all things to be sought
for of all men in all their actions, therefore Paul says (1. Cor. 10. 31)
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. The
inferior end is two-folde: First that we might know our selves and the case we
are in, that so we might prepare our selves for the receiving of the Lords
supper. Secondly, that we might confirm the good assurance or persuasion that
we have of our good estate before God, For true and new obedience unto the
commaundments of God, does plainly demonstrate that the obeier is the child
of God, the member of Christ, within the kingdom of grace, and an heir
apparent of the kingdom of glory. But obedience performed to this one
comma^dment of examination in the right manner, which I have before declared,
is true and new obedience, and is in him only that is careful to observe all
other commandments, which he knows to be Gods. Therefore he that obeieth
this one precept as he ought to do, may assure himself that his state is good
before God in this world, and shall be glorious with God in the world to come.
And so much for the fourth general point and for the doctrine it self. The
uses thereof come now to be delivered.

CHAP. 16.
FIrst we are taught to take heed that we do not come to the Lords table
without serious and sound examination of our selves. How can we know that we
go prepared if we do not prove ourselves? And how can we know the depth of our
hearts unless we sound them to the bottom? A man shall receive very little heat
from the fire, if he stay not at it, but pass hastily by the hearth: So we
shall but ill discern and understand our hearts, if we do but glance at them,
as by the way, and search them only superficially, and not narrowly. Who can
know the nature and course of the sun without serious search and study? Even
so no man can rightly know the nature and course of his soul, and the
disposition and motions of his heart, except he do very diligently, seriously,
and laboriously, search and examine them. For man's heart is a mine of
wickedness, and a gulf of deceit. It is full of secret corners and winding
stairs, and will apeare often more glorious then indeed it is. All is not
current money which has the Kings picture upon it: neither are our hearts
always good metal when they seem good: therefore if we will not be deceived
let us search them truly, and touch them thoroughly, and never cease proving
them, till we may with good warrant approve them. For as wind and fire gather
strength in proceeding: so the further we proceed in the diligent performance
of this duery, we shall be made more able to go throughstitch with it. And as
natural bodies, the nearer they come to their places, do move so much the more
swiftly: so shall we in the course of this examination, to our great comfort
and commodity. And thus by our careful and constant trial of our selves, we
shall manifest our obedience unto God, we shall declare the care we have of our
own welfare and welldoing, and the more eager we shall make our selves upon
this duty, and procure such an appetite and affection to it, as that we shall
be more swift and nimble in performing of it; and not easily driven from it,
till we have finished it in some honest and laudable manner.

Secondly, as we must in examining our selves beware of the common custom of
many, which slubber over this and all other christian duties, or else pass by
it without any regard thereof at al:so also we must take heed of the wily
stratagems and pleasant enchantments of Satan and our own Flesh, which are
false hearted and full fraught with fraud and subtilty. Lastly we must beware
that we do not conceive of this sacrament, and of those other things (whereof
we must examine our selves) according to the sentence and determination of the
Romish Sinagogue, which is the chair of pestilence, and the throne of
Antichrist. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees: take heed of her
partiecoloured and linsi-wolsi doctrines, and because the Light (o^ word) of
the Pro. 20. ^7
Lord is the breath of man, and searches the bowels of the belly, and is a
discerner Heb. 4. 12
of the thoughts and intents of the heart and therefore the fittest touchstone
Occultum nil esse sinit latebra^e; per ov^nes intrat, and obstrus^^ explorat
qu^sque ^^e^ssus.
to try our selves withal; it is meet that we should acquaint our selves with
it. The more we are ignorant in Gods word, the more unfit we are, and unable to
perform this duty. For it is the only true rule of our examination: And as
the Marigolde or Dazie does open and shut with the daylight, so should our
examination begin and end with and in the word. The love of ignorance, is the
life of ignorance, and the life of ignorance is the death of the ignorant: for
the wages of every sin is death, yea an ^uer-liuing and an everlasting death.
For Eze. 18. 31 Rom 6. 23 Is 66. 34
this death is life, and that life is death, a life of horror, and an horrible
death, a death of terror and a terrible life. Now what wise man would endanger
his soul, and expose both soul and body to such infinite and such
inextricable misery by taking delight in ignorance in Gods word? Men are
careful to shun small and momentary dangers, were it any wisdom then to
thrust themselves upon this, that is so great, as it can neither be described
with pen, nor uttered with tongue, no nor yet conceived of the mind? Many men
bend their thoughts upon the search of natural things, and many spend much
time in laboring to know the states and fashions of countries and kingdoms,
and to have understanding in liberal and illiberall, sordid yea and impious
arts and sciences; and shall not we study to understand the sacred scriptures,
which are the Oracles of God and his Law-booke, by which we may see and sift
our selves, and learn to direct our feet, to govern our very thoughts, and
to prepare and dispose our selves for every good work whatsoever, whether it
concern God immediately, or our neighbor, or our selves in special?

Those which affect the knowledge of things natural, and politic or civil,
and neglect or respect not the knowledge of Gods word, are not unlike those
foolish children, which busy them selves in turning over the leaves of their
books to look for fine letters and painted babies, nothing regarding the
solid and substantial matter, which is contained in their books: and not
much unlike Martha, who was busied Luke 10. 41
about many things but not about the best: or the Pharisees, who tythed Mint
and Commin, but omitted the waightiest matters, M^t. 23. 23
which the law required. Let us therefore search the scriptures, as our Savior
commands, and labor to understand the will of John. 5. 39
God revealed in them, and so we shall be able to unmask our sins, and
discover our souls, and fit our selves for the Lords Table. David says, I will
meditateon thy precepts, Psalm. 1 ^9 ^5 54
and consider thy ways: thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my
pilgrimage. And prays, Blessed 12
art thou o Lord, teach me thy statutes: open mine eyes that I my see the
wonders of thy law: and make me to understand the way of thy precepts. And the
Holy ghost describing a blessed man, says, that his delight is in the law of
God, and that he does meditate therein day and night: As Psalm. 1. 2
we therefore respect the commaundment of Christ, and the practice and
resolution of David, and as we desire to be in the roll of the blessed, and
assured that we are out of the rank of reprobates, and of unprepared
communicants, let us acquaint our selves with the word of God, and make it
alone the Touchstone of our trial, and the line to measure all our actions,
and the Judge to determine of all our ways and of our whole estates.

Thirdly, for so much as we are commanded to use this examination, as a means
to make us fit for the Lords table, we are all taught, to take heed that we
make not Gods decree a means to make us negligent and secure.

For there are some desperate and prodigious wretches, who make conscience of
no duty nor of any religious action, because (they say) it is to no purpose,
seeing God has set all things down in an unchangeable, irresistable, and
irreuocable decree. It is true indeed that Gods decree is eternal, constant,
and immutable, and yet nevertheless, we may, yea we must use all honnest and
lawful means, for the effecting of that which is convenient and good. Because
as God has ordained the end, so he has also subordained the means, whereby it
shall be brought to pass. Because God has decreed either the victory or the
overthrow unto an army, must the captains therefore be negligent, supine, and
lazye? Must the Soldiers therefore cast away or not use their weapons? Must
they therefore abstain from prayer and from fighting? God has decreed the
destruction and desolation of the whore of Babylon: so he has also ordained
the means to effect it. Ten Kings shall hate her, and make her desolate and
naked, Reu. 17. 16. In like manner as the Lord has decreed that a man shall
receive the Lords supper aright, so he has also to that end decreed that the
same man shall prove and prepare himself. Paul was not ignorant of Gods
decree, yet we see that he requires the performance of this duty, which he
would never have done, if he had judged it needelesse and of no use. And
indeed we must not make Gods decree or secret will the squire and rule of our
actions, but his revealed will. Whatsoever God commands us in his word to do,
that we must do with all lowliness of spirit, without grumbling and disputing.
His word is our warrant: and his precepts must be our practice. Abraham must go
when God bids him go, though he know not whether: even so we must prove our
selves, seeing God commands us, though But we know^ hy^ a^ before was (...)
we knew not why. For God is our supreme and absolute Lord, his commandments
are not idle or unreasonable: and as Pliny writes of the Pi. Romans 13. 8
ralis or Fire-fly, that it lives so so long as it abides in the fire, and
dies if it leap out, and fly any thing far into the air; so it may be said
of us, that by desert we die so soon as we do transgress any of Gods
commandments, and either break down or leap over the pales of his precepts.
Reave 22. 14
But blessed are they that keepethem, for they shall live: they do live the life
of grace, and shall live the life of glory, Ezekiel. 18. 22.

Fourthly, all those communicants verse. 4
are in fault, who receive the Sacrament without due trial before they come.
They neither respect the thing they take in hand, nor regard the Apostles
exhortation: and therefore they bewray their disobedience and disloyal hearts,
and show themselves negligent and careless of their own peace and welfare.
For what peace is there, or what comfort can there be in sinning against God,
and leaving those things undone which he wills to be done? Those which know
their Masters will, and Iame. 4. 17
will not do it, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. And to him
that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is a sin.

Fifthly, seeing that examination Verse 5.
of a man's self is commanded to be made before this sacrament be received, we
see plainly that those ought not to be admitted unto it, which are not able to
examine themselves; as mad men, and children, and all such as have either no
knowledge of Christ at all, or not sufficient, albeit they do profess
Christian religion. Ebrius infamis, erroneus, atq, furentes; ^u^^ pueris domini
no^ debent, sumery corpus.
For not only Drunkards, Thieves, Madmen, Heretics, and such as are
infamous for some notorious vice, but children also and ignorant persons
(though for conversation civil) must not be permitted to receive this
Sacrament. For first, examination is required of every receiver: secondly, 1
Cor. 11. 25
meditation and remembrance of Christ's death: thirdly the rites or actions used
in this sacrament are not fitting to infants; as receiving, eating, drinking.
Lastly, circumcision was under the old testament appointed for children, (and so
acordingly we baptize children) but the Pasouer belonged to those only that
were of age at least to ask what it meant. It is true indeed that the
Sacrament or sign and seal belongs to those to whom Christ (the thing
signified) does appertain, but yet only according to Gods determination and
appointment propper to each Sacrament, to wit, so as that the sacrament of
initiation, admission, or entrance into the church be given both to children,
and men of years, bu to the male only in the old testament, and that also
not before the eight day, but in the new testament (that is now) both to male
and female, without limitation of time, and that the sacrament of Nutrition and
continuance in the Church be given to those only, that are of years and
discretion, and that by reason of one peculiar end (to wit, the annuntiation of
Christ's dcath) and of the different circumstance of the action. And albeit our
Savior says that none shall have life in them, unless they eat his flesh and
drink his John 6. 53
blood, yet it does not follow that the sacrament of his body and blood should
be given unto infants: for he speaks not of sa^ramentall eating and drinking,
but of that which is merely spiritual or by faith. Neither does he there mean
infants at all, seeing they are utterly destitute of actual faith, which none
have, none can have, but those that have discretion, knowledge and
understanding. This shall suffice for the first Doctrine: a second follows.

CHAP 17.
SEcondly, for so much as the Apostle commands a man to examine himself, I
conclude that a man's principal and chiefest care must be to prepare and prove
himself in porticular. The reasons of this concl^sion are many. First, the
Scriptures both here and else where do prove it by express precepts. David
says, Examine your own heart. HAGGAI says, Psalm 4. 4 Hag. 1. 5.
Consider your own ways in your hearts. PAVL says, Let every man prove his
Galat. 6. 4
own work. And again, Prove your selves, examine your selves, know ye 2
Cor. 13. 5
not your own selves? Now the holy scriptures a^e Gods own oracles, given by
inspiration of God. For these 2 Ti. 3. 16
and all the other holy men of God 2. Pet 1. 21
(...) our selves in special, and that by our selves. The lord will have me^
dilligent to know the state of their flocks, and bids the^ take heed to their
herds; Pre. 27* 23
therefore good cause have we to be dilligent to know the state of our hearts,
and to take heed to our selves Shall me^ prove their oxe^, and try their
horses, and shall not we prove and try our selves? shall an honest and painful
sheepherd observe and attend upon his sheep? shall he prove and veiw them
diligently, that he might have a sound and fruitful flock, and shall not we
observe and attend upon our selves, that we might have sound souls? shall not
we ponder and prove our hearts thoroughly that we might be fit to receive
Christ, and that we might approve our selves unto God, and present our selves
unto him (as we use to do at the Sacrament in the way of thankfulness) as an
holy and lively sacrifice acceptable unto him by Jesus Christ? Shall men fit
their cattle for faires and markets? and shall we dress up our selves, when
we go to feasts and public meetings? And shall we not prepare and fit our
selves, and trim up our souls, when we come to this spiritual banquet and
market, in which we set our selves before the great God and graund Commander of
all the world; and wherein Christ Jesus and his inualuable and all-sufficient
merits are set before our eyes, and offered to us: which we may buy without
gold, without money, without merchandise: and which we may touch, we may
taste, we may eat and drink faith, freely without surfeiting, without
fullness, and yet to the full: We can never be so full of them, but we may well
desire to feel them more, and to feed and fill on them still; They are so
swee^e in the mouth, and so plea^ant in the maw, so good of taste, and so easy
of digestion. Finally, shall we dress up our houses, shall we in our own
persons see al things set in order, when we are to receive and entertain some
great man; as the King, some noble person, or our Landlord? And shall we not
our selves labor to deck and dress up our hearts and to order all things
aright within us, when we mean to receive the Sacrament, yea, to welcome and
entertain the King of glory, the Lord of life, on whom we do depend, and by
whom we have and hold our lives natural, spiritual and aeternall, and the
true title unto, and the right use of all our lands and goods: who is also our
King to govern us, our Intercessour to sue for us, our Shield to protect us,
our frieud to counsel us, our food to releive us, and our God to save us. Yea,
we desire to be fitly dressed and prepared: therefore let us ransacke and
prove our selves, And let us do it our selves. For we can best do it: and it
will be best done, when we do it our selves. The heart is best acq^ainted
with it self: and either is, or should be most faithful to it self, and
more studious of her own good then another either is or can be. Thus much for
the first use.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves to correct the curiosity of many men, who
spend much pains in examining and judging of others, but never call themselves
to a reckoning. There are some as quick sighted a^ Eagl^s, to discern and
spy out the sins of other men but as blind as Beetles, when they have to do
with themselves. But if it would please them to look upon themselves, to turn
their eyes into their own breasts, and to examine and weigh themselves, they
would not have so much leisure to censure and search others. If they would take
due and true notice of themselves, they would have work enough within doors,
and might well spare their curious inquisition, and unnecessary prying into o
there men. We have yrons enough of our own in the fire: we need not curiously
and ouerbusily meddle with other men's, least our own should be burnt in the
mean time. I do not task those, that are called to examine others, and do
contain themselves within the lists and limits of their callings: but those
only, that are curiously and without any calling occupied in this work, or
which are wholly taken up with examining and preparing of others, never
thinking seriously of themselves, or sildome, and not so often as they should.
He which examineth others, or councels the^ to examine themselves, and shows
them how to do it, and in the mean while forgets, or lets pass himself, is
like the man, that directs an other, and erreth himself * he may be a
means of good unto others, as those were, that built the Arc, and yet perish
himself (if he take not heed) as they did. Thus much for this second Doctrine.
A third follows.

CHAP. 18.
ANd so let him eat. In that the Apostle having exhorted us to examine our
selves before we come to the Lords Supper, does immediately add a new
Commandment, or exhortation saying; And so let him eat, etc. I gather these
three Doctrines.

First; that it is not sufficient for to allow of himself, to approve
himself to God and to his own conscience, and to be persuaded in his heart
that he may come. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin: but no man has any
sure warrant out of Gods word to come, unless he do approve himself before.

Pro^ation without Approbation will stand us in little stead: yea, it will
bereave us of all excuse. For if we will not labor that we may approve our
selves, and that we may be approved of God, when by proouing of our selves
we find our hearts amiss, and our states but evil and unorderly, we show
our selves, desperately negligent and secure, we tempt the patience and long
suffering of God, we make our selves more guilty of our own destruction, we
sin the more grievously if we come to the Lords Table, and we leave our
selves without excuse before God, if he judge us for coming so. We knew our
duty: we saw the danger: we were privy to our defect and vnpreparednesse:
We neglected our duty: we weighed not the danger: we sought not to prepare
and approve our selves: we yet went, we would go: and so we wittingly ran,
and rushed upon the sword of vengeance, even the pike of our own destruction.

Moreover, the Greek word, (...) translated examine or prove, does also
signify, to approve or allow, and is so taken and translated, Romans 14. 22. and
1. Cor. 16. 3. A man may prove himself and yet not approve. But surely
Paul's meaning was that a man should approve himself before he came to the
Sacrament. Therefore I see not but that the word in this place may be taken in
both senses, to prove and approve our selves; and so it may be understood in
Gal. 6. 4. Now that we we may approve our selves rightly, we must labor
that all our works be according to Gods will, performed with an honest heart in
the name of Christ unto the glory of God. And that we may do thus, we must
labor to be bathed in the blood of Christ, and to be pertaker of his Spirit,
who may inform our judgments, and reform our hearts, and make us conformable
to the will of God, and for to strive to please him in doing that which is
good, and abandoning that which is evil.

Let us therefore (brethren) not only prove, but also approve our selves.
For one end of our proouing, is that we might labor to approve our selves,
and that we might be approved of God, and accounted meet to receive the
Sacrament of his son. And further, we shall reap great comfort to our souls,
gathering assurance that we are in Gods favor, in the state of grace, and out
of the state of damnation, out of the rank and rabble of reprobates, and in
the number of Gods elect.

Secondly, I gather that it is not we come: but that we ought also in the very
act of receiving, or in the very time thereof to approve our selves. Paul
says; So let him eat: that is approouing himself, and finding himself
meet, and prepared to receive. For a man may examine, and approve himself
also, and yet receive unworthily, if after his examination and app^obation he
should fall into some capital and grievous sin, and so receive before he have
renewed his faith and repentance, by apprehending and applying the blood of
Christ for the remission of it, and by the desiring pardon of it, and by
sobbing and sorrowing for it, and accursing it to the pit of hell from whence
it came. Therefore Paul's meaning is, that we must not only prove and
approve our selves before we do receive, but also we should approve our
selves when we do receive, allow of our selves as of prepared Guests in the act
and article of receiving.

Thirdly, I gather that, when a Let him eat, says Paul. It is a Precept, and
not a bare permssion. He does not say, Let him eat and drink if he so please.
The former words are a commandment wherefore then should not these be so
likewise? The Greek words are of one person, and of one mood: they are of the
commanding or imparatiue mood: and they are used in one verse, about one
matter, and one in the neck of another. It follows;

CHAP. 19.
Eat of this bread and drink of this cup. The word bread, has diverse
significations in the Scriptures.

First, it is taken for bread properly, as in Genesis 14. 18. And Melchizedech
brought forth bread and wine.

Secondly, by it is sometimes meant bread corn, or corn whereof bread is
made, Job 28. 5. Out of the same earth comes bread, and under it there is as
it were fire turned up.

Thirdly, it is put for Manna, Ex. 16. 12. And in the morning ye shall be filled
with bread, that is, with Manna, as Moses does expound it in the fifteen verse.

Fourthly it signifies sacrifices, as in Mal. 1. 7. Ye offer unclean bread
upon mine Alter.

Fifthly, it is taken generally for all things necessary for the maintenance
of this present natural life. And so it is used in the Lords prayer, and in
Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread; that is, thou
shall get thy living.

In this place it is used in his proper and natural signification. Now our
savior ordained bread to be the Sacrament of his body, by reason of the
analogy and similitude of the properties and effects of the sign, and the
thing signified. For;

First, as corporal bread is made of corn, so spiritual bread is made of the
body of Christ.

Secondly, as bread is baked in the oven with the heat of the fire: even so the
body of Christ was (as it were) baked with the fire of the Cross, and prepared
to be the food of the soul.

Thirdly, as bread asswageth hunger, and strengthens the heart, and
preseruet^ the life of the body: so the merits of Christ's body stays the
hunger of the soul, and strengthens it to eternal life.

Fourthly, as bread profits the hungrye, and not those that are full: so the
merit of Christ's body does benefit those only, that hunger after righteousness,
but those never a whit, which swell with the opinion of their own
righteousness and perfect purity.

Fifthly, as bread distributed amongst many is a token of concord: so also the
body of Christ sacrificed for the sins of many, is a token and pledge of his
good will toward us, and of mutual good amongst our selves.

Sixthly, as one and the same bread is made of many grains: so we many, who
partake of one bread, (one in a common notion of the Sacrament, and received to
one end, but not one in number) are one mystical body of Christ.

And it pleased him to make choice of bread rather then of flesh, because he
did not respect the color or external form (in which regard flesh is likest
to flesh) but the strength or virtue to releive and nourish, which is greater
in bread (the staff of life) then in the flesh of any creature whatsoever.

By Cup, the Apostle understands the wine in the cup. Now Christ instituted
wine to be the sign of his blood for the resemblance, that is between the
properties and effects of wine and his blood. For;

First, as wine is a most sweet liquor coming out of the vine: so the blood
of Christ is a most delicate drink for the soul: he is the Vine from whence
it came, John 15. 1.
and the Grape ou^ of which it was squized.

Secondly, as wine slaketh the thirst of the body: so the merit of Christ's
blood quenches the thirst of the soul.

Thirdly, as wine makes the Psalm. 104. 15.
heart merry, so the blood of Christ received by faith does comfort the soul,
and makes the heart joyful.

Fourthly, as wine warmeth the body and drives away cold: so the blood of
Christ expels the coldness of charity, and heateth our hearts with zeal
and love.

Fifthly, as Wine causes the countenance to shine, and remooueth palenesse: so
the merit of Christ's blood takes away the palenesse of the soul, and makes
it look fresh and fair as a rose. It lays the stormy winds of the
conscience, and makes us seem comely and amiable in Gods sight. Whatsoever a
man sees through red glass, will appear red, ^o whatsoever God beholds
through CHRIST'S blood seems lovely, fair and beautiful.

Sixthly, as wine makes a man cheerful, stirring and active: so the blood of
Christ received by faith, stirs up the soul and makes it cheerful, quick
and nimble, about good works.

Seventhly, as wine procures speech, and causes the heart to break out into
Songs: so the blood of Christ makes us ^loquent and musical in the confession,
and commemoration of his benefits conferred freely to us.

Lastly, as wine stirs up the spirits, and makes men bold and hardy: so
the blood of Christ applied by faith to the heart, will make men stout,
valorours, and constant, and fill them with spiritual fortitude and
magnanimity.

By this Bread and this Cup, the Apostle means sacramental bread and wine:
that bread and wine, which is appointed and set apart to be the sacrament, the
sign and seal of the body and blood of Christ, and to be received of the
Church, in memorial of his bloody death, for the redemption of the Church.
This shall suffice for the explication of these words.

The Doctrines, which remain to be collected from them, and to be
propounded, are especially two.

CHAP. 20.
FIrst, I conclude out of these words of PAVL, that they, let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup. He will have them to drink as well as to
eat. Secondly, the Greek word, which in the beginning of the verse, is
translated Man, is commune to both Sexes, signifying women as well as men.
Thirdly, the Apostles writes to all Christians in Corinth, and reprooueth the
unworthy receiving of many, and prescribes a remedy to them all. But the
greater number were of the Laity or people, and not ministers: it was not a
church consisting wholly of Pastors, or Praelates and Ministers. Therefore not
only Ministers, but others also, whether men or women, may receive the wine as
well as the bread, and the bread as well as the wine. Yea, when they do receive
the one, they must receive the other: not one only, but both. For so they are
commanded. Christ says. Take, eat, Mat. 26. 27
drink ye all of it. And according to his commandment, They All Mar. 14. 23.
drank of it. Fourthly, Christ instituted an entire Sacrament consisting of
two signs, kinds, or parts; to wit, bread and wine: and according to Christ's
Institution, our Apostle prescribes the receiving thereof under both kinds. But
it is horrible rebellion to repeal and impugn the ordinances of Christ, and
no small sin not to follow so great an Apostle in that wherein he follows his
Lord; but to disobey his prescript and precept, given unto us by Gods special
inspiratio^. Fifthly, the new Testament, remission of sins, and the
commemoration of Christ's death, does belong not only to Ministers, but to
Lay men, and women also: why then should they not be partakers of the cup, or
the wine in the cup, seeing it is a sign and pledge of the new Luke 22. 20
Matthew. 26. 28.
Testament, and of his blood which was shed for the remission of the sins of
many and does notably resemble the effusion thereof upon the Cross? Sixthly, it
was the Communicating under both kinds, was in the Church 1300. years The
Cup was first (by public decree) taken from the people in the counsel of
Constance, 1484
custom of the ancient Church to minister and receive both the elements.
Chrysostom says; Non est apud nos vt in lege veteri, vbi aliae parts ex Hom.
8. ^ri. Cor. 11.
victimis dabantur Sacerdotibus, aliae vero cedebant offere^tibus: sed nobis
Omnibus idem Christi corpus proponitur atque idem poculum: Unto us All is
proposed the same body of Christ, and the same Cup. Ignatius, says to the
Philadelphians; One bread is broken to All (...), and one cup was distributed
to All. Gelasius says, that the Division of one and the same mystery cannot
be made (sine grandi sacrilegio) without great sacrilege. Licet Christus suis
d^scip^lis administ rauer it sub ^traqu^ panis and ^in^ specie etc.
And the Council of Constance, (though it took the Cup away) confesses
plainly that the Communion under one kind, was neither instituted by Christ,
nor used in the Primitive Chuch. Therefore the Church of Rome commits
sacrilege in robbing the people of the cup, and shows her self to be of a
rebellious, arrogant, and refractary spirit (ill beseeming a loyal and obeent
wife) in ouerth warting and crossing the holy ordinance of Christ and the
practice of the ancient Church. Therefore ^et us herein give care to him that
says; Come out of her my people, reu. 18. 4 Her arguments are very feeble and
ridiculous, and cannot abide the touchstone of sound reason, and the sun-light
of the Lord. False Wares are not for light shops: and a true Touchstone will
discrie copper.

CHAP. 21.
SEcondly, in that the Apostle says, let him ^ate of this bread, and drink of
this Cup, I conclude whole Christ with all his benefits. For the confirmation
of this conclusion, we have first (besides this) other express phrases of
Scripture: secondly, other arguments grounded upon the word, and upon good
reason: thirdly, the judgment of the Primitive Church for many hundred years
together after Christ.

For the first, Paul says; The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? For we that are many, are one bread and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread, 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. And
again, As often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink of this Cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and
drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall he gu^^tie of the body and blood
of the Lord. 1. Cor. 17. 26, 27. Here is not a word of any transubstantiating,
or turning the bread and wine, into the substantial and true body and blood of
our Lord, but a plain distinction made betwixt the signs and the things
signified without annihilation or corporal alteration. And Christ himself,
says at his last Supper, after that he had blessed the cup; I will not drink
henceforth Matthew. 26. 29.
of this fruit of the vine, etc. By which it is evident, that he and his
disciples drank true wine. It is true (I confess) that Christ says expressly,
This is my body: but Matthew. 26. 26. Christ's body is threefold: natural,
mystical, and Sacramental.
without doubt his meaning was not, that the bread was truly turned into his
body. For first, it were very absurd to imagine, that Christ did eat his own
body: and therefore also as absurd to say that the disciples did eat it. Now
the bread is his sacramental body, that is, the Sacrament, the sign and
seal this body: and the word (I^) is as much as signifies as in Luke 8. 21.
For he and they did eat of one thing. Secondly, there are other places of the
Scripture like unto this, which show that his speech was not proper, but
figurative: and it is strange that they, which stand so much upon figures,
could perceive none here. Genesis 17. 10. Circumcision is the Covenant, that is,
a sign of the covenant. Ex. 12. 11. The Lamb is the Lords Passover, that
is, a sign and pledge thereof. 1. Cor. 10. 4. The rock was Christ, that is, a
sign of Christ. Thirdly, we must needs understand a figure in the word Cup:
and a figure is granted of all, even of the Adversaries of this doctrine;
wherefore then should it sound against reason to hold that speech to be
understood by a figure?

For the second: It is against common sense, that Christ's body, which is
finite and circumscriptible, should be in so many places together so far
distant one from an other: and that accidents should remain without a subject,
as if the whiteness of the snow should continue, when the snow it self is
melted. It is true indeed that the power of God is great: but yet he neither
does, nor will do, whatsoever he is able by his power for to do. He can of
stones make children unto Abraham: he can consume the world at one instant,
but he does not, neither will do. And again: there are some things which God
cannot do. He cannot lie, he cannot deny himself. he cannot break his
promise, and go against his word. He has said that the heaven must contain
Act. 3. 27.
Christ, till the time that al thngs be restored: therefore he shall be there
above, and is not here below. Yea further, God cannot make one thing to be, and
not to be at one instant. He cannot make the air to be wholly both fire and
water at one moment. God cannot make the body of Christ to be both a true
body, and not a true body, circumscribed and not circumscribed to have
dimensions, and to be without dimensions: to be in heaven, and upon the earth
also in a thousand distinct places at one and the same Article of time, and to
be as long, as broad, and as thick in a piece of bread as it was, when it
hanged upon the Cross.

Secondly, we believe that Christ's body was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin Marie, therefore sure it is not made of Bakers bread.

Thirdly, the nature of a Sacrament requires that there should be an outward,
visible, and corporal sign, as well as an inward, and spiritual thing
signified: but the doctrine of Transubstantiation does overthrow the sign.

Fourthly, if we allow of transubstantiation, we shall not receive the body,
that was delivered to death for us: but some other thing, which an hour before
was not a body, but plain bread.

Fifthly, when a Mouse eats hallowed bread, what eats she? does she eat
the shadow, the shape and likeness of bread? For those Alchimists hold, that
the substance of the bread is gone. Now it were absurd to say, that a mouse
could feed upon naked accidents or mere colors. What the^ does she eat? the
body of Christ? How absurd and impious were it to imagine? It remains
therefore that the substance of the bread does still continue. If the bread
after Consecration be burnt to ashes, and the wine cast into the fire, whence
come the ashes? And whence is the smoke and hizzing? Surely they cannot come of
mere accidents, as shape, color, dimensions, etc. Therefore it is safest to
hold the continuance of the Elements, as touching their substance. For the
third, we have herein also the consent of the ancient Church. Ambrose says,
that the signs are the same (Quaeerant) which they were * De sacra. l. 4. c. 4.

Theoderet says, that those mystical signs do not go from their nature
after consecration: Post sanctificatione^ no^ recedu^t a natura s^a. Di^. 2.

Gelasius says, that the signs remain in the property of their own nature,
Gelas-contra-Eutye.

Augustine says, we cannot with the hand touch Christ sitting in the heavens
but by faith we can touch and apprehend him. In Ioh. Tract. 1.

Irenaeus says, that a Sacrament requires two things: the one earthly and the
other heavenly.

Walefridus says, that Christ delivered the Sacraments (or signs and seals)
of his body and blood to his disciples (In panis and vini substantia) in the
substance of bread and wine. cap. 16.

And because many stand upon the bare words of Christ, saying; This is my body,
and will admit no exposition but the literal, acknowledging no figure in them,
let us observe the judgment of two or three ancient Doctors.

Augustine says, that the Lord stuck not to say, This is my body, in so much
as he did give the sign of his body Contra Adimant. c. 12.

Cyprian says, that the Sacraments have the names of those things, which they
signify Epist. 102. ad Euod.

Chrysostom says, that the bread after consecration is counted worthy of the
name of the Lords body, Etiamsi natura panis in ipso permansit, although it
have the nature of bread still remaining in it. Epist. ad. Caesar. Mon^ch.

Theodoretus says, that the Lord has honored those visible signs with the
name of his body and blood, (...) not altering their nature, but adiecting
grace unto nature. Now that grace, which is added to their nature, is in that
those outward elements are made Sacraments, or outward means and instruments
of Gods spirit, for the confirmation conservation and augmentation of the
Communion of Christ in us, and signs and seals of the love of God unto us in
Christ. And whereas the ancient and orthodoxall Fathers do use the words of
Conversion, mutation and trans^usion, when they speak of the sacrament, we
must know that they understand a change or alteration in respect of use, and
not of substance. And albeit, Cyprian say, that the bread is natura mutatus
changed as touching the nature of it, yet he means only that it is changed
in the Sacrament, in regard of the natural and common use thereof (being set
apart and sanctified to signify the body of our Lord) and not in respect of
the natural substance and essence: and therefore in the same place he says it
is not effigy mutatus changed in shape and likeness. Now Cyprian never was
acquainted with that learning, which makes accidents to subsist without their
subject. For the old learning, which was in his time and long before, was (that
Accidentisesse est in esse, and that Subblato subiecto tollitur ^ccidens) that
no accident, no shape or fashion could continue without the thing wherein it
does subsist, and on which it does depend. For to say otherwise, were as if a
man should say, that the redness of the face can continue, when the face is
quite defaced and consumed: or that the colors of the rainbow may remain,
when the cloud is vanished and dissolved. It may be then demanded, why christ
should rather say, This is my body, then this (that is, this bread) signifies
my body? I answer, that he used that speech, because it was his pleasure to
declare more expressly, that the bread is not set before us to be considered as
it is in it self; that is, as it is bread, but that we ought to behold and
lay hold upon that with the eye and hand of a lively faith, which is
represented and signified by the bread, as if the bread were not the sign
thereof, but the thing it self, which is signified by it.

And albeit we deny both transubstantiation, that is to say, that the bread and
wine are turned into the body and blood of Christ, and that he is bodily
present in, with, under, or about the elements, vet we hold and teach, that he
is truly and really present, and not absent from h^s Supper: but mark how.
Not bodily, for his body is in heaven, and there shall continue till he come
unto judgment. How then? I answer. Christ is present in respect of his grace,
power ^aiestie and operation, communicating himself and all his merits to us
truly, but spiritually, and lifting up our hearts unto himself into the very
heavens, that there we might behold him (that was our sacrifice of
reconciliation) in his celestial sanctuary, and feed upon him with a lively
faith. In one word, he is present in respect of our faith, which joins
things that are far distant in place one from another. We do not therefore deny
the real and true presence of Christ, but we do only deny that he is
present in a bodily manner.

The consideration of these things, serves to condemn the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, which teaches that the elements after the words of
consecration are truly turned into the body and blood of Christ: so, as that
nothing remains of the Elements at all, saving nak^d and mere accidents,
which are perceived by seeing, tasting, and touching. And according to this her
doctrine she squareth out her practice; persecuting with fire and faggot, with
sword and word, those that will not subscribe unto it: and yet there is no
footing for it in the word of God; not one sentence nor syllable, which vpholds
or favors it.

Let us therefore detest and accurse it, and let us desire the Lord of his
mercy to open their eyes that hold it, daily increasing the number of true
Christians, and weakening the kingdom of Antichrist, that the Gospel may
flourish, and that the Kingdom of Christ may be enlarged to the consolation
of the faithful; and glory of God; unto whom, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
be rendered all honor, laud and power, for ever and ever. Amen.

Trin-vni Deo gloria.

