THE Excellent Historye of Theseus and Ariadne.

Wherein is declared her fervent love to him: and his Traiterous dealing
toward her: Written in English Meeter in Co^mendacion of all good women: and
to the Infamy of such light Huswyues as Phedra the sister of Ariadne was:
which fled away with Theseus her Sisters Husband: as is declared in this History.

By Thomas Vnderdowne.

Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes: and are to be sold at his Shop,
ioynyng to the Southwest Door of Paul's Church.

1566, 28. of January.

The Preface to the Reader.
Seeing the prick whereunto the Line of our life guydeth us, is knowledge of
things whereof we are ignorant: and that of all knowledges, none is more
estimable or worthy for those that acknowledge them selves by the names of men,
then the Science of the Natures and qualyties of things: and of Natures, the
best and most excellent is the acquaintance with Mankind, and knowledge of
his conditions. I have thought it good (gentell Reader) to set before thine
eyes Thistorie of Theseus and Aryadne: the which, though the Style and Meetre
be to base for so perfyte a Pattern of so many things: yet by the persuasions
and earnest request of diverse and those my very friends, I have given it thee:
wherein thou maiste behold, as in a Glass almost all manner of dealings for
sundry kinds of purposes. As if thou seek for true love, look upon Ariadne:
who adue^tured her fame, body and goods to go with Theseus. If thou seek for
good counsel, how to eschew the blasynge brandes of the fyerye flames of
love, see Phedra. If Craft, Dissimulacion, Perfidye, Periurye, or forgetfulness
of good turns: behold Theseus. If thou crave an Example of unnatural lust,
lechery: or as I might say, incest: let Phedra come before thine eyes: who
having no respect to honesty, fame, ire of the Gods, nor kynred: entysed
the unconstant Theseus to forsake her Sister, and love her. Certainly in that
she was a woman, she deserved pardon: but in that she was a Sister, she
deserved perpetual ignomynie and everlasting shame and dishonor. And seeing
the Sister may not trust her Sister, sith both came out of one belie, and
sucked of one pappes: what other will be so mad, or so much without reason as
to trust a woman? whose dishonest parts have hitherto, and yet do so properlye
play their Pageantes, as no tongue can tell, no Pen can write, nor any heart
comprehend: I will not that any honest and virtuous Woman be towched with that
I mind to say: but they only who in reading hereof, shall by any means
find them selves agreeued. And I will touch no point, but only Beauty.

For if I should say, what I have seen, read and hard, a year were to
little to tell of their tricks.

Assuredly, he that desires a fair woman armeth him self to a right great
and dangerous adventure: and why? a fair woman is nothing but a gasynge
stock of ydell folks: an earelye waking for them that be light: and she
that is desired for her Beauty in her youth, may hope too have but a sorye
life in her age.

An infallyble Rule it is, that she that is desired for her fayrenesse, is
hated for her sowlenesse: and Beauty of truth is not perpetual, but fades
as the flowers and green grass. Also he that has a fair woman must suffer
her pride: for Beauty and Pride go always together. Also he must suffer her
expenses: for beauty in the face, and folly in the head, be two worms that
fret the life, and consume the goods. Also he must suffer her Ryotes: for a
fair woman will, that none but she have her commandments in the House.

Also be must suffer her nyce Mynions: for a fair woman will pass her time
in pleasures. Also he must suffer her Presumption: for every fine and fair
woman will have preeminence before all other: and at a word, he that has a
fair woman is apparelde with as great peril as ever was Cartha with Scipio,
Jerusalem with Titus, or Rome with Brennus: No man complayneth that the Gods
among his destenies have given him a foul wife: let every man choose as him
list. The noble Armynus of Carthage for the space of fourscore years wherein he
ruled the common wealth there, was as strange to women, as famyliar to his
Books. And this age passed, his friends desired him instantlye to take a wife,
that the memory of so perfyte a wise man might remain to the posterytie: and
the more earnest they were, the more he resisted and said: If she be foul, I
shall abhor her: if she be fair, I must take heed to her: if she be rich, I
must suffer her: if she be poor, I must maintain her: if she be a shrew, I
can not forbere her: and the least plague of these is sufficient to slaye a. M.
men. But let us see how they of old time passed their days, and let us
consider whither the Grafts that were slipped from these trees, be any whyt
degenerated from the old stock. Myrrha lay with her father. Byblys caused her
brother Cannus for unjust and unnatural lust to be banyshed. Medea slew her
Brother Absyrtus, thereby to escape her fathers danger* and follow Jason into
Greece: and this our Phedra left her sister in a vast forest a pray to the
fierce and cruel Beasts, and ran away with her Husband. I speak not of any
light fault, but of such, whereby the fawties have gotten them no less reproach
in their time, the^ shame with us by being Examples of so filthy factes. As
for those that live now with us I fear me, they shall be as ill reported of
time to come, as they be hated now with wise and ancient men: their looks be
so lofty, their gate so stately, their apparel so disguised, their courage so
hawtye, that you may muse to here of their manners gestures and behauiours, no
less then they were Monsters, or things wherein Nature either had erred, or
would not show her force. And where in time passed, all that was done
otherwise then honesty permitted was done very secretly. Now (I know no cause
why) they that be dyffamed do as much rejoice in their naughtines, as they
aforetime were ashamed of their misdedes: I can allege no reason why such
things should come to pass now, rather then in times paste: but that our
women live so yedellye, that they eschew all honest labor, and whollye
addicte them selves to dishonest idleness. For this is certain: where the
hands is occupied: there, the heart must needs do somewhat: and if I say not
true, let any man allege when ever there were more ydell Women in the whole
world, then is now in the small Circuit of England. I read, how diverse
have been commended for keeping them selves close in their Howses, using them
selves discretelye with company: moderatelye with their Household: decentlye
with their Husbands. But never was any lauded, for leadynge of an ydell life.
You idle Dames whersoeuer you be, tell me I pray you? what was the cause that
Penelope was so much honored in her time, and left eternal memory of her
good renown to us after her death? What trade of life led she when Ulysses
was at the Siege of Troy? she being a Queen did paynfullye spyn and keep
her house, and for all the knot of gentell Woers that she had, she never left
her work to dallye and toye with them, though her Husband were away.xx.
years? What did the wicked Torquyne find the good Lady Lucres doing when he
came to rauysshe her? If ye know not (O ye amorous Ladies to you I speak) I
will tell you: she sat spynnyge with her Maids: and being deflowred: she
neither gave Torquyne thanks for his good will, nor reward for his pains, but
flewe her self, because her Husbands bed was defiled. Let these to Ladies
be Examples, to you (O ye Ladies enamorous) how you shall occupye your selves
in your Howses: they were no vile women, for the first was Queen of Ithaca,
the other a Consuls wife of Rome. But I suppose you cannot away with spinnynge,
for that utterly takes away all vain thoughts, and occupyeth the mind
with honest studyes: for all the Senses be moved by it: the eyes with seyeng
that the threde be well twyned: the ears with hearing the sownde of the
wheel: the hands with turnyng it about, so that no place is void of doing
somewhat: whereby no ill can tarry or reign in ye heart: thus much I have said
because Ariadnes idleness caused al her grief: for if she had not be^ idle, she
had not gone out of her chamber: if she had not gone out of her chamber, she had
not come to the Laberynthe wherein Theseus was: if she had not gone to the
Laberynthe, she had not hard his complaint: if she had not hard his
complaint, she had not loved him: if she had not loved him, she had been safe
from the chance which happened to her: as in the Historye shall be declared.
Ydlenes is therefore the ground of all vice, and overthrows quyte all the
foundations of Virtue. But as I have said of these two, I might speak of many
mo: but this is enough if it be well understood. But to leave this, and come
to the Historye again, from the which I have a little dygressed: if thou look
for an example of paynfulnes, take them all, and think with how great pains
they slew and subdued the fell Monster Mynotaurus: If thou desire to here of
vnmercyfulnes of Parents, cast thou eyes to Theseus, who lost his father Egeus
through his defaut. But because it is but little touched in this Historye, I
will pretermyt that: If myserye, call to mind Aryadne left in the wilderness:
and to be short of all unhappiness let her be a Pattern. I might apply each of
these to diverse other common places: but the^ I should make my Entry greater
then my whole House. I will therefore leave the rest to be scanned of thee
(gentle Reader) and if I shall perceive that this is welcome to thee, hereafter
as occasion shall serve, thou shall encourage me to do the more: Thus hoping
that thou will take in good part whatsoever is said herein, I bid thee
farewell: desirynge thee if ought be amysse, frendlye to correct it, or
gentlye to admonysshe me thereof. Farewell.

A Rule for Women to bring up their Daughters.
YE Mothers that your Daughters will
bring up and nurture well:
These Rules do keep, and them observe,
Which I shall here now tell.
If they will go or gad abroad,
their legs let broken be:
Put out their eyes if they will look
or gase vndecentlye.
If they their ears will give to bark
what other men do say:
Stop them up quyte, if give or take,
then cut their hands away.
If they dare lightly use to talk,
their lyppes together sow:
If they will ought lightly entende,
let Grass upon them grow.
And at a word, if she be ill,
let her ill aunswers have:
And for her dower give sharp words
and for her house a grave.
Therefore ye Mothers, if ye use
and keep my Rules in mind:
Daughters you shall have none at all,
or those of Phenyx kind.
Finis.
The History of Theseus and Ariadne.
THere dwelt sometime in Crete a king;
that mighty Minos hight:
Who had to wife Pasiphae,
a passing wylye wight.
This careful Queen bewailed sore,
her husbands absence long:
She did lament with pensive thought.
her injury and wrong.
And most for that dame Venus sport
she wanted such a space:
There was no man in all her Court,
that could deserve her grace.
They were each one to base of blood,
or of to low degree:
As that they might obtain or have
so peerless a Lady.
And why? she did mutche more esteem
her honor and her fame:
Then that she list to hasard them,
with such reproach and shame.
Thus did therefore her broylyng breast,
invent to put in ure:
Least that her ardent secret flames,
should not be kept in sure.
A Cow of wodde for to be made,
she did therefore devise:
Compacte with connyng handycrafte,
and perfect Artifice.
For Dedalus the Carpenter,
did frame it in such sort:
As it once seen, you would in deed,
a very Cow report.
For it one were within the wood,
the gynnes were trimmed so,
That if they were plucked aright,
the Cow would walk or go.
This work when it was finisshed,
the queen for her solace,
would oftimes get into the same,
and sit in it a space.
Till that the Gynnes she could once turn
and rule them as she list:
Then she to work her wanton will,
begyns as she thynkes best.
Somtymes she goes, sometimes she ronnes
somtymes she lies still:
And finally she does each thing,
that pleases her wicked will.
Then smelling ointments does she take
and does annoint this Cow:
For to provoke the boisterous Bull,
as women know well how.
This done she goes into the same,
the Bull also is brought:
And there betwixt the Bull and Cow
is pretty pastime wrought.
Pasiphae thus has her will,
except I be beguylde:
Soon after this congresse was done,
the Queen was found with child,
Shortly after, the king retournde
and did lie by this queen,
And she was great of king and Bull,
at once, as then was seen.
For when she should be brought to bed,
came forth a Monster fell:
That had both shape of man and beast
as ancient Stories tell.
The Fame of this deformed Beast
hard Countreies near and far,
And for because two forms he had,
men called him Mynotare.
This furyous Feende, this hungry thing
would eat naught else but men,
Wherefore from all the sorye Lands,
that Mines conquered then.
There comes many men by lotte,
this hungrye Beast to feed,
And how they speed for to rehearse,
ywys it is no need.
Till at the last noble Theseus,
Good king Egeus son:
Who for his sake from Turrets top,
In sea headlong did run.
Came into Crete to Laberynthe,
Wherein this monster was:
There for to end his glorious life,
from wealth to woe to pass:
Where he once put with clamours huge,
began to extol his cry:
Bewaylyng much his fatal fall,
and present myserye.
With these, or other such like words,
he did begin his moan:
Salted with sighs and bitter tears,
he was so woe begone.
What do avail my warlyke prowess,
my strength and hautie heart:
They can not in this seoberdye,
at all releas my smarte.
Ah wretch full of calamytie,
alas what hap have I?
In Crete thus in the Laberynthe,
in prison strong to dye.
Why did I not submytte my self,
to Tygres tirranye?
Or rampynge Lions dagynge teeth,
or ennemies cruelty.
Why did not Giaunts me subdue?
or Wolves in wyldernes:
or Serpents stynge in time tofore,
ryd me from this distress.
Why did not thou Hippolite,
thine ennemie overthrow:
Which now is in extremetie,
in myserie and woe?
Why did thou not threeheaded Dog,
thou Porter of Hell gate:
Destroy me quite, when I did thee
so cruellye assaute?
Why did I not some poison take,
to ryd me of my life:
Why did not cruel dynt of sword,
stynt all this hateful strife?
Oh all ye Gods that all things guide,
whom men do gentell call:
Why do ye not pety my grief,
and raise me from this fall.
Remember me whom ye have made,
a kings son lo I am:
In warlyke force and hardines,
surmountynge every man.
In flower of youth without redress,
Oh cruel Destenie:
Do lie in fear, alas the while,
lookynge when I must dye.
My weapons all are raught from me,
wherewith I me defend:
Well, weal away, I say no more,
but thus will make an end.
This said, the bitter tears and sighs,
his senses do oppress:
So that ye never saw a man,
in so mutche heaviness.
All this complaynt and woeful cry,
king Mynos Daughters hard:
And were in mind, if that they might,
to take him out of ward.
And thereof spoke thelder maid,
unto her sister dear:
Doste thou not here this man quoth she,
that makes this ruthefull cheer?
I bear quoth she, and do bewail
this woeful wretches case:
What shall we do to help alas,
we have no time nor space?
Well, well: quoth Ariadne thoe,
(that was the Elders name:)
I will provide some spedye help,
come what will of the same.
And thou my sister Phedra dear,
assist me as thou can:
For I must either die therefore,
or else enjoy this man.
For I do love with such a zeal,
and with so fervent love:
That I can not abide such flames,
I swear by the Gods above.
This said: the younger sister said,
alas what will thou do?
Oh sister dear, now rule thy self,
and let such folly go.
Remember thou king Mynos wrath,
remember thine own fame:
And how the world will speak of thee
both vyllanie and shame.
Oh can thou not content thy self,
with thine happy state?
Why will thou cast away thy self?
why do thou thy wealth hate?
Do thou not know that no Realm is
safe from king Mynos sight?
Do thou not know that all the world,
is subject to his might.
Which way will thou thy self convey
where he shall not thee find?
Therefore let this thy folly go
and put it out of mind.
Do thou not know ye kings are wont
long hands to exercise?
Do thou not know that kings are said
that they have Lynres eyes.
Do thou not know that Mynos is
of nature very fell?
Thou know all his qualyties,
I neade them not thee tell.
But put the case thou have thy will,
mark well what I thee say:
He will at length forsake thee quite,
and cast thee clean away.
Example take by Sylla fair,
king Nysus Daughter dear,
Who upon promysse made to her,
by Mynos king or sier.
Who promised to carry her
with him into his land:
If that she would her father give,
and City to his hand.
She did with haste and dilygence,
perform his whole request:
But he alas unto her pain,
did frustrat his behest.
Did not Medea by her means,
young Iasons life preserve:
What curtesye and gentleness
did her good will deserve?
She kept him safe from ennemies force,
from Dragons stynge also,
She slew her Brother for his sake.
and with him she did go.
Yet he at length did cast her of,
such is the Greekysh kind:
And will thou now a Greek believe,
who has bewitched thy mind?
Do thou therefore such foolysshe toys,
out of thy mind let slide:
And never let such fancies force,
thy unconstant head to guide.
This said, her sister wared read,
and looked lowryngly:
As though that she displeased were,
yet kept it secretly.
Least that her Sister should disclose,
her pryuie enterprise:
Which she would not should come to pas
in any manner wise.
And spoke with silent voice again,
what panges of dolfulnesse
Do I sustain? what weepynge wayles
can half enough express?
The flames that I do hydden keep
within my burning breast?
Oh sister dear assiste thou me,
that I may get some rest.
I do not weye king Mynos wrath,
I do it not regard:
So that I may my Theseeus
deliver out of ward.
What do I care, what men do say,
of me, when I am gone:
So that I never here their talk,
and I shall leave to moan.
And so should I be happy then,
which now unhappy prove:
Then should I save my self which now
do languysh, lost in love.
I do not care for Mynos might,
as mighty men as he:
Have mist their will of meaner men
then Theseus and me.
I know that Mynos might is great,
yet love is greater much:
And such as fear his Ire or wrath,
leave of to love let such.
I know that kings have arms long
and that they can see far:
Yet Love is far without their reach:
they can not see so far.
I know that Mynos is both fell,
and of great cruelty:
And if that he us apprehende,
I know that we must dye.
But come or hap what will to me,
I care not for his might:
For if that I might Theseus have,
I were a blessed wight.
Thou ought not (sister) to compare
Mynos with Theseus:
The one is roughe and hasty both:
the other courteous.
I know not what young Jason was:
ne of what stock he came:
But if he did, as you report,
he has deserved blame.
But sure I am that Theseus,
his promys made, will keep.
And I twyse happy should then be,
in his sweet arms to sleep.
But I alone, do I, I say
alone attempt by flight:
My love to have, and him enjoy:
is this so strange a sight?
Has not such chances chanced before
for Lovers to have joy?
Did not Dame Helene company,
sir Paris unto Troy?
Did not trusty Theagenes,
conuaye Cariclea:
Until they came with much ado,
to Ethiopia.
Where after many sturdye storms,
and burning broylynge past:
They did enjoy each other both,
long looked for at last.
I could rehearse thee many more,
if I had time and space:
But all to long I fear alas
we tarry in this place.
These words did quayle her sister well
and forth they go both two:
Unto the Den where Theseus was,
in myserye and woe.
They call the Porter unto them,
and bid him open the door:
And in they go together both
and stood Theseus before.
And Ariadne spoke to him,
and said sir how fare ye?
Alas Madame but ill quoth he,
in this extremytie.
And in such sort they talk a while,
then did she speak again:
And would you gladly sir quoth she,
be eased of this pain?
If you will promys me one thing,
and grant me my behest:
That when I shall desire you,
you will grant me my request.
We will seek means all that we may
for to deliver you:
We will assiste you as we can,
this Monster to subdue.
When Theseus hard so joyful news,
he fell upon his knee:
And did request her of her aid,
and that right spedelye.
And I quoth he, will all things do,
that you can me command:
I will be yours, all that I have
I put into your hand.
Therefore Madame, help me I pray,
that am your own at will,
Lo I am yours at all assayes,
to save, or else to spyll.
Therefore say on Oh courteous Queen,
here say what is your will:
Some service do to me command,
and I will it fulfill.
Naught else I will of thee quoth she,
but that thou promys here:
That thou will carye us with thee,
into thy country dear.
And that thou shall me take to wife,
and live with me for ay:
This sure, and thou delivered,
shall be this present day.
Oh Lady fair, happy were I,
yea thryse happy I say:
If you would me accept your man,
and your servant always.
And as for Marriage, I suppose,
that you will not bestow
your self on me: whom here tofore,
you have not seen ne know.
And as for me, I do confess,
I am to base of blood:
As that I may attain unto
so fair a Queen and good.
Alas, what is poor Theseus?
what is Egeus son.
Whose fate is such, that still he must,
his myserie bemone.
But if you will vouchesafe taccepte
me, for your man or slave:
As I that in your mercy lies,
either to lose or save.
I were mutche bound unto your grace,
I were much bound I say:
And I now am, and still shall be
your own, at each assaye.
Leave of quoth she these words, and swear
I know well what thou art:
Come of, and do as I request,
and ease my pain and smarte
And thou straight way shall be exempte
from prison and from ward:
Do as I say, if thou have ought
upon thy self regard.
Well than quoth he, since me your make
you will vouchsafe to have:
Which would be glad, if you so would
to be your page or slave.
Mark well and hark what I will say,
mine answer thus shall be,
Which I will still auouche and keep
what so betyde of me.
I swear to you by all the Gods,
and powers in heavens hye:
By all the spyrytes that hell do rule,
the earth and sterry sky.
That I will be your man and make,
both now and eke for aye:
Still you to love, and none but you,
if you save me this day.
And these also, that you do bring,
I will them still defend:
From time to time as need shall be,
until my life shall end.
When in such sort his oath he made,
Oh Lord how glad was she,
Her blood did come, her heart did leap,
she began to wax merye.
Then by and by they take in hand,
this Monster for to kill:
And Balls of Here and Pitch they make
to give to him his fill.
None was so earnest in this work,
none labored so mutche:
As Arsadne did, as whom
these wisshed Joys did tutche.
And to be short, with travel great,
and with great toil and pain:
This disformed Beast, this Feend so fell
was murdered and slain.
Then speed they make unto their ships
while as it was yet day,
And Phebe had not with her stars
chased the light away.
With haste they get a boorde each one,
they labor all the night:
All do put to their helping hands,
to further this their flight.
Until Aurora did them tell,
that Phoebus was at hand:
And thereby found guess that they
approached to some Land.
In deed these Damselles could not well
abide the ragynge Seas:
Therefore they labor to get land,
thereon them selves to ease.
And then about the time that Sole,
approached to the place:
Where from the hiest heavens top,
he shows his shynyng face.
They leave their ships, and find a Land
where pleasures do abound:
Where they lie down to take their rest
upon that fruitful ground.
And those that sleep did not oppress,
they gather flowers gaye:
Or else did walk into the woods,
to drive their cares away.
Nothing there was in all the Land,
that could not move their spirits:
Their eyes, their ears and senses all,
moved them to brave delytes.
But Aryadne had good cause
not to have slepte at all:
Although it were to her unknown,
what should to her befall.
For Theseus, Oh traitor like,
when she so surely slepte:
Away from her as secretelye
as he could, from her crepte.
He gathered his men to him,
that wandered in the wood:
Were rangyng here, and walking there
as each of them thought good.
And hastily they went aboorde,
and lancht into the deep:
And left not one with her a shore,
where she alas did sleep.
Forgetting quyte her benefytes,
which she to him had done:
And how she had her country lost,
and parents left each one.
But so soon as she did awake,
and felt that he was gone:
She starteth up, and stares about,
but men she sees none.
She ronneth straight unto the place,
where as the shyps did stand:
Where she a far into the sea,
did look from Naxus land.
And when she had espied the ships,
where they away did sail.
She wept and wrange her hands apace
but what did tears avail?
And so soon as her tears did cease,
amyd her myserye:
She did begin with pyteous playnt
for to extol her cry.
What time quod she, this Theseus
by cruel fates constraynt:
Within my father Mynos Realm,
did utter his complaynt.
In danger with despair,
a loathsome life he led:
With scaldyng sighs and bitter tears
desiring to be dead.
But I poor wretch, alas I did
lay playsters to his sore:
That he had never after cause,
to weep or wayle no more.
I did repair his crased ships,
I did him treasure give:
I did my self bequeath to him,
still with him for to live.
I bancketted this Traitors men,
I vittayled them with store:
I showed them such pleasure, as
they never had before.
I did my loved country loathe,
my parents I forsook:
To go with him unto his land,
all pains I undertook.
And he likewise did swear to me,
by Gods and heavens hye:
That he always would be my man,
with me to live and dye.
Yet be my merytes does,
with falshed recompense:
Which love and loyalty he does
dispytefullye dispense.
Amyd a Forest wild and wide,
for Bears or Wolves a pray
He leaves me a sleep, and he
falsely does go his way.
His trustlesse truth, his treason tried,
his faith, his falshed found:
And I a woeful wretch in care,
as any on the ground.
To you ye Gods, I do complain,
to you this tale I tell:
Sith yt he has your names blasphemd
that he may hang in hell.
Revenge my cause, sith none but you
my whole estate do know:
That you be Gods, and will revenge
to Theseus do show.
And you also that here of me,
that be of Judgment pure:
Beware to fisshe in Fancies flood,
or else to drown be sure.
Beware, be wise, example take,
by Ariadnes pain:
Which helpyng him who helples was
she helples does remain.
This said: the Gods did her translate
into the starrye sky:
And gave her place among the stars,
where she shall never die.
FINIS.
Th. Un.


