AN EXAMINATION AND CONFVTATION of a Lawless Pamphlet, INTITVLED, A brief
Answer to a late Treatise of the SABBATH DAY: Digested Dialogue-wise between
two Divines, A and B.

By Dr. FR. WHITE, L. Bishop of ELY.

^ COR. 13. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. Hieronymu^,
de Luciferianis, dicit: Facilius eos vinci posse, quam persuaderi. LONDON,
Printed by Richard Badger, and are to be sold in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE CHRISTIAN AND JUDICIOUS READER.
THe Reason and Occasion inducing my Superiors to employ me in a service of
the Church, for penning and publishing a Treatise of the Sabbath, and of the
Lord's Day, is delivered in my Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord's Grace of
Canterbury: And my intention in performing thereof, was to deliver and
maintain the Orthodoxall Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and the Doctrine of
the Church of England, authorized by the Laws and Statutes of our Kingdom,
against the Sabbatarian Error of one Theophilus Brabourne: and because this
Errant had grounded the most of his Arguments, upon certain Principles
borrowed from some Modern Teachers of our own Nation, I was compelled to
examine and confute the same.

This service being with much Care and Diligence performed by me, I expected
some thanks for convicting and converting that Errant, and for preventing the
farther spreading, and infection of his Error: But at least I presumed to have
obtained a charitable Construction of such Passages in my Treatise, as were
subservient to a farther discovery of Verity: and that if any had found cause
of dissenting from me, they would in a charitable and peaceable manner, have
propounded their Exceptions.

It has now so fallen out, that contrary both to my desert and expectation, A
certain clamorous and audacious Scripturient, a Person of a very weak
judgment, but yet exceeding confident, and arrogant, has vented a Lawless,
and unlicensed Pamphlet, digested Dialogue-wise etc. wherein he Proclaims
with open mouth, that my Treatise of the Sabbath overthrows the public
Doctrine of the Church of England, touching that Question.

Now, the whole matter and frame of his Dialogue is so rude, and indigested,
and the Author thereof is so notorious for his ignorance, envy, and
presumption, that it rather merits execration, than confutation: and many
Persons of worth and quality, have persuaded me rather to contemn, than to
confute, either the work, or the workman.

But when I consider the cause it self, and the humor of factious people, who
are always ready to conceive their own fancies, to be irrefragable Verities,
if they pass in public without just reproof; I conceive, it can be no
indiscretion in Me, or dishonor for Me, to appear in defense of Verity,
against falsitie and iniquity, how base and unworthy soever the Author is,
with whom I shall contest.

Now all which I shall desire of the judicious Reader is; first, that he take
into consideration, the maine accusation of the Dialogist, which is; That in my
Treatise of the Sabbath, I have overthrown the public Doctrine of the CHURCH
of ENGLAND touching this Question.

Secondly, that he will duly and impartially consider, and examine in the
balance of true judgment, the Adversaries Exceptions, and Objections against
my Arguments and Positions; and my Answer, and confutation of the same.

Concerning the maine accusation of the Objector before mentioned, the Reader
may easily discern the falsity and iniquity of it: for the Doctrine of the
Church of England concerning the Sunday, and other Holy days, is in plain and
express terms delivered in the Statute of Quinto and Sexto of King EDWARD the
sixth, cap. 3. in manner following:

Neither is it to be thought, that there is any certain time, or number of
days prescribed in holy Scripture, but that the appointment both of the time,
and also of the number of the days is left by the authority of God's Word, to
the liberty of CHRIST'S Church to be determined, and assigned orderly in every
Country, by the discretion of the Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall
judge most expedient to the setting forth of God's glory, and the edification
of their people. Be it therefore enacted, by the King our Sovereigne Lord, with
the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all the
days hereafter mentioned, shall be kept and commanded to be kept holy days,
and none other: that is to say: All Sundays in the year; The days of the
Feasts of the Circumcision of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; of the Epiphanie; of the
Purification of the blessed Virgin; of S. Matthias the Apostle, etc. And that
none other day shall be kept holy day, or to abstain from lawful bodily*
labor.

The former Statute being repealed, Anno primo Mariae, cap. 2. was revived, An.
prim. R. IACOBI, cap. 25. and is at this day in force, as appears by the
book of Statutes; page 894. and by the judgment of the Reverend Judges, and
Masters in our Laws.

A Second passage, which I desire the judicious Reader to observe, is; That the
Doctrine concerning the Sabbath day, and the Lord's day, maintained in my
Treatise, agrees exactly with the unanimous Tenet of the Orthodoxall Catholic
Church of ancient times: and the same agrees likewise with the Tenet, both of
all the School Doctors, ancient and modern, and also with the Tenet of the
best learned and most religious Divines of the reformed Churches beyond Sea:
And lastly, the same is agreeable to the Tenet of the Holy Martyrs of our own
Church; Bishop Cranmer, John Frith, William Tindall, D. Barnes etc. And the
other opinion; That the fourth Commandment is a Precept of the Law of Nature,
and purely and entirely Moral: And that the observation of the Lord's Day is
expressly commanded by that Precept of the Decalogue, is a novell Position,
repugnant to all, or most Orthodoxall Divines, who have instructed Christian
people in the ways of godliness, in former or modern times.

Every one of the former passages, is so fully prooved and confirmed in my
Treatise of the Sabbath, that no just exception can be taken against my
proceeding, in handling this Question: and therefore the boldness, and
impudency of this blattering Dialogist is detestable, when he affirms, that
my Treatise of the Sabbath overthrows the Doctrine of the Church of England.

Lastly, all the Reward which I desire to reap for my travel in this, or in
any other service of the Church, is, that the Truth which I have faithfully
delivered, may be maintained, and my integrity be protected, against
graceless, impudent, and irreverent Calumniators, such as the Author of the
Dialogue has proclaimed himself to be, in this, and in some other of his lewd
and lawless Pamphlets.

For although this Dialogue penner has concealed his name, yet Ex ungue
Leonem, the world may easily conjecture who the Creature is, by his foul paw:
The Scope of his writing in his Pamphlets, is, to magnify his own Zeal,
piety, and integrity, to persuade the World, that he alone is left a Prophet of
the LORD, and is guided with the spirit of Verity and Fidelity; and that the
present Fathers and Rulers of our CHURCH, and other conformable Persons who
comply with them, are little better than Hirelings and blind Guides: And
(besides his ignorance, which is notorious) the violent Man, is so far
transported with bitter Zeal, that whatsoever proceeds from him, is litigious,
clamorous, scandalous, and abusive: and his Pamphlets are fraughted with such
Materials, as are apt to poison Christian people with contempt and hatred of
Ecclesiastical Government, and present Religion established in our CHURCH.
Also he is possessed with a graceless and malignant humor, to wit, look
whatsoever gives all other judicious and godly Persons best content, enrageth
him against such as are employed in the Government and public service of the
CHURCH.

But I shall detain my Reader no longer from the Examination of this Man's
Quarrels and Objections vented in his Dialogue; and my Answer, and Reply shall
make it evident, that the Doctrine propounded, and maintained in my Treatise of
the Sabbath (maugre the malice of this Blatterant) stands firm, and is not
subject to any just Reproof.

(...). Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

A devout Friend of all those, who are lovers of Truth and Peace. Fra. Eliens.

The Title and Inscription of the Dialogue.
A BRIEF ANSWER, TO A LATE TREATISE OF THE SABBATH DAY: Digested
Dialogue-wise, between two Divines, A and B: beginning with these words,
Brother, You are happily met. THE saying of Saint Augustine may justly be
applied to this Dialogist, to wit: It is an easy matter, for such as cannot be
silent, to frame babbling answers: and none are so forward to crake, as empty
Casks puffed up with Vanity; but although Vanity can make louder noise than
Verity, yet it will have no power to prevail against Verity. Aug. de Civ. Dei.
l. 5. c. 27. Facile est cuiquam videri respondisse, qui tacere noluerit. Aut
quid est loquacius vanitate? Quae non ideo potest quod veritas, quia si
voluerit, etiam plus potest clamare qua^ veritas.


Now upon due examination of the Cavils and Objections contained in this
Dialogue; it will be manifest, that the Author thereof is not a person in any
measure qualified with endowments and abilities, requisite and necessary for
such an Undertaker* to wit, with sound Judgment, sufficient Learning, love of
Verity, together with Modesty and Humility: For instead of solid and
substantial proceeding, the judicious Reader shall find nothing in his
Dialogue, but presumptuous Dictats; absurd and non-concluding Objections;
perversion of the true state of the question; solution of Arguments, by denying
the Conclusion, and pretermission of the Premises; abuse of Terms when he
cites Authors; rude and irreverent Behavior Hieron ad Nepotian. Nolo te
declamatore^ esse, and rabulam, garrulumque sine ratione, sed mysteriorum
peritum, and Sacramentorum Dei tui eruditissimu^. Verba voluere, and celeritate
dicendi apud imperitum vulgus admirationem sui facere, indoctorum hominum est.
Attrita frons interpretatur saepe quo^ nescit, and cum aliis persuaserit, sibi
quoque usurpat scientiam.
, toward the Person and Calling of Him, whom he styles his Adversary. And the
most of his Positions concerning the Sabbath, and the Lord's Day, are repugnant
to the common sentence of all learned and godly Divines, who have treated of
this Argument in ancient or modern Times.

This rude and graceless creature had not the honesty to consider, that the
Author of that Treatise, against which he barketh, undertook his Work by
command of High and lawful Authority: and the true Reason, inducing his
Superiors to employ him in this service, was urgent and important.

For a pestilent, and subtle Treatise was published (and dedicated to his
Royal Majesty,) in which the Author maintained, with much confidence, Theoph.
Brab. I am tied in conscience, rather to depart with my life, than with this
truth: so captivated is my conscience, and enthralled to the Law of God. H. B.
Law and Gosp. reconcil. ^p. Dedicat. A Book lately come forth, which would
utterly evacuate the Lord's Day, and reduce us to the Jewish Sabbath again,
which will be a work, so much the more necessary, by how much this Jewish
Sabbatarian finds already, many idle and g^ddy-brained Christians to embrace
the his Book, which is written, with a mighty, confident, and Giant like
spirit, as if the arguments thereof were invincible.
and with sundry probable Arguments; That the old Sabbath of the 4th
Commandment (and not the Sunday or Lord's day of every week) ought by divine
Law to be religiously observed in the Christian Church.

Now the Grounds and Principles, upon which that Sabbatarian builded his
error, were the same Positions and Dictats, which this Dialogue weaver, and
some late Teachers of our own Nation, have peremptorily maintained, in their
Pamphlets, Lectures, and Catechismes: and had those Positions, and Dictats
been divine Verities, it would have been impossible to have solved Th. Brab.
his Objections in a clear and substantial manner.

For it is most certain, that the Sabbath Day commanded to be kept holy in the
4th Precept of the Decalogue, was Saturday, the seventh and last day of the
Week Aug. Ep. 119. c. 10. Sabbatum co^mendatum est priori populo in ocio
corporali temporaliter, and ut figura esset sanctificationis in r^quiem
Spiritus Sancti: Nusquam enim legimus sanctificationem per omnes priores dies,
de solo Sabbato dictum est, et sanctificavit. Deus diem septimum.
: That day of the week, in which Almighty God ceased, or rested, from the
work of prime Creation: That very day, which the Jews perpetually observed in
their Generations: The same day, concerning which the Pharisees so often
contested with our Savior: The day which was a figure of Christ his resting in
his grave: and of our Christian Sabbatisme, or spiritual Resting from sin.
Read the Bishops Treatise, page 182, 183.

Now this being a certain and undeniable verity, it will be consequent, that
if the 4th Commandment of the Decalogue be simply, entirely, and properly
moral, and of the Law of Nature (as this Objecter pretends:) Then the
Saturday-Sabbath of every Week must be observed by Christians, and not the
Sunday or Lord's Day in the place thereof.

A necessity therefore was cast upon the Bishop to examine this, and such like
Sabbatarian Principles, and to demonstrate the falsity of them: For He was not
otherwise able, by any course of true Disputation, to solve Th. Brab. his
objections. Sine causa enimaliquis ramos conatur incidere, si radicem non
conatur evellere: Aug. li. 50. Homil. 8.
It will prove lost labor, for any one to endeavor to lop off the boughs or
branches of a Tree, if he shall still suffer the Root to grow.

Also because Th. Brab. had, ^^on the former Principles, styled the Lord's Day
an Idol, and a Superstitious Tradition: The Bishop thought it his duty to
vindicate the honor of that Day; and to deliver the true grounds, upon which
the Christian Church observes it: also to declare the Antiquity of the
Observation thereof: and the more to advance the honor of the Day, he
collected out of the Primitive Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, and Ancient
Records, sundry remarkable observations, concerning the Religious use, and
sanctification of this Day, Page 196. etc.

Lastly, because some Novell Teachers, here in England, had wronged this Day,
by converting it into a Legal Sabbath; and likewise they had presumed, without
any lawful authority, to lay heavy and unreasonable burdens upon God's people:
Affirming that all bodily exercise, and all civil passe-time and Recreation,
(although the same be sober and honest) is simply unlawful, upon all hours of
the Lord's Day; and not only unlawful, but a mortal and enormious crime, of
the same quality, and iniquity, with Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. The Bishop
had just reason, to discover the error and falsi^ie of such principles and
arguments, upon which these presumptuous Dogmatizers grounded their rigid
edicts, page 235. unto page 250.

Now after all this the Bishop himself is persuaded, and so likewise are his
Honorable and Religious Superiors, that he has performed faithful,
profitable, and necessary service to the Church (whereof he is a member) in
composing and publishing his Treatise of the Sabbath: And likewise his
confidence is, that those honorable and Reverend Commanders, who employed him
in this religious service, will ever protect him, Aug. de. Doctr. Christ. Sic
Doctor bonam eligat vitam, ut etiam bonam non negligat famam.
against base, envious, and scurrilous abuses and detractions (such as he is
rudely, and injustly loaded withal) by this unmannerly, and foul-mouthed
Dialogue-Broacher.

Nevertheless, if any learned, judicious, and modest Reader shall at any time
note, or observe any passages in his Treatise, seeming to the ^epugnant to
Orthodoxall Verity, Aug. de. Trin. li. 3. In omnibus literis meis non solum
pium lectorem, sed etiam liberu^ correctorem desidero.
let (...) proceed soberly, substantially, and modestly, in propounding their
exceptions; Ib. Noli meas literas ex tua opinione vel contentione, sed ex
divina lectione, vel inconcussa ratione corrigere.
The Bishop is, and ever will be ready (without giving the least offense) to
yield them a just and reasonable satisfaction.

But rude, envious, and clamorous Carpers (such as this Dialogue-Broacher is,
and has ever bin Hieron ad Julian. Gloriae animal, and popularis aurae vile
mancipium.
) are incompetent Judges, in Questions and Controversies of this quality: for
such Men's Tractats, and Pamphlets, contain nothing, but only that, which is
Verbal, Illiterate, and no ways sufficient to discover or settle Truth. The
end also of their writing is not Verity: but they study only to flatter an
irregular Multitude, which is adverse to Ecclesiastical Regiment settled in our
Church: and the Leaders of this Anarchicall Sect, by applying themselves to the
humor of these Proselytes, gain popular applause, Greg. Nazian. Orat. 8. de
pace. Ex rebus novis, claritatem famae venantur. Chrysostom. In Ioh. He. 65. Prava
doctrina nihil aliud est, quam inanis gloriae silia.
and likewise authority to make their own fancies, and traditions to be no
less esteemed, than Divine Oracles.

For being wily as Serpents, they have by long and subtle experience observed,
that impetuous speaking, clamorous inveighing, virulent declaming prevail more
with that generation, than solid, material, and substantial disputing.
Hieron. ad. Nepotian. Nihil tam facile, quam vilem plebeculam, and indoctam
concionem linguae volubilitate decipere, ^, quicquid non intelligit, plus
miratur. Id. c. Ruffin. li. 1. Quotidie in plateis sictus hariolus stultorum
nares verberat, and obtorto scorpione dentes mordenti^m quatit: and miramur, si
imperitorum libri lectorem inveniant?
Now this verbal form has the worthless penner of this Dialogue observed,
both in this, and in all other his unlicensed Pamphlets.

The Bishop of Ely his Positions, concerning the Old Sabbath Day, and the
Lord's Day, which are opposed by the Dialogue-Broacher.
Thesis 1a. The Law of the fourth Commandment, concerning the religious
observation of the Seventh Day Sabbath of every week, was not purely moral,
or of the Law of Nature, like as were the other nine Commandments of the
Decalogue.

This Position is confirmed by Demonstrative arguments, in the Bishops Treatise
of the Sabbath, page 26. unto page 37.

Thesis 2a. The Law of the fourth Commandment, concerning the Seventh Day
Sabbath, was Legal, in respect of the special Day designed by the letter of
that Commandment. The same Law, in respect of the literal Object thereof, is
ceased under the Gospel, and obliges not Christians to the religious
observation thereof, as it did the Jews in time of the Old Law.

This Position is confirmed by many weighty arguments, and by the Unanimous
testimony of the Ancient Fathers. Page 6. 7. 8. 148. 161. 276.

Thesis 3a. The Christian Church, in the New Testament, has received no
special, or express divine precept, in holy Scripture commanding the same, to
observe any one particular, or individual day of every week, rather than
another, for their Sabbath: Neither has the Christian Church received any
Divine mandate, to observe any day of the week, according to the rule of the
fourth Commandment, page 189. 239.

Thesis 4a. The observation of the Lord's Day, is not grounded upon the
particular Law of the fourth Commandment; But only upon the Equity of that
Commandment, and upon the practice and example of the holy Apostles, and of
the Primitive Church. And after such time as the Persecutions of the Christian
Church by Infidels ceased; Then godly Laws and Canons were framed by
Constantine the great, and by other succeeding Emperors, Theodosius,
Valentinian, Archadius, Leo, and Antoninus, and by Bishops in their Synods, for
the religious observance of the Lord's Day, page 109, 110. 135. 143. 189. 211.

Thesis 5a. The Sabbath day of the fourth Commandment, and the Lord's Day,
both in holy Scripture, and in the writings of the godly Fathers, are made two
distinct days of the week: Neither was it the ordinary style of the Fathers,
and Primitive Church, to name the Lord's Day the Sabbath Day, in a proper and
literal sense, to wit, in such a sense as the Jews styled their Seventh day
the Sabbath day, page 201, 202.

Thesis 6a. There is no Divine Law extant in the old, or in the New Testament,
prohibiting all secular labor, and all bodily exercise, and honest recreation,
upon some part of the Lord's Day, namely at such time of the day, as the
religious offices thereof are ended: much less is there found any divine Law,
which makes honest and sober recreation, in manner aforesaid, an enormous
crime, equal to Murder, and to Adultery, page 229. unto page 267.

Thesis 7^. The Sanctification of one particular day in seven, is neither any
principle of the Law of nature, nor yet an immediate Conclusion of the same,
neither is the same commanded by any written Evangelicall divine Law:
nevertheless the same is consonant to the Equity of the 4th Commandment of
the Decalogue; and besides, The religious observat^on of one day in seven, is a
convenient time, for GOD'S public and solemn worship; and the Christian
Church in all ages, since the Apostles, has deputed one weekly Seventh-day, to
the foresaid end: And therefore it is a thing just and reasonable, to continue
the same observation, page 91.

Thesis 8. There is no express Commandment written in the New Testament,
concerning the religious observation of the Sunday of every week, rather than
of any other convenient day or time. Nevertheless, because the Christian
Church ever since the Apostles age, has been accustomed to observe this
weekely-day; and it is a received Tradition, that the holy Apostles themselves
were the authors of this observation: and also the maine reason upon which this
observation was first grounded (to wit, the Resurrection of CHRIST, upon the
day, called the Lord's Day,) is a just and weighty motive to induce Christian
people, to observe this day in the honor of CHRIST, and to testify their
rejoicing and thankfulness, for the benefit of our SAVIOR'S Resurrection:
Therefore it is not expedient, decent, or agreeable to equity and good reason,
to alter the long continued observation of this day, into any other new day or
time, page 152.

Jncipit PROLOGUS.
A. BRother you are happily met.


B. And you Brother also.


A. I would I might spend an hour or two with you in private conference, in a
point wherein I have of late been not a little perplexed.


B. Why, what is the matter Brother?


A. Have you not seen a late Treatise of the Sabbath Day, published by an
eminent Antistes in this Church?


B. Yes, I have both seen and perused it.


A. I pray you, what think you of it?


B. I think it is a very dangerous Book.


A. What mean you by that?


B. I mean dangerous to the Author, if it were well examined, before competent
judges.


A. How so, I pray you?


B. Because it overthrowes the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the point
of the Sabbath.


A. Pardon me, that seems to me impossible.


B. Why?


A. Because he says expressly in the very title page of his hook: That it
contains a defense of the Orthodoxall Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Sabbatarian Novelty. And therefore I am confident* he will look to
make that good.


B. Be not too confident, you know the Proverb, Fronti rara fides: The foulest
causes may have the fairest pretenses.


Answ.
The substance of the precedent interlocutory babble is: The Bishops Book is a
dangerous book, and that to himself, if it were examined before Competent
judges: for contrary to the title of the book, it overthrowes the Doctrine of
the Church of England, in the point of the Sabbath.

Our answer to this accusation is, 1. that if we will rightly understand the
quality of it, we must first of all define who are Competent judges. Now the
holy Scripture, The Law of reason, and all prudent men require these properties
following, to the Constitution of Competent judges: 1. Lawful authority: 2.
Sufficient learning and knowledge: 3. Fear of God: 4. Wisdom: 5. Integrity
and love of Verity.

2 The Bishops Treatise of the Sabbath has already been examined by judges
qualified in manner aforesaid: Namely, by the two most Reverend Archbishops:
by many Reverend Bishops: by the Honorable Court of High Commission: by many
Reverend and learned Deanes: by many Doctors, and Professors of Theology: by
some of the learned Readers in Divinity, of both Universities: by Noble and
Prudent Statesmen: by eminent Professors of both Laws, civil, and temporal:
and the Kings Majesty himself, the Bishops Sovereign Lord and Master, has
graciously accepted it: and if these before named, shall not be esteemed
competent judges* Our desire is to be informed by our Brother. B. who, in our
Church or Kingdom, are competent judges? but especially let him resolve us,
who shall be those competent Judges, to whose sentence he will submit the
examination of his own unlicensed pamphlets.

3 The Bishop has not only affirmed in the title page of his Treatise, that
it contains a Defense of the Orthodoxall Doctrine of the Church of England,
etc. but he likewise has confirmed the same by arguments and testimonies
irrefragable. Therefore Brother. B. his proverbiall sentence, Frontirara fides,
is not (...), for it admits an exception, to wit, credit ought at all times
to be given to the Frontispice of every book, which confirms that which is
contained in the same by weighty and effectual arguments.

Now the conclusion from the Premises is: The Bishops Book can prove no
dangerous Book, either to himself, or to any other, if it were duly examined,
by lawful and competent Judges.

A. That is true you say. But yet I cannot be persuaded, that so great a
Personage would so far overshoot, as to give that advantage to those, whom he
makes his adversaries. Nay, you know his Book is dedicated to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, by whose direction, and that according to his sacred Majesty his
command, he was set upon this work: both for the preventing of mischief, (as
himself says in his Epistle Dedicatory to the said Archbishop) and to settle
the Kings good Subjects, who have long time been distracted about Sabbatarian
questions. Now if he maintain not, but (as you say) overthrow the Doctrine of
the Church of England, he will have small thanks from his sacred Majesty for
his pains, who is the Defender of the Faith of the Church of England, and has
often solemnly protested, Declaration about the Dissolving of the Parliament.
And Declaration before the 39. Articles.
and that in his public Declarations ^n print, that he will never suffer
therein the least innovation. And what thanks then can he^ expect from the Bp.
trow you? And instead of preventing, he will pull on greater mischiefs; And in
stead of settling the Kings good Subjects, he will fill their minds with greater
distractions. And therefore Brother, in so saying you lay a heavy charge upon
him. It is dangerous so to charge a Person of that Dignity, and Esteem in the
world. Take heed therefore what you say. You know also, that he is a great
Scholar, deeply learned, a Reverend Father of the Church, so as his judgment is
taken almost for an Oracle.


Answ.
The sum of the former discourse is: That the Bishop can expect small thanks
from the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom his Book is dedicated: or from his
Majesty, who will suffer no innovation in Religion: if he being of note for
learning, and a Bishop of the Church, has, in stead of settling the minds of
the Kings loving Subjects, distracted, or led them into error.

To this Verbal discourse it is answered, that the Bishop has already
received approbation of his work from his sacred Majesty: and as much thanks,
and respect from the Lord's Grace of Canterbury, as a faithful person can
expect, or desire from a Superior: and continuing as he has begun, he is in no
danger to lose either his Majesty's, or the Archbishops, or any other worthy
Persons lawful favor.

2 The Author (with thankfulness to God) protests, that He having bestowed
above two hundred of his books, upon Persons (among which, many were) of great
worth and quality, has never as yet received so much as one check or affront
from any one, since a three fold impression of the Book: And the Dialogue
deviser is the first Satan (so far as the Bishop is hitherto informed) who has
fomed out his gall and venom against it: Sed quamvis libraverit accusationis
suae hastas, and totis adversus nos viribus interserit: credimus in Deo
salvatore, quod scuto circumdabit veritas ejus, and cum Psalmista cantare
poterimus: Sagittae parvulorum facta sunt sagittae eorum; although he has with
all his might bent his Spear, and darted his Weapons against us, yet we trust
in God our Savior, that the shield of very y shall protect us, so that we may
say with the Psalmist; Their arrows shall be as the arrows of children. Hier.
adv. Ruffin. lib. 1.

3 The Treatise is so far from distracting the Kings loving Subjects, which
are of a loyal and peaceable disposition; that many intelligent persons, who
have diligently read, and examined the same (having in former time been
doubtful,) are now settled in a firm resolution, never to be distracted with
Sabbatarian fancies any more.

A. You know what is said in a late book allowed by Authority: Communion Book
Catec. expounded, by Reve.
That the holy Fathers in God, the Bishops, are to be guides in Divinity, to
the whole Clergy of inferior Order; So as all Priests are to submit to their
godly judgments in all matters appertaining to Religion. And the reason is
given; because the Fathers of the Church now and always do, in the great
mystery of godliness, comprehend many things which the common people do not:
Yea, also some things which Ministers of the inferior Order do not apprehend.
So as it is expected of those Holy Prelates, that we must lay our hand on our
mouth when they speak, and be altogether regulated by their profound dictats.


B. I remember well the Book, and I cannot but wonder, that those passages
were not expunged, with many others, when the Book was called in, and then the
second time published. You know we live in a learned age One, of whom it may
truly be spoken, None so bold as blind Bayard, may live in a learned age.
, and we deny the Popes infallibility, or that it can convey it self, as from
the head, and so confine it self within the Veins of the body of the Prelacy:
Or that a Rotchet can confer this grace Ex opere operato. And believe me
Brother, when we see such a Papal spirit begin to perk up in this our Church,
is it not high time, trow you, to look about us? Shall we stumble at the Noone
day, and in the Meridian of the Gospel close our eyes, and become the sworn
Vassals of blind Obedience Cusan. Exercitat. l. 6. Obedienti^ irrationalis,
est consummata obedientia, scilicet quando obeditur sine inquisitione rationis,
sicut jumentu^ obedit domino suo.
? No, no: In this case therefore, were Goliath himself the Champion, I would by
Gods grace try a fall with him.


Answ.
If bold Bayard were armed with David's spirit and fortitude, what Giant were
able to stand before him? But if his whole strength consists in wording and
facing only, Quid prodest Simiae, si videatur esse Leo Greg. Nazian. in
sentent.
? What can it avail an Ape, to conceive himself to be as strong as a Lion?
But passing by this vain ostentation, let us take the matter delivered by him,
into examination.

1 He censureth a modern Writer, for affirming, that the Bishops of the
Church, are Guides to the inferior Clergy, to direct them in matters of
Religion.

2 He disputes against this Position in manner following: The Pope is not
infallible; Ergo, the Bishops being Veins of the Body, whereof the Pope is
Head, cannot be Judges or Guides, to instruct the inferior Clergy.

3 He says, that the Author, whom he opposes, is guided with a Papal spirit.

Now this (as I conceive) is the Sum and marrow of the Dialogaster his
argumentation.

In answer hereunto, the Bishop says: that if this Objecter had intended to
proceed in a right method of Disputation, he must first of all have stated the
Question, and considered what Judicial power the Bishops of the Church of
England challenge concerning regulating and deciding matters of Controversy,
in Religion: and then he might have framed Arguments, made Inferences, and used
his Invectives, and Declamations, and not before. But being bold and blind,
and not regarding and considering the Churches Tenet, concerning Episcopal
power, he disputes in a rude and deriding manner; rather venting his malice
against the Order of Bishops (as Heretics Cyprian. l 3. Ep. 9. Haec sunt
initia Haereticorum, and ortus atque conatus Schismaticoru^, male cogitantium,
ut sibi placeant, and praepositum superbo tumore conte^nant.
in ancient times were wont to do) than delivering any thing true,
substantial, or to the purpose.

1 The Question is, whether Bishops lawfully called and qualified, according to
the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 3. have any power of judicature, in matters belonging
to Religion, or in questions Theological.

2 Whether they be Veins of the Pope, and guided by a Papal spirit, if they
challenge or exercise any such power.

3 Whether they can have no such power, unless they be endued with Divine
Grace, Ex opere operato.

Now to these Questions, our Answer is:

1 That Bishops lawfully called, and qualified according to the Apostles Rule,
have a ministerial and subordinate power, and authority to determine
Theological Controversies, by the Rule of holy Scripture, and by the
consentient Tradition and testimony of the ancient and orthodoxall Catholic
Church. For, Timothy and Titus being Bishops lawfully ordained Eusebius. hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c 4. (...).
, exercised such power in the Church Habiles and idonei, ad ecclesias quas ^^i
(Apostoli) fundaveran^, pascend^s, regend^sque estim^ti fuerint etc Hieron. c.
Ruffin. li. 2. Vtrum recipi debet, Episcoporu^ relinquitur judicio. Iren. lib.
4. cap. 43. lis qui in Ecclesus sunt Presbyteris oportet obaudire, quicunque
cum Episcopatus successione, charisma veritatis acceperunt.
: The Bishops and Fathers in the four first general Councels Eusebius. vit.
Constable. l. 3. c. 18. Quicquid in sanctis Episcoporu^ Conciliis decernitur, id
universum divinae voluntati debet attribui.
did the like. So likewise did S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Ireneus, S.
Athanasius, and all other orthodoxall Bishops in their times: and the inferior
Clergy, and other Christian people submitted themselves unto them.

2 To enable Bishops to exercise this power of judicature, in such manner as
they assume it, it is not necessary, that they be endowed with* miraculous
inspiration, as the Holy Apostles were: but they may attain ability to perform
this by diligent study, and meditation of holy Scripture, and of the learned
writings of the godly fathers, and by helps of good learning, and by the
assistance of ordinary grace: And this appears by the Bishops in the Councels
of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, and by Irenaeus, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Athanasius, Hilarious, Cyrillus, etc.

Thirdly, The Roman Jacob. de Graff. Decis. Aur. part. 1. li. 2. Omnia agit,
disponit and judicat, prout sibi placet, etc. Apud eum est pro ratione
voluntas, and quod ei placet, vigorem habet legis. Baron* Annal. An. 373. n.
21. Bosiu^. de sign. Eccles. li. 5. ca. 9. Greg. Val. in Tho. to. 3. disp. 1.
q. 1. punct. 7.
Pontife claims a twofold power of judicature, in quest^ons Theological: 1.
Such an infallible, unerring, and binding power, as that no Church or Creature
may appeal from his sentence or Tribunal in any case whatsoever. But the
Bishops of the Church of England challenge no such power but they maintain,
that the inferior Clergy, or any other Christian people, upon weighty and
substantial grounds of ve^^^le, may dissent from their sentence August. de
unit. Eccles. cap. 10. Nec catholicis episcopis consentie^dum est, sicubi forte
falluntur ut contra canonicas scripturas aliquid sentiant. Id. de persev.
sanct. ca. 21. Neminem velim sic amplecti mea omnia, ut me sequatur, nisi in
eis quibus me non errare perspexerit.
. 2. The Pope groundeth the infallibility of his sentence, upon immediate
divine inspiration, and because He is the supreme visible head of the
universal Catholic Church, succeeding Saint Peter, not only as a Bishop, but
as an Apostle Apud Gratian. did. 19. Sic omnes sanctiones Apostolicae sedis
accipiendae sunt, tanquam ipsius divina voce Petri firmatae. Aug. Triumph. Sum.
de. pot. Eccles. q. 6. ar. 1. Sententia Papae, and sententia Dei est una. Ib.
quaest. 18. ar. 4. Papa quantum ad dognitionem gratuitam revelatam, est major
Angelis. Gretser. def. Bellar. to. 1. ca. 1. Id Solum pro verbo Dei veneramur
and suscipimus, quod nobis Pontifex ex cathedra Petri, tanquam supremus
Christianorum magister, omniumque controversiarum judex, definiendo proponit.
Gulielm. Rubeo. ^. did. 19. qu. 2. Papa Christi vicarius, habet tantam
potestatem in spiritualibus, quantam habuit Christus, non ut Deus, sed ut homo
verus.
. But the Bishops in our Church, make not themselves Apostles, but are called
to be Pastors of the Church, by ordinary means, and likewise they attain
ability of true and right judgment by ordinary helps of learning, and by
ordinary assistance of divine Grace.

Now if it shall be objected, that the inferior Clergy, and many other good
Christians, may equal Bishops, and sometimes exceed them in Learning, Piety,
Virtue, and therefore Bishops may not be judges of the inferior Clergy.

Our Answer is, 1. That by the laws of our kingdom, and the Canons of our
Church, many learned Persons are appointed to be Assistants unto Bishops; and
in our National Synods (in which all weighty matters concerning Religion are
determined) nothing is or may be concluded, but by the common Vote and consent
of the Major part of the Convocation, which consists of many other learned
Divines, besides Bishops.

Secondly, to the end that order may be observed, discord prevented, and
Heresies condemned; it is necessary, that there be a power of judicature, in
some able and worthy persons: and our State walking in the way of pious
Antiquity Cyprian. Epist. 27. Inde per temporum and successionum vices,
episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super
episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus ecclesiae, per eosdem praepositos
gubernetur. Aug. Epist. 86. Episcopo tuo noli resistere, and quod ipse facit,
sine ullo scrupulo, vel disceptatione, sectare. Hieron. ad. Nepotian. Esto
subjectus pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suscipe. Id. adv.
Luciferian. Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendet: cui si non
exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis
efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes.
, has settled this power in the Bishops of our Church: for if it shall be left
free, to every singular, and private person, to frame a rule of faith, and to
judge and determine matters of Religion, and Theological questions and
Controversies, by his own private skill and spirit, it will then be
consequent, that there shall be no common Ecclesiastical rule of faith to
settle unity in Religion, but the people of the land will be divided into as
many Sects and factions, as themselves please Cyprian. li. 1. ep. 2. Neque
aliunde haereses abortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde, quod
sacerdoti non obtemperatur: Nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and ad
tempus judex vice Christi cogitatur, cui secundum magisteria divina
obtemperaret fraternitas universa. Idem. li 4. ep. 9. Vnde schismata and
haereses obortae sunt, nisi dum episcopus qui unus est, and ecclesiae praeest,
superba quorunda^ praesumptione contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honoratus
ab indignis hominibus judicatur?
: and a greater confusion must be among Christians, than there was in old time,
among Pagans and Infidels.

Lastly, it appears by the form of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, authorized in this kingdom, that the inferior Clergy are obliged
to submit themselves, to the Bishop, being their Ordinary, and to whom the
charge and government is committed over them.

The words of the book of Ordination, are these which follow:

BISHOP. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers,
unto whom the government and charge is committed over you, following with a
glad mind and will, their godly admonitions, and submitting your selves to
their godly judgments?


Answer: I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


Having thus far proceeded in declaring both the quality of Episcopal
authority, in judging the inferior Clergy; and also how necessary it is, for
preservation of verity and unity in Religion, that this authority be respected
and maintained: In the next place we will examine the weight of the
Dialogaster's objections.

If Bishops are to be guides to the inferior Clergy, in matters of Religion:
then the inferior Clergy, must lay their hands on their mouth; and be
altogether regulated by their Dictates. But this is unreasonable, etc.

Answ. No such thing will follow: for although the inferior Clergy are to be
guided by the Bishops in matters of Religion, so far as the Bishops instruct
them, according to the common rule of faith collected out of Holy Scripture,
and confirmed by the Vote of Primitive Antiquity, and which is approved and
ratified by the Church, whereof they are members: yet they are not absolutely
or altogether to be directed by the Bishops; for they have liberty to dissent,
if by weighty and substantial arguments they shall be able to demonstrate,
that the Bishops determination, or doctrine is repugnant to Orthodoxall Verity
Aug. ep. 28. Contra Cypriani aliqu^m opinionem, ubi quod videndu^ fuit,
fortasse non vidit, sentiat quisque quod libet, tantum contra Apostolicam
manifestissimam fidem nemo sentiat. Id de. Trin. li. 3. Prooem. In omnibus
literis meis, non solum pium lectorem, sed etiam liberum correctorem desidero,
etc.
.

But now again on the contrary, if any of the inferior Clergy proceed (as
the Dialogaster has done,) and be able to produce nothing weighty, effectual,
firm, or solid, but that which is merely schismatic, declamatory, and
verbal: Then there is just cause, that the inferior Clergy, in due
obedience, should submit themselves to Episcopal sounder judgment.

A Bishops Rotchet cannot confer Grace, ex opere operato: Ergo, The inferior
Clergy are not bound to submit themselves to the Bishops judgment, etc.

Answ. The ground of this objection is apparently false: for if inferiors are
not bound to submit themselves to the judgment of any, bu^ of such only as
have received extraordinary grace ex opere operato Causare Gratiam ex opere
operato, idem est, atque eam causare in omni suscipiente sufficienter
disposito, non per modum meriti, sed prout consideratur secundum entitatem
suam, quatenus habet rat one^ entis quodammodo naturaliter operantis. Coenick.
Cabrera. Gregor. Valent. Hosius. Bosius, etc.
, Then it will be consequent that Parochians are not obliged to submit
themselves to the instruction of their godly and lawful Pastors: Neither are
Children bound to submit themselves to their Parents directions, because holy
order, and paternity confer not extraordinary grace to Priests, or to
Parents, ex opere operato, to instruct their Parochians, or their Children, as
the Holy Prophets and Apostles instructed the Church, to wit, by a miraculous
power of inspiration.

Bishops have not such infallibil^ty as the Pope challenges: for we deny the
Popes infallibility, or that it can convey it self as from the Head, and
confine it self within the Veins of the body of the Prelacy. Ergo the
inferior Clergy are not bound to submit themselves to the Bishops judgment.

Answ. 1. If none may instruct and guide others in matters of Religion, but
they only, which have such infallibility, as the Pope claims Aug. Triumph.
Sum. de potest. Eccles. q. 6. ar. 1. Nullus potest appell^re a Papa ad Deum,
quia una sententia est, and una Curia Dei and Papae.
, and is conveyed from him as the head, into them as Veins: Then neither Saint
Augustine, nor any other of the Fathers, nor any other man since the Apostles,
might guide and instruct others in matters of Religion: for none of these had
such infallibility, as the Pope challenges, etc.

Secondly, If none may be guides to others in things Divine and Religious, but
such only as have the same infallibility which the Pope claims: How comes it
to pass, that the Author of this Dialogue, having neither extraordinary wit
nor wealth of learning, presumes to make himself a Judge H. B. Tr all of
private devot. Praef. I hear, alas, poo^e Burto^ he is cracked: coffeehouse,
or hope of preferment have embarked him in this perilous adventure: What shall
I say? Am I cracked? Wherewith? Not, I am sure, either with too much l^arning
(as FESTUS charged Paul) or too much living: And if I am mad, I am not the
first.
, and Instructor of others, not only in his own Cure, but of all men, learned,
and unlearned in the kingdom Cyprian. ad Iubaian Novatianus simiarum more,
quae cum homines non sint, homines imitantur, vult ecclesiae catholicae
authoritatem vendicare, quando ipse in ecclesia non sit.
: and if any man vary (as all Wise men do) from his placits contained in
certain irregular, and unlicensed Pamphlets. He forthwith stigmatizeth them
Hier. Apol. c. Ruff. Quicunq, te offenderit, quamvis simplex, quamvis innoxius
sit, ilico fiet criminosus.
in print, threatens to publish Books in Latin against them, He turns White
into Black Plea To the Appeal. page 5. The Puritans stick not to cast him (D.
Wh.) in the tenth, with, White died b^acke.
, He casts dirt in their faces, Tertul. c. Hermog. Maledicere singulis,
officium bonae conscientiae judicat.
and flings about with his heels, like a netled ^ade.

Now what partiality is this, to make the Reverend, and learned Bishops of the
Church, Veins of the Pope, because they by lawful authority guide and
instruct the Clergy, subject to their Episcopal jurisdiction: and in the
mean time that this Scripturient, having received no authority from God or
men, and being destitute of all abilities for so great a work, should
constitute himself a Judge Paramount, even in the most profound, and obscure
questions of Theology Greg. Nazian. Apolog fugae: stulte t^m^reque faciunt,
qui priusquam ipsi satis doctrina instructi sunt, aliorum se magistros
profitentur, Figlinamque (ut vulgo dici solet) in dolio discunt.
.

A. Brother, such a resolution had need have a good ground to stand upon: and
being a matter of such moment, it requires our best zeal and strength,
especially to vindicate the Doctrine of our Reverend Mother the Church of
England, which we have sucked from her purer Breasts, nor only so, but to
vindicate her name from reproach: for if it be so as you have said, that the
Doctrine of our Church is by that book overthrown, then consequently (as I
conceive) she must deeply suffer, and be wounded through the sides of those,
whom he so often in his Book brandeth with the odious name of Novell
Sabbatarians.


B. Brother, you conceit aright; for in truth, all those Calumnious, and
odious Terms which he gives to those, whose opinions (except Brabournes only)
he impugneth in his Treatise; as venomous Serpents, Noisome Tares, Pestilent
weeds, and Unclean Beasts (terms to be abhorred of all true Christians) and
in a word Novell Sabbatarians, they all result upon our dear Mother the Church
of England With lie and all.
. For who are the most of those, or rather all, whom he thus stigmatizeth? are
they not, or were they not in their time, the truebred Children of the Church
of Engl. all unanimously professing, and maintaining her Orthodox Doctrines?
Can therefore the Mother be free, when her pious Sons are so traduced and
reproached, and that for defending those very doctrines, which by her means
they sucked from the breasts of both the Testaments:


A. That must needs follow, I confess.


Answ.
In the former declamatory passage, these particulars following are to be
observed.

1 The hypocrisy August. Sermon. in Mont. l. 2. c. 3. Qui vult videri quod non
est, hypocrita est. Id. in Psalm. 103. Parie; dealbatus hypocrisis, and
simulatio: paries dealbatus, foris tectorium, intus lutum. Id d. civ. D. lib.
2. Malignitas Daemonum, nisi alicubi se transfiguret in Angelu^ Lucis, non
implet negotium deceptionis.
of this Declamitant, who professes himself an obedient Son to his dear and
reverend Mother, the Church of England: whereas in the precedent Section, he
most contemptuously disgraceth Episcopal Authority ordained by the holy
Apostles, and established in the Chapter of England ever since the reformation;
accounting the Prelates (if they exercise that power of judicature which the
Church of England approves, as being descended from Primitive and Apostolical
Ordination) V^ines of the Pope. And more than so, This Dialogue-broacher Read
this Auth rs Treatise, entitled, Christ's confession* and complaint, page 30.
an^ page 59. In wh ch he condemns Episcopal government, saying, It is
prohibited by Christ, Luc. 22.24. and 1 Pet. 5.3. Mat. 20.25. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.
And he applies S. Paul's Text, Col. 2.20. to the Ceremonies of the Church, page
60. They look to little, but the silencing of such as stumble at their
Ceremonies and Hierarchy. To defend the injunctions of men and their
unprofitable Hiera^chie. Plea. Such kind of Ministers are not wanting to help
forward the re-erecting of the Romish Baal in our Land, had they but a young
Manasses to restore the Altars and Groves which good King Ezekiah his Father
had pulled down.
in other Pamphlets declares himself to be an adversary to the Ecclesiastical
policy, Rites, Ceremonies, and Canons of our present Church: and scarce any
professed Schismatic of later days has entreated conformable persons of good
quality with more despitefull abuses, than this hypocrite (who styles himself
an obedient Son of his Mother the Church) has done.

2 This Dialogist falsely accuses his Adversary, in laying to his charge, that
he has stigmatized all such as dissent from him in the Question of the
Sabbath, Venomous Serpents; noisome Tares, pestilent Weeds, and unclean
Beasts: for it is apparent ex Pagina secunda of the Epistle Dedicatory, that
those terms are applied to notorious Heretics, malicious Schismatics,
profane Hypocrites, and proud disturbers of the peace and unity of the Church
Hieron. apolog. c. Ruff. Tu nimium suspitiosus and querulus, qui dicta in
Haereticos, ad tuam refers contumeliam.
. The Bishops words are; This being the condition of the Church militant, it
cannot be otherwise, but that in all ages there shall be found among those
which profess Christ, not only such as are virtuous and sound in faith, but
also men of corrupt minds, and reprobate, concerning the faith: Venomous
Serpents, noisome Tares, pestilent Weeds Idem c. Luciferian. Non solum in
Ecclesia morantur oves, nec mundae tantu^ aves volitant: sed frumentum in agro
seritur, and inter nitentia culta Lappaeque and tribuli and steriles dominantur
avenae.
, and unclean beasts. Our Saviors own prediction was; There shall arise
false Prophets, etc. S. Paul, Oportet Haereses esse, etc.

3 Another branch of Br. B. his Declamation, is:

The Bishop in his book brandeth those whose opinions he impugneth, with the
odious name of Novell Sabbatarians.

Our answer is: 1. The Bishop in his Treatise brandeth not all such as dissent
from him in his Tenet of the Sab. etc. with that name: neither brandeth he any
therewith, because they teach Christian people to observe the Lord's Day
religiously, and to spend the same in the performance of holy and spiritual
duties, so far as is necessary for their godly edification, and in such manner
as the Canon and Precept of the Christian Church has enjoined: for he holds
this to be a necessary duty obliging al good Christians.

2 He gives this Title and Name very justly to all those, who proudly and
peremptorily maintain the maine Principles and Positions, upon which
Sabbatarian Heretics in ancient and in modern times have grounded their
error, touching the necessary observation of the old legal Sabbath.

The Reader shall find these Principles and Positions peremptorily taught for
divine truth (by those Teachers whose opinions the Bishop impugneth) laid
down in his Treatise, Page 20. etc.

The observation of the Seventh day, and also the precise resting from worldly
affairs, is moral; neither is there any thing in the fourth Commandment that
might intimate it to be Ceremonial.

The 4th Commandment can be no more partly moral, and partly Ceremonial,
than the same living creature can be partly a Man, and partly a beast.

The fourth Commandment is part of the Law of Nattre, and thus part of the
Image of God, and is no more capable of a Ceremony, than God himself.

The fourth commandment, in every part thereof, as it is contained in the
Decalogue, is moral, and of the Law of Nature.

The Decalogue being the same with the Law of Nature, is one, and the same for
ever: it follows necessarily, that the Sabbath being a part of that
Decalogue, is to remain for ever.

The observation of the seventh day is of the Law of Nature: it was established
before Christ was promised, and therefore it is not ceremonial, but of the Law
of nature, and perpetual.

The Sum and substance of the former Positions is: The fourth Commandment of
the Decalogue, is purely, entirely, and totally moral; it is a Precept of the
Law of Nature, and of the same quality, both for morality and perpetuity with
other Commandments of the Law of Nature, neither was there any thing
Ceremonial in it.

Now the judicious Reader will presently observe, that the Sabbatarian Heresy,
concerning the perpetual observation of the old Legal Sab. is a necessary and
undeniable Conclusion, issuing out of the former Positions.

For every Law or Precept, purely, entirely, and totally moral, is perpetual
and unchangeable: the same must be entirely observed; and if nothing positive
or Ceremonial be found therein, then no branch or member thereof can cease or
be omitted.

But the keeping holy of the Seventh day Sabbath, namely Saturday, was a maine
part of the fourth Commandment; for it was the Subject or material Object of
that Commandment, literally, expressly, and positively specified and
commanded by God Almighty in the Decalogue.

Therefore from the Premises it will be consequent, that the Seventh day
Sabbath, being Saturday, must be kept holy until the end of the world.

The first Proposition is confirmed in manner following.

The prime, special, and express material Object of every Law, is a
substantial part of that Law: and it is of the same kind and quality with the
Law it self: and therefore if the Law be entirely and naturally moral, then
the express and special object of the same, is of the same quality.

For example, in the fifth Commandment of the Decalogue, Honor thy father and
thy mother, etc. Natural Parents are the prime, special, and express Object
of that Law: therefore although other Objects may be added, as honor the King;
give honor to Presbyters that rule well; honor Masters, etc. Yet natural
Father and Mother being named, expressed, and specified in the Commandment,
remain indelible, because they are the prime Object thereof.

In like manner, if the fourth Commandment were natural and entirely moral,
like unto the fifth: then the particular day expressed and described therein,
namely Saturday, must be observed, although the Apostles and Christian Church
might add the Lord's Day and some other Festivals, for the enlarging of the
service of Christ.

4 The Bishop also in his Treatise, 235. etc. 249. etc. has observed certain
desperate passages in those men's Sermons and Tractats, whom he styles Novell
Sabbatarians: to wit,

To do any servile work or business upon the Lord's Day, is as great a
sin, as to kill a man, or to commit adultery.

To throw a Bowl on the Sabbath Day, is as great a sin, as to kill a man:
And to make a Feast or Wedding-dinner on the Lord's day, is as great a sin, as
for a father to take a knife and cut his childs throat.

To ring more Bells than one upon the Lord's Day to call the People to Church,
is as great a sin as to commit murder.

In Harvest time, though the Corn be in danger, yet better were it for us that
it should rot on the ground, than for us by carrying it in with the breach of
the Sabbath, to treasure up unto ourselves wrath, etc.

It is not lawful for people to go out of their houses to walk in the fields.

These former Dictats are borrowed from the old Pharisees, and the modern
Authors who have revived and maintained them, comply herein with Sabbatarian
Heretics.

Thus to satisfy my judicious Reader, I have delivered the reasons inducing me
to style certain new Scripturients and Predicants, whose opinions I impugned,
Novell Sabbatarians: and if Br. B. and his Allies are offended, and hold this
Title odious, let them right themselves; not by raging, and thrusting out
railing and libelling Pamphlets, marching up and down in blew Iackets: but by
renouncing and recanting those scandalous Positions, which are apt to impoyson
Christian People with Iudaical and Sabbatarian heresy.

5 Those persons which the Bishop intended, when he used that term of Novell
Sabbatizers, were so far from being the true bred children of the Church of
England, that they were either in heart, or in open profession adheres to the
Presbyterian Policy; and they sucked not their Doctrine of the Sabbath from the
breasts of both the Testaments, but partly from the corrupt Fountains of
Ancient Heretics, and partly out of the broken Cesternes of their own
private fancies.

B. The Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the Sabbath, is most
clearly If Br. Asotu^ had said clearly, and left out the word most, he had
said more, than he could have made good.
, and fully set forth in the Book of Homilies: which Book the 35. Article (to
which all we Ministers do subscribe) does commend, as containing A godly and
wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these times, and therefore judged to be
read in Churches, by the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be
understood of the People.


Answ.
The Homily sets forth the Doctrine of the Church of England, if the words
and sentences thereof, be rightly expounded: to wit, according to the rule of
the Scripture, the common vote and consentient testimony of the Orthodoxall
Catholic Church of Christ in all ages, and the precedent and subsequent Laws,
Statutes, and Canons of the kingdom and Church of England. But if the words
and sentences thereof be not rightly expounded Tertul. d. Prascript. ca. 17.
Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quantum and corruptor stilus.
, according to the foresaid rules, but according to men's private
interpretation, then the same may be a means, to lead people into error: for
so it fares sometimes even with holy Scripture it self Hieron. Com. in Ephesians.
1. Interpretatione perversa, ex Evangelio Domini sit Evangelium hominis, and
quod pejus est, Diaboli. Id. c. Lucifer. Nec sibi blandiantur, si de
scripturarsi capitulis videntur sibi affirmare quod dicunt, cu^ and diabolus de
scripturis aliqua sit locutus: and scripturae non in logendo consistunt, sed in
intellige^do.
.

2 Some passages in the Homily are ambiguous. Therefore the doctrine of the
Church of England is not most clearly set forth in the same.

The Antecedent is proved by these Instances.

The Homily says: As for the time which Almighty God has appointed his people
to assemble together solemnly, it does appear by the fourth Commandment of
God, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Upon which day, it is plain in
the Acts of the Apostles, ca. 13. the people accustomably resorted together,
and heard diligently the Law, and the Prophets read among them.

In this passage the Homily might seem, to those who maintain the Saturday
Sabbath, to make that day, a weekly festival: because the Apostles, upon that
day, even after Christ's Ascension, entered into Synagogues, and did there
perform Christian religious offices, Act. 13.14, 44. and Chap. 17.2.

It follows in the Homily: God does not bind Christians so straightly to
observe the utter Ceremonies of the Sabbath, in forbearing of work and labor
in time of great necessity.

In this passage the Homily has not clearly, and explicitly declared. 1. How
far forth the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment was Ceremonial. 2. What
kind of work, and labor in particular, Christians may lawfully use upon the
Holy day.

Br. B. page 22. Will admit no work or labor upon the Sunday, but such only as
is of absolute necessity, as in time of Scar-fire, invasion of enemies, etc.
But the Ancient Imperial laws permitted sundry works of less necessity than
the former upon the Sunday, page 219. and grave Divines, as Calvin, Bucer,
Beza, etc. approve the same Walaeus de Sab. page 1^9 Non audemus improbare quod
post concilium Arelatense, Constantinus in suis constitutionibus, tempore
pluvio, aut alio necessitatis casu, permittit ut messes, aut vindemiae, etiam
die Dominico colligantur. Quia si ad famis propriae solatium, licuit Discipulis
sabbato aristas vellere: Cur non liceat in tali casu ^d pulsionem and
praeventionem famis communis, terram co^serere, and messem aut vinde^iam
salvare? Bez. in Cantic. Ho. 30. Vt autem Christiani, eo die a suis quotidianis
laboribus abstinerent, praeter id temporis quod in caetu ponebatur: Id neque
illis Apostolicis temporibus mandatum, neque prius fuit imperatum, quam id ab
Imperatoribus Christianis, nequis a rerum sanctarum meditatione abstraheretur,
neque ita praecise sancitum est.
.

It seems therefore, that the Homily has not most clearly, and fully
declared all things necessary to be known, touching this question.

Again, the Homily says: Whatsoever is found in the fourth Commandment,
appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly, most just, and
needful for the setting forth of God's glory, it ought to be retained of all
good Christians.

Our of the former words it may be collected, that nothing in the fourth
Commandment is simply moral, and of the Law of Nature, but that which is most
godly, most just, and necessary for the setting forth of Gods glory: And if
this be the sense of the Homily (as no doubt it is) then the fourth
Commandment is not in force according to the letter, but only according to the
equity and Analogy thereof.

Lastly the Homily says: God has given express charge to all men, that upon
the Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly,
and worke-day labor: and God does command the observation of this Holy day:
and we must be careful to keep the Sabbath day, which is the Sunday.

Out of the former passage, these questions arise. 1. What the Homily
intends, in saying, God has given express charge etc. and God has
commanded, etc. Whether God has immediately, by any Divine Law, expressly
commanded the Observation of Sunday? and in what Texts of Scripture this Law
and Commandment, touching Sunday, is to be found? Or whether the meaning of
the Homily is not, that God has thus commanded Christians, by a mediate or
ministerial Law, and precept of his Church.

It may be^ questioned likewise, in what sense the Homily styles the Sunday,
the Sabbath day: whether in a proper and literal sense, according to the style
of the old Law: or in a mystical and analogicall sense, as Christ is called
our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7.

Now from the precedent observations, it is consequent, that the Doctrine of
the Church of England is not most clearly, or so plainly and expressly set
forth in the Homily, as this Objector pretends when he says, page 13. The
words of the Homily, as you have heard, and every one may plainly see, are so
express, clear, and full, that they cannot possibly admit the least ambiguity.

Reasons to the contrary. 1. Evidens censeri solet illud, quod ita sufficienter
movet intellectum, ut in libera hominis potestate non sit dissentire Aqu. Sum.
Greg. Valent. Et alij Scholast. Doctores. Aug. c. Crescon. Gram. li. 3. Ipsa
sententia loquatur, cujus verba sic fulgerit, ut si eam veli^ abscondere,
quarumlibet tenebrarum latebras, suo nimio splendo^e perru^pe^^t.
: That only is to be reputed clear and evident, which in such sort affects
the understanding* that it is not in the free power of an intelligent Person to
dissent from it. But this definition, of clear and evident, cannot be applied
to the words of the Homily, for the reasons before delivered.

2. According to Tertullian. Tertul. d. Resur. Carnis. ca. 33.
Sententiae et definitiones, quarum est aperta natura, aliter quam sonant, non
sapiunt: Sentences and Definitions which are clear and evident, cannot be
expounded otherwise than as the words sound.

But the words of the Homily, concerning the Sabbath, which this Objector
produces, do neither force the understanding of every intelligent Reader to
yield assent to Br. B. his Exposition: and unless we expound them otherwise,
than the words seem to sound, we shall fall into many absurdities.

Ergo. It is false, which the Objector delivers, to wit, The words of the
Homily are so express, clear, and plainly delivered, as that they cannot
admit the least Question or Ambiguity.

B. The Homily of the time and place of prayer, part first, shows, That our
Lord's Day is grounded upon the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, in these
words: Whatsoever is contained in the Commandment appertaining to the Law of
Nature, as a thing most godly, most just and needful for the setting forth of
Gods glory, it ought to be retained* and kept of all good Christian people: and
therefore by this Commandment we ought to have a time, as one day in the
week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful, and needful works.

For like as it appears by this Commandment, that no man in the six days,
ought to be slothful, or idle, but diligently to labor in that state wherein
God has set him: even so GOD has given express charge to all men, that upon
the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly
and work day labor; to the intent, that like as God Himself wrought six
days, and rested the Seventh, and blessed, and sanctified, and consecrated it
to quietness, and rest from labor; even so God's obedient People should use
the Sunday holily, and rest from their common and daily business, and also
give themselves wholly to heavenly excercises of God's true Religion and
Service.

So that God does not only command the Observation of this Holy Day, but also
by his own example does stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the
same. Good natural children will not only become obedient to the Commandment of
their Parents, but also have a diligent eye to their doings, and gladly follow
the same: So if we will be the children of our Heavenly Father, we must be
careful to keep the Christian Sabbath Day, which is the Sunday, not only for
that it is God's express Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be
loving children in following the example of our Gracious Lord and Father.

Again thus it may plainly appear, that God's will and Commandment was to
have a solemn time, and standing day in the week, wherein the People should
come together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render
Him thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind and obedient People. This
example and Commandment of God the godly Christian people began to follow
immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, etc. So the Homily, and
much more, whence we plainly observe these conclusions.

1 That all Christians ought, and are bound in conscience of the fourth
Commandment, to keep the Lord's Day holily.

2 That by the force of the fourth Commandment, one day in seven is
perpetually to be kept holy.

3 That the keeping of the Lord's Day is grounded upon, and commanded in the
fourth Commandment, and so is not of humane institution.

4 That the Lord's Day is, and may be called our Christian Sabbath Day,
therefore it is not Jewish to call it so.

5 That this Day is wholly to be spent in holy rest and duties of
sanctification; and therefore no part of it to be spent in vain pleasures, and
profane pastimes.

Now the Author of the Treatise does overthrow all these conclusions: for page
23. his words are: This Position (to wit, that the fourth Commandment is
properly and perpetually moral, and is for quality and obligation equal to
the other nine Commandments, which for many years has reigned in Pamphlets,
Pulpits, and Conventicles; and is entertained as an Oracle, by all such as
either openly profess, or do lean toward the disciplinarian faction) is
destitute of truth.

These are his words: which comparing with the words of the Homily of our
Church already cited, are found quite contrary. For the Homily says: That the
fourth Commandment is a Law of Nature, and ought to be retained and kept of
all good Christians, in as much as it commands one day of the Week for rest:
and God has given an express charge to all Men, that the Sabbath Day, which
is our Sunday, should be spent wholly in heavenly exercises, of God's true
Religion and Service.


Answ.
The Sum of the former accusation is, That the Bishop in his Treatise
overthrowes the Doctrine of the Church of England in the point of the Sabbath:
For his Doctrine is repugnant to the Homily, etc. which teaches that the
fourth Commandment is of the Law of Nature, etc. and that all Christians ought
to keep it holily: and one day in seven is perpetually to be kept holy: the
keeping of the Lord's Day is commanded by the 4th Commandment: The Lord's Day
may be called the Christian Sabbath Day. Lastly, the Lord's Day ought wholly to
be spent in holy rest, and duties of sanctification.

Now the Bishop (says the Objector) has opposed all these positions, for he
has affirmed in his Treatise of the Sabbath: that the fourth Commandment is
not properly, entirely, and perpetually moral, like as are the other nine: and
he has permitted some bodily exercise and recreation; to wit, such as is
honest and sober, upon the Sunday: and he denies, that in a legal sense the
Lord's Day is to be called the Sabbath Day.

To the former, the Bishops answer is* that the Objector has snatched some
words of the Homily, but he has not duly observed the true sense and meaning
thereof Athanas. Orat. 1. c. Arrian. Verba quidem profert, veram tamen inde
sentontiam sufferatur. Tertul. ad Praxean. Malo te ad se^^um ^^i, qu^ ad sonum
vocabuli exerceas.
.

For first, the Homily does not affirm, that the fourth Commandment is
purely, entirely, and properly moral, and of the Law of Nature, like as are
the other nine: But that whatsoever is found in the Commandment appertaining
to the Law of Nature, being most godly, most just, and needful to the setting
forth of Gods glory, ought to be retained.

Now if nothing else in the fourth Commandment is of the Law of Nature, but
only that which is most just, godly, and needful to the setting forth of Gods
glory: then the Homily makes not the letter of that Commandment of the Law of
nature: but the intent and meaning thereof is, That the fourth Commandment, in
respect of the natural equity Al. Hal 3. ^ 32. m. 5 ar. 1. Hoc praecepto
praecipitur tempus vacationis aliquo^, and secundum hoc est morale legis
naturae, and hoc secundum ind^terminatione^* and hoc modo secund^
indeterminationem praecipitur Dominica dies tempore gratiae.
(which is, that the Rulers of the Church must appoint necessary, convenient,
and sufficient time for Divine Worship, and for religious offices,) is moral,
and of the Law of Nature.

And if the Objector will strain the words of the Homily to a further sense,
let him well consider, into what absurdities and contradictions he will be
forced to plunge himself.

For if this Commandment be entirely, purely, and properly Moral H. B. Gosp
and Law. recon. p. 38. The Commandment of the Sabbath is moral, and so no
less perpetual then all the rest: for if none of the rest of the
Commandments be abolished, then neither the fourth. Page 42. and 49. The Law
of the Sabbath was imprinted in Adams heart by the Law of Nature.
, and of the Law of Nature, like as the other nine: Then it must have all the
essential characters of the Law of Nature, and of Precepts purely, and
entirely moral: But it wants all these, as is proved by demonstrative
arguments in the Bishops book, page 26. until page 37. and page 172.

Nevertheless, that I may more fully discover the ignorance and presumption of
this Dialogist, I shall propound an argument against him, which he will hardly
be able to solve, to wit:

The Law of Nature was made known to all mankind Isidor. Etimol. l. 5. ca. 4.
Ius natural commune est omniu^ nationum, eo quod ubique instinctu naturae, non
constitutione^ aliqua habetur.
by the Common light of natural reason: The same is immutable, unchangeable
Decret. Did. 5. Natural jus ab exordio rationalis naturae, nec mutatur
tempore, sed immutabile permanet. Aug. Confess. l. 2. c. 4. Lex scripta in
cordibus hominum, quam nec ipsa quidem delet iniquitas.
, eternal, indispensable.

But the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath was not imprinted
naturally, or made known to all mankind by the common light of natural
reason: but it was made known only and wholly, by divine and supernatural
revelation. Also the fourth Commandment was changeable and mutable: for the
Sabbath of that Commandment, which was Saturday (according to the Objectors
own Tenet) was changed into Sunday: And lastly it admitted sundry
dispensations, page 34. 67.

Now the premises being indubitate Verities, The conclusion is firm, to wit,
That the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, is no precept of the Law of
Nature Theod. in Ezekiel. 20.12. Illud, non moechaberis, non furtum facies, and
alia cum his conjuncta, alios quoque homines naturae lex edocuit: At Sabbati
observandi, non natura magistra, sed latio legis. Walaeus and Alii Synops.
purior. Theolog. disp. 21. n. 20. Sabbati praeceptum non est a naturae
necessitate, ut reliqua praecepta, quae menti insita, and per se cognita sunt,
sed (...), ex voluntaria Dei institutione. D. Bound. d. Sab. l. 1. p. 11.
Indeed this Law was given in the beginning, not so much by the light of Nature,
as the rest of the Commandments were, but by express word. For though this be
the Law of Nature, that some days should be separated to Gods worship, yet
that it should he every seventh day, that, the LORD himself set down.
: neither is it purely, entirely, and properly moral, like the other nine; but
merely positive, in respect of any one particular day of the Week specified
in the same.

The Bishop desires to receive some reasonable answer from Br. B. to this and
to other the like arguments, delivered in his Treatise of the Sabbath: for if
he shall (according to his rude manner) bark and blatter against his
adversaries Positions, and dissemble his arguments, it is apparent that he
maintains a forlorn and desperate cause.

B. The Homily says: All Christians ought and are bound in conscience of the
fourth Commandment, to keep the Lord's Day holily.


Ans.
1. The equity and Analogy of the fourth Commandment, obliges Christians to
observe a convenient and sufficient time for Gods worship and service, and for
the exercise of spiritual and religious duties.

2 After such time as the Orthodoxall Catholic Church, has upon the example
of the holy Apostles and for other weighty reasons, devoted the Sunday of every
Week to the exercise of Religious duties, Christian people in obedience to the
Law of the Church, grounded upon the equity of the fourth Commandment, and the
example of the Apostles, are bound in conscience to observe that Day holily, in
the performance of religious duties, page 100.

B. The Lord's Day is, and may be called our Christian Sabbath Day: and
therefore it is not Jewish to call it so.


Answ.
1. The Lord's Day is not the litterall Sabbath of the fourth Commandment; and
therefore in propriety of speech it cannot be called the Sabbath Day, expressly
or in particular commanded in the Decalogue; but the same is styled by the
Homily, our Christian Sabbath, in a mystical and analogicall sense: even as
mort^fication is called Circumcision, Romans 2.29. and sincerity and truth, are
called unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 8.5.

B. That this day is wholly to be spent in holy rest, and duties of
sanctification: and therefore no part of it to be spent in vain pleasures, and
profane pastimes.


Answ.
1. The Homily (according to the Tenet also of other Divines Bucer. in Mat. 12.
p. 113. Eximatur e cordibus hominum opinio necessitatis, ne quis credat eum
diem, per se, esse aliis sanctiorem, vel operari in eo, per se esse peccatum.
Danaeus Eth. Christ. l 2. c. 9. Nobis Christianis, non tanta tamve severa and
rigida observatio (ne laboremus in die Dominica) imposita est. Nam ex lege
Constantini, licet serere, and metere in die Dominica, si commodum sit. Aquin.
2. 2. q. 122. ar. 4. ad. 4. Non est ita arcta prohibitio operandi in die
Dominica, sicut in die Sabbati: sed quaedam opera conceduntur in die Dominica,
quae in die Sabbati prohibebantur: sicut decoctio ciboru^, etc.
) permits some kind of labor upon the Sunday: Therefore, by wholly, it
understands not every hour and minute of the day; but so much thereof as is
necessary and morally sufficient for the performance of the religious duties of
the day, page 218, 219. 225. 231.

2 If the Objector would have proceeded sincerely, he should have declared,
whether by vain pleasures, and profane pastimes, he understands all bodily
exercise and recreation in general: or such only as is vicious in quality, or
by reason of circumstances, page 229.

If he mean the first, we find no words in the Homily, condemning in general
all recreation, to wit; such as is sober and honest in quality, and which is
not attended with evil circumstances.

But if he understand the Homily in the latter sense, to wit, that it
condemns ungodly pastimes: Then he might have observed the Bishops words,
page 258. The Laws of our Church and Commonwealth condemn and chastise all
things profane and vicious upon the Lord's Day. And page 259. All obscene,
lascivious, and voluptuous pastimes are prohibited on this day. And page 229.
All kinds of Recreations which are of evil quality in regard of their object:
or which are attended with evil circumstances, etc. If they be used upon the
Lord's Day or on other Festival days, they are sacrilegious, etc. And in the
Ep. Dedicat. Profanation of the Lord's Day, and of other solemn Festival days
which are devoted to religious offices, is impious and hateful in the sight of
God and all good men; and therefore to be avoided, by such as fear God, and to
be corrected and punished in those which shall offend, and page 109. 110. This
Ordinance and observation of the Lord's Day, began in the holy Apostles age,
and has universally been continued ever since, to the great honor of Christ
our Savior, and to the mavelous benefit of Christian souls, who upon that
holy day, are edified weekly in godliness, virtue, and true Religion. And
therefore we justly account all those who malign the honor of this blessed
day, profane and sacrilegious.

A. The Author seems to acknowledge some morality natural, to be in the
fourth Commandment: for page 135. He says, Our resting from labor, in
respect of the general, is grounded upon the Law of Nature, or the equity of
the fourth Commandment.


B. This is nothing to the purpose to acquit him from being an Adversary to the
express doctrine of our Church. Dolosus versatur in Vniversalibus (it was the
speech of King James.) The natural morality of the fourth Commandment, is not
in general, to imply some Individuum Vagum, some certain uncertain
indefinite time for God's Worship Vrsin Cat. de Sabba. Non sumus allegati, ut
diem vel Iovis, vel Saturni, vel Mercurij, vel ullum alium, certum habeamus.
Rivet. in Exodus 20. page 193. Petitur principium, cum id pro confesso sumitur,
ad substantiam ma^dati quarti, quatenus morale est, pertinere circumstantiam
die^ septimi. Phil. Melancht. loc. Com. d. 3. praecepto. Recte dicitur in
tertio praecepto duas esse parts: unam naturalem seu moralem, seu genus:
altera pars est caeremonia, propria populo Israel, seu species de die septimo.
De priore dicitur, natural, seu genus esse perpetuu^, and non posse abrogari:
videlicet mandatu^ de conserva^do ministerio publico, sic ut aliquo die populus
doceatur, and caeremoniae divinitus institutae exerceantur. Species vero, quae
nominatim de septimo die loquitur, abrogata est.
: for the Commandment is express, for a certain day in the week for the
Sabbath Day; Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it. It says not, remember to
set apart and allow some time for the service of God, but it determines the
time and day: lest otherwise being left undetermined, man should forget God
Himself, and allow no time or day at all for God's service; or if he did, God
should be beholden to him for it.


Ans.
1. Is he Dolosus, a deceiver, who maintains, there is a general equity in
Divine Positive Laws? No man living is able to justify this. For in the Old
Judicial Laws, yea in many Ceremonial Laws, there is contained a general
Equity grounded upon the Law of Nature. In the judicial Law set down, Exodus
22.1, 2. there is a general equity employed, obliging Christians to restitution
of goods unjustly by them taken away. In the Law of Deuteronomy 25.4. Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn, there was
contained a general natural equity, 1 Corinthians. 9.9.

Therefore he is not Dolosus, who maintains a general equity in the fourth
Commandment, but he is a Dolt who denies it.

2 It is granted that the fourth Commandment is express for a certain day,
for a particular day: Namely for Saturday: But if it be express for Saturday,
and for that Individual day only, Then it is not express for Sunday: and the
observation of Sunday must either be grounded upon the natural equity of the
fourth Commandment, or else it cannot be grounded upon that Commandment at
all.

3 Brother B. says in this passage of his Dialogue: The fourth Commandment is
express for a certain day: But in another of his treatises he delivers the
contrary, to wit, The Commandment says not, Remember the Seventh day to
sanctify it: but Remember the Sabbath, whatsoever it be, to sanctify it. Now
a certain day, is definite: and a Sabbath day, whatsoever it be, is
indefinite. Therefore if the fourth Commandment enjoyneth a Sabbath Day
whatsoever it be, it commands a day indefinite, and not a particular and
certain day.

4 If the fourth Commandment is express for the Lord's Day, then it either
names this day in particular, or it describes the same by some Characters, by
which it is distinguished from other days.

But the Commandment neither names the Lord's Day in particular, nor yet
describes it by any special Characters: but on the contrary it both names
the Seventh day, and describes it by a special Character, whereby it is
distinguished from other days, to wit, by God's resting from his grand work
of prime Creation.

Therefore the fourth Commandment is not express for the keeping holy of the
Lord's Day* but if we will have the day expressly commanded, we must observe
the Old Sabbath Day according to Theoph. Brabourne's Tenet.

5 Whereas the Objector says: the Commandment must determine the particular
time, and day in Individuo: because otherwise, if the same be lef^ indetermined
man should forget God, and himself, and allow no time at all for God's service:

The answer is, there can be no just reason, for people to forget God, and to
allow no time at all for his service, if a sufficient and convenient time, be
indefinitely commanded, by the Law of Nature, and a definite and particular
day, and time be appointed by the Pastors of the Church. For the precepts of
the Church, being godly, and holy, and subservient to God's glory, and being
grounded upon Apostolical example, oblige Christian people to their particular
duty, in observing time and place, and many other circumstances, concerning
God's service: and Christians are obliged to observe all such godly precepts,
when the same are means to execute God's general Law, which is: Let all
things in the Church be done decently, and in good order, and to edification,
etc. page 99.

B. It is a Law of nature, that every Lord and Master, should have the power in
himself to appoint, not only the kind of service, but the time when it should
be performed of his servants: As Alexander d. Ales Alex. Hal. part. 3. quaest.
32.
says upon the fourth Commandment. The time of this Rest, it is not in Man's
power to determine, but God's.


Answ.
The chief Lord and Master of the family has the supreme authority, to
determine the time, and circumstances of his own service: But he may delegate
subordinate power to his Steward, or other Officers to perform the same.

In the Old Law, God Almighty prescribed the particular day, and place of his
public worship, to wit, the Saturday of every week, etc. and the Tabernacle,
etc. But in the Evangelicall Law, he has not expressly, or literally
appointed either a particular day or a particular place: But Christian Kings,
being nursing Fathers, and the Bishops, being Pastors and Governors in the
Church, and Stewards of this great Lord, by a delegate and ministerial power
may lawfully perform this, page 187.

I desire the judicious Reader to consider, that the former Objection is a
pestilent drug, borrowed from Schismatickes and from Separatists, page 95. and
if the same be admitted, it takes away all power from the Kings Majesty, and
from the Church, to appoint any set place for God's public service, or to
ordain any holy days, or festival solemnities: or to determine the hours of
the day, for peoples resorting to Church, and their continuance at the Church:
Lastly, it denies the Churches power, of composing any external form or
Liturgy for God's public and solemn worship.

B. Again, the Adversary acknowledges an equity in the fourth Commandment.
What equity? If as it bound the ancient people of God, to one day in the week,
it do not also bind the Christian People to keep one day in the Week? And if
it be the equity of the fourth Commandment, to prescribe one day in seven,
then they are very unjust, that deny the keeping of the Lord's Day, to be
grounded upon the equity of the fourth Commandment.

It were well, if they would stand to equity: But this does our Adversary fly
from; for he says in the next words: The particular form and circumstances of
resting are prescribed unto us by the precepts of the Church: our spiritual
actions, according to that which is maine and substantial in them, are taught
by the Evangelicall Law. Their modification, and limitation in respect of
rituall and external form: and in regard of place, duration, gesture, habit,
and other external circumstances, are prescribed by the Law of the Church. So
He.

Thus you see how he limits the prescription of circumstances (which
comprehend time and place, persons, and duration, when and how long God shall
be served) unto the prescription of the Law of the Church: which he expresses
more fully page 270. saying, It was in the free election of the Church to
appoint what day, or days or times she thought good, or found convenient for
religious duties P. Martyr in Genes. 2. Quod hic dies magis quam ille eligatur
ad Dei cultum, liberu^ fuit ecclesiae per Christum, ut id consuleret, quod
magis ex re judicaret. Bulling. Co^. in Apoc. 1.10. Sponte vero Ecclesiae
receperuntillam diem, non legimus eam ullibi praeceptam Hospin. de Orig. Fest.
ca. 8. Et si ex hijs constet Dominicum diem jam tum Apostolorum temporibus
Iudaici Sabbathi loco fuisse solennem, non invenitur tame^ vel Apostolos, vel
alios lege aliqua aut praecepto observatione^ ejus instituisse, sed illam
fuisse liberam, etc. In primitiva Ecclesia ipsius quoque Dominicae diei
observatio nulla certa lege praecepta, sed libera fuerit, etc.
: For the Evangelicall Law has not determined any certain day or time: And
those actions, or circumstances, which are not determined by divine precept,
are permitted to the liberty and authority of the Church, to be determined and
appointed. So He.

But clear it is, that the Church of England disclaimeth all such power Read
the words of the Statute, recited in the Preface to the Reader: and it will be
evident, that Br. B. is a deceiver.
: but ascribes all authority, of prescribing a time and day of holy rest, unto
the Lord of the Sabbath, who has expressed his will and pleasure herein, in
his Law of the fourth Commandment, as our Homily says.


Answ.
The Bishop acknowledges a moral equity in the fourth Commandment, for the
observation of necessary, sufficient and convenient times, days, hours, etc.
For Gods public worship, and the performance of spiritual and Religious of
fices. And (for ought this Objector has said or can say to the contrary) more
than this, cannot be proved out of the Law of the fourth Commandment, or by
any necessary illation, from any sentence of the Commandment; Or from any
principle of the Law of Nature Lorea. 1. 2. de leg. Disp. 8. Legis naturae alia
sunt prima principia practica, per se nota: alia sunt conclusiones ex
principiis deductae, co^clusiones autem aliae universaliores, and proximiores
primis principiis: aliae quae a primis principiis, magis distant, and sunt
specialiores, and de particularibus objectis.
.

For the Principle of natural Law is: God is duly and religiously to be
worshipped: but unless convenient, and sufficient time be appointed, God
Almighty cannot be duly and religiously worshipped, Therefore a necessary,
convenient, and sufficient time, must be appointed Alex. Hal. 3. q. 32. m. 2.
De ratione been ordinata est, quod cum semper non possumus vacare Deo, propter
temporales, and corporales necessitates, quod aliqua^do vacemus: oportet igitur
habere tempus aliquod determinatu^.
(either expressly by God Himself, or by such as he has ordained to be his
Stewards, and Officers in the Church) for Divine worship.

2 The fourth Commandment enjoined the Jews to keep holy the seventh day,
being our Saturday: but from hence we cannot conclude by necessary inference,
that the fourth Commandment enjoyneth Christians to keep holy the Sunday being
the first day of the week: For the special and proper material object of
every Law, is a substantial part of that Law; but if the substantial part of
any Law be changed and taken away, a new Subject or material Object is no part
of the old Law; but another law must be ordained, for the se^ling of that new
Subject, and material object in the place of the former.

3 Whereas the Objector pretends, that the Church of England disclaimeth all
power of settling the particular time of God's public worship: how then comes
it to pass, that this Church commands the solemn observation of Easter,
Whitsuntide, Christmasse, and of many other Holy Days, to be days and times
for the religious service of God and Christ.

A. But the Homily seems to favor his opinion, saying; godly Christian people
began to choose them a standing day of the week, etc. and therefore it seems
to be at the Churches choice.


B. Our choice does not necessarily imply a power of institution; we are said
to choose life and truth, before death and error, are we therefore the Authors
of them? Again, our choice herein is according to God's Commandment.

Thirdly, the Homily says expressly, that those godly Christian people, did
in their choice follow the example and Commandment of God. Now what example
The Example of God, specified in the fourth Commandment; was his own resting
and ceasing upon the old Sabbath Day, from the work of prime Creation: and
not our Savior his resting from the work of Resurrection, upon the first day
of the week.
had they but Christ's rising, and resting that day after the example of God's
resting the seventh day. And for Commandment, they had both the fourth
Commandment, and an Apostolical Precept, 1 Cor. 16. No general commandem^t
common to all Christians, for the weekly observation of Sunday, is delivered
in these two Texts of holy Scripture.
And that place in the Revelation appropriating this Day, as holy to the Lord,
and so ratified by God himself: And who were they which taught those godly
Christian people to keep that day? viz. The Apostles.

And therefore we must put a vast difference between the unerring Apostles,
and the succeeding Churches, so as the Homily is clear against him.


Answ.
The Objector says: The Churches choice does not necessarily imply a power of
institution, etc.

It is answered: making choice many times implies a free election, and
institution, both in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 26.2. 1 Samuel 17.8. and in Ecclesiastical
and Humane Authors: and that it is thus to be understood in the Homily, is
proved in manner following:

The sense of the Homily is according to the authorized Doctrine of the Church
of England.

But the authorized Doctrine of the Church of England is, That the appointment
both of the time and number of days, is left by the authority of Gods Word to
the liberty of the Church, to be assigned orderly by the discretion of the
Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most expedient to the true
setting forth of Gods glory, and the edification of the people.

Ergo, the Churches choice according to the Homily, is a free election of a
convenient day, and of other convenient and sufficient time, for the service of
God, and the edification of Christian people.

2 There is a great difference between a Precept and an Example. The Homily
says, that godly Christians (to wit, by imitation of God's example) observed a
seventh day; but it affirms not, that they did this by an express
Commandment of any Divine Law.

Also godly Christians made the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue a motive
to induce them, to make one day of seven a weekly Holy day; but that which is
only a motive, or a reason inducing and persuading to perform an action, is
not an express, imperative, or formal Law.

The sense therefore of the Homily is, That Christians made choice of a weekly
standing day by the rule of the equity of the fourth Commandment, and not by
any express or formal Divine Law Walaeus. d. Sab. ^. 7. Nec Christus, nec
ipsi Apostoli ex praescripto Christi, de observatione hujus diei ullu^
expressum mandatum, quemadmodum de aliis pietatis officiis reliquerunt. Non
videtur autem ullo modo verisimile, Si Christus nos ad observationem ullius
diei, ut partem cultus voluisset astringere, fuisse fucurum, ut id nullo
praecepto indicasset. Bulling. Apoc. 2. Non legimus eam ullibi praecep^am.
Hospinian. d. se^. cap. 8. Non invenitur Apostolos aut alios lege aliqua aut
praecepto observationem ejus instituisse.
.

3 Our Savior's Resurrection upon one Sunday in the year, cannot of it self,
unless some precept were added, be a Law to enjoyne Christians to observe
every Sunday of the Week throughout the whole year; read page 302.

4 The fourth Commandment is directly and in plain terms for Saturday, page
182, 183. and therefore if that Commandment is still in force according to the
literal sense, then the Christian Church is obliged to observe the old legal
Sabbath; for the Objector has formerly rejected the equity of the fourth
Commandment, and therefore he must wholly ground his Tenet upon the express
words, or upon some necessary and formal illation from the words or sentences
of that Commandment.

5 In S. Paul's Text, 1 Cor. 16.2. we find a mandate, that the Corinthians upon
the first day of the week should lay aside something for charitable uses,
according as God had enabled them; and more than this we read not in that Text.

6 The Place, Revel. 1.10. contains no mandate; for no imperative words are
found therein, but only a narration of the time, in which S. John received his
Prophetical Revelation.

Lastly, the Bishop is persuaded, that the holy Apostles (not presently, or
immediately, but) certain years after Christ's Resurrection, taught Christian
people to observe the Lord's Day, 109. 189. But this impetuous Objector cannot
demonstrate, that the holy Apostles themselves, or their immediate Successors,
grounded the observation of this day upon the old Law of the 4th Commandment.

And therefore we trust Br. B. will not take it unkindely that we cannot yield
assent to his verbal Positions, which are not confirmed by Divine or
Ecclesiastical testimony, nor yet by any other weighty grounds of reason; and
lastly they are repugnant to the common Tenet of the most judicious Divines
ancient and modern.

A. The maine knot of the whole Controversy, is about the designation of the
particular and special time consecrated to Gods worship: whether it be
comprehended and prescribed in the fourth Commandment, or depends upon the
determination of the Church.

The Adversary confesses a natural equity in the fourth Commandment; That
some time is to be set apart for the service of God, but indeputate, and left
at large to the liberty of the Church, to determine and limit the special
time, when and how long, what portion, and proportion is to be allowed, etc. I
pray you more fully elucidate this Point, etc.


Ans.
1. The Bishop's Tenet is, That by the equity natural of the fourth
Commandment, a necessary sufficient, and convenient time ought to be
appointed by the Christian Church, for Divine worship, and for religious
offices. Therefore it is not left to the Churches liberty and arbitterment, to
allow what portion or proportion of time it pleases; For it must in duty and
obedience to God, proportion a full, convenient, and sufficient time.

2 The Church shall do that which is offensive, if without just, necessary,
and urgent cause, it presume to remove the ancient bounds, or to alter the
ordinance of primitive times, concerning the religious observance of the
Lord's Day. For the Tradition Hieron. c Lucifer. Etiamsi scripturae authoritas
no^ subesset, totius orbis in hanc partem co^sensus instar praecepti obtinet.
Na^ and multa alia, quae per Traditione^ in Ecclesiis observantur, authoritatem
sibi scriptae legis usurpaverunt.
of the Holy Apostles, and of the Primitive and Apostolical Church, ought
highly to be honored and respected: and (according to Saint Augustines Aug.
Ep. 118. ad Ianuar. cap. 5.
rule) it is insolent madness (unless it be done upon necessary reason) to
vary from the same, page 270.

B. The Adversary does the more easily play fast and loose Observe, How this
bold Baya^d faceth, and in the end fails in his proof.
in the mist of his generalities, though while he cannot or dare not for shame
utterly deny the morality of the fourth Commandment (which all Divines do
hold:) yet he denies any particular, special, determinate time to be
commanded, or limited therein, but will have that wholly put and placed in the
power of the Church.

It will be requisite therefore to stop this hole You will stop this hole, with
bold prating only.
, that he may not have the least evasion, but by the cords of strong reasons
Your cords of strong reason, will prove roaps of sand and cords of vanity.
be bound and forced to confess, That either the fourth Commandment does
prescribe and determine a set, certain, fixed proportion of time, consecrated
by God himself unto his solemn and sacred worship: Or else that it commands
to Us Christians no certain time or day at all: and so the morality of it (if
ever it had any) is quite abolished; and no other Law or Commandment now binds
us, but the precept or practice of the Church. This is the very Sum and
upshot of the matter.


Answ.
1. The Bishop delivered all his Positions, and Assertions, concerning the
Sabbath, in perspicuous, distinct, and clear Sentences, Terms, and
Propositions, in which there is no ambiguity, no equivocation, no fast and
loose, as this Bold-face declameth.

2 He has confirmed the said Positions, with strong and weighty reasons (the
most of them are Demonstrative:) and his Arguments are such, as this Objector
is afraid to look upon them: and throughout his Dialogue, like unto a Cravin
Cur, he bites behind, at the conclusion, but dares not look the Premises of
the Arguments in the face.

3 It was not fear or shame that induced the Bishop to maintain the natural
equity of the fourth Commandment, but love of verity, and weight of reason,
and the consent of grave and judicious Divines: But neither fear nor shame can
persuade this rude animal Homine imperito nihil est improbius. Qui nisi quod
ipse facit nihil rectu^ purat.
, who is maledicus conviciator, non veridicus Disputator, to deliver any thing
material, or which savoureth of common reason.

4 The Position, that the morality of the fourth Commandment must be utterly
abolished, unless it command us Christians a definite and particular day, as
it did the Jews, is an idle and presumptuous position, as will appear by the
loose and inepte Arguments which the Dialogaster brings to confirm the same.

B. Now I shall prove and make it evident, that the fourth Commandment either
prescribes a certain proportion of time, and a fixed day The fourth
Commandment appointed a particular fixed day, to wit; Saturday; and if it is
in that very respect moral, why does H. B. condemn Th. Brab.
, consecrate to God, and in that very respect is perpetually moral, binding us
Christians to the same proportion: or else if it determine no set proportion of
time, but leaves it at large It leaves it not at large, but the equity and
analog e of the Commandment obliges the Church to appoint necess^ry,
convenient, and sufficient time.
to the Church to proportionate, whether longer or shorter: Then there remains
no such obligatory equity in the fourth Commandment, as to bind the Church to
appoint and allow such or such a proportion of time: but that if this time
which the Church appoints, be either one day in twenty, or forty, or an
hundred, or one day in the year, or so; or but one piece of a day in such a
revolution of time, and not one whole or entire day, much less one whole day
in every seven: The Church in this sins not, as being not guilty of the
breach of the fourth Commandment, which binds us Christians to no certain
proportion of time, as the Adversary himself would have it, but in this
respect is now abrogated, etc.


Answ.
The Objector at his entrance says: Now I shall prove and make it evident Q.
Curtius. Apud Bactrianos dici solet: Canem timidu^ vehementius latrare, quum
mordere.
, etc. and then falsifieth his word, for his Argument is of no force at all.

If (says Br. B.) the natural equity of the fourth Commandment determines
not one particular and certain day of the week, but only a sufficient and
convenient time for Divine worship: Then there is no obligatory equity in the
fourth Commandment. And the Church sins not, if it appoint one day in
twenty, forty, a hundred, or one day, or half a day in a year, or in an age,
etc.

But the Adversary maintains, that the natural equity of the fourth
Commandment prescribes only a sufficient and convenient time, but no one
certain or fixed day of the week. Ergo.

The Adversary leaves it in the Churches liberty, and arbiterment to allow as
small a proportion of time, to wit, one day in 20. 40. 100. or in the whole
year, etc. as it pleases.

The consequence of the former argument is a Lame Giles; for one day in 20. 40.
100. or in the whole year, Or one half day in a Week, Month, or Year, etc.
is not a competent and sufficient time for God's service, or for religious
duties, and for the spiritual edification of Christian people: Therefore the
natural equity of the fourth Commandment, requiring a necessary competent and
sufficient time for Divine worship, obliges the Church to allow a greater
measure, and proportion of time, than one only day in 20. 40. 100. etc.

B. Argument 1. Observe we the words of the Commandment, Remember the Sabbath
Day Praemittitur memento, quia nimirum, cum non si^ natural praecept^ poterant
illud facile Iudaei oblivisci.
to keep it holy: which words (says the learned Zanchy Zanc. d. oper. Redemp.
in 4. Mand. Adjecimus, sine ulla conscientiae obligatione, fuisse hunc diem
divino cultui destinatum. Hoc liquet e sacri^ literis. Nullibi enim legimus
Apostolos hoc cuipiam mandasse: tantum l^gimus quid solit^ fuer^^t facere
Apostoli and fideles ill^ die: liberum igitur reliquerunt. Walaeus de Sabb.
page 156. Nec Christus nec ipsi Apost. ex praescripto Christi de observatione
hujus diei, ullum expressum mandatum, quemadmodum de aliis pietatis officiis
reliquerunt.
) are the very moral substance of the fourth Commandment. The Lord says not,
remember to sanctify some convenient, and sufficient time, as the Church shall
think fit: The Commandment prescribes a certain and set time, yea a day,
the Sabbath Day, one day in the week, which is the Sabbath day.

Again, it teaches what day in the week the Sabbath day is: to wit, the
Sabbath day of the Lord thy God: that day in the week wherein the Lord our God
rests, must be our Sabbath Day. So that as the Commandment prescribes unto
us a weekly Sabbath day to be sanctified; So God's president and example
points out unto Us, what or which day in the week we must rest on, to
sanctify it. And this is not only the natural equity (which the Adversary in
general confesses) but the very natural Law, and substance of the fourth
Commandment, to prescribe a set solemn day in the week to be sanctified, and
not to leave it in the power of Man, or of the Church, to appoint what time
they please:

The Reasons are these: 1. because the Commandment expressly limiteth one set
day in the week, being the Sabbath day of the Lord our God. Now the
Commandment prescribing a set and fixed day in the week, what humane power
shall dare to alter it into an indefinite time (call it what you will,
convenient or sufficient) to be appointed at the pleasure of man? This is with
the Papists to commit high sacrilege, in altering the property of God's
Commandments. For upon this ground of general equity, they have been bold to
suppress the second Commandment, saying it is comprised in the first. As they
have robbed the people of the Cup in the Sacrament, saying the blood is
contained in the body under the forms of Bread. So our Adversary imagining a
general (I wot not what) equity in the fourth Commandment of some certain
uncertain time, for God's public worship, does thereby destroy the very
property of the Commandment, which expressly prescribes the Sabbath Day in
every week.


Answ.
1. This argument is down right for Theophilus Brabourne's Tenet, concerning
the Saturday Sabbath; For Saturday is the set, fixed and particular day in the
week, concerning which God said, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.
That special weekly day, which is called the Sabbath of the Lord thy God:
This only day, and no other, was it, In which the Lord God rested from the
work of prime Creation: and God's example expressed in the fourth
Commandment, pointed out this particular day of the week, and not any other
of the six days. The Law and substance of the fourth Commandment, was
fulfilled in the religious observation of this very day: and during the time of
the Old Law, it was not in the power of the Church, or of any humane creature
to alter this day into any other.

Now from hence it is consequent, that if the Christian Church stands obliged
to observe that weekly day, which was styled the Sabbath of the Lord thy God,
and which is thus marked, and pointed out in the fourth Commandment; Then we
must observe the Legal Sabbath day according to Th. Brab. his Tenet.

It might be admired (but that the pride and stupid ignorance of this
Goose-quill is notorious) that he should not foresee the consequence so
directly concluding for the observation of the Old Legal Sabbath.

Secondly, Whereas this Babbler says, that they which deny, that the fourth
Commandment, in time of the Gospel, prescribes a set and fixed weekly day
for public worship, comply with the P^pists, who take away the second
Commandment, and the Cup from the people, etc.

Our answer is. 1. Let him resolve us, whether Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, P.
Martyr, Rivetus Rivet. in Exodus 20. page 184. Quaestio agitatur, an sal^em unus
e septem diebus, etsi non a creatione septimus, sed in unaquaque septimana, in
orbe^ re^urre^s septimus, ex quarti praecepti vi, ut qua morale est, ^^t
necessario obser^andus in Ecclesia Christiana. Resp. page 186. Argume^ta pro
negativa part talia sunt, ut me moveant ne disce^am ab ea quam Calvinus
probavit ^in^entia.
, etc. who main^ained the former position, complied with the Papists.

2 He should first have proved by firm arguments (but his manner is to prate,
and not to prove,) that Christians, under the Gospel, have received an
express Commandment from God, for the Observation of a certain particular
day in every week; In such manner, as they have received the Commandments,
touching the non-adoration of Images, and giving the Cup in the Eucharist. But
until he perform this (which will be impossible) he declares himself a
Rude Accuser: and withal a foolish, and babbling disputer.

B. A second reason, why it is not left in the power of the Church to Prescribe
what time men please, is: Because it is God's prerogative as a Master, to
appoint his own worship, and service; So the time The time commanded in the
fourth Commandment is Saturday, the Old Legal Sabbath.
wherein he will be served. This God Himself commands in the fourth
Commandment. Now as the King will not take it well, that any meddle with his
prerogative, and arrogate that to himself, which is the King's right: So God
is justly offended, when men presume to assume to themselves that power, which
is proper, and peculiar to God alone God is well pleased when the Church
assumeth such ministerial power, as he has granted.
.

If any will take upon him to coin money by counterfeiting the King's stamp
and name, his act is Treason. How then shall they escape, who presume to coin
what time they please for God's solemn worship, though they set the
counterfeit stamp of God upon it. Now the Sabbath Day is of the Lord's own
making The Sabbath day of the fourth Commandment was of God's own immediate
making: and if this day, is the Lord's day: Then Th. Brab. is in the right.
and stamping, and therefore called the Lord's Day.


Answ.
There is no color of truth in this second reason.

1 The Author of it deals falsely: For the Bishop maintains not, that it is
in the Churches power to appoint what time men please for Divine Worship: But
he says the contrary, to wit, The Church must appoint such a measure and
proportion of time for God's worship, and for Religious Offices, as is
convenient, competent, and every way sufficient: But he that teaches this,
leaves it not in the power and liberty of the Church to prescribe what time
men please: Because such time as men please to appoint, may be inconvenient,
incompetent, and insufficient, for so great and holy a work.

2 The argument it self is of no force: For although all power of constituting
time, for his own worship, be eminently and originally in God himself, as
likewise is the teaching of all supernatural truth, Matthew. 23.8. Yet there is
given to the Pastors of the Church, a derivative, delegate, and ministerial
power, both to teach God's people, and likewise to appoint set, fixed, and
convenient days, and times and places, for religious worship, page 187.

Where the great Lord and Master himself has by his own express, or
immediate Law, ordained a particular day or time, for his own worship, It is
not lawful for man, to alter the same: and therefore the Jews in the Old Law,
might not change their Sabbath into another day: But the Church by
ministerial, and delegate power, may add, and increase the number of
Religious holy days, if it be necessary or expedient for the peoples
edification.

For in the very time of the Old Law, when many festival days were ordained
by God's special mandate, the Jewish Church, notwithstanding, upon special
occasions, appointed some new Holy Days, Hest. 9. 17. 1 Machab. 4.56. and our
blessed Savior Himself honored one of these feasts, with his own presence,
Ioh. 10.22. But now in the time of the N. Test. the Church of Christ must of
necessity have power, to ordain set times, and festival days, for Divine
worship, and the spiritual edification of People; because such days and times
are necessary to the ends aforesaid: and the Lord Himself by no express
particular mandate of Holy Scripture has commanded them.

3 The Objector's similitudes borrowed from Royal Prerogative, and coining or
stamping moneys, are nothing worth: for although no Subject may lawfully usurp
the Kings's authority or prerogative: yet a Subject may receive power from the
King's authority and Prerogative, to do many things, which otherwise were
unlawful for him to do: As appears in Judges, who from the King's
prerogative in sundry cases have power of life and death: In privy Counselors,
etc. So likewise the Pastors of the Christian Church, by a Ministerial power,
given them by Christ, exercise authority many ways in ordering times and
places, and many other actions, and circumstances which concern God's worship.

Also It is very lawful for subjects to Coin and stamp moneys, when the King
being supreme Lord, grants them license and authority: It is Treason in such
only, as presume to do it without license: and because it is a thing
prohibited by Laws and Royal Authority. And so it fares with the Governors,
in the Christian Church: If they presume to appoint any thing, which God has
prohibited, they are Delinquents: But if in their Ecclesiastical Precepts they
exceed not the power given them by Christ, they do well, and they ought to be
obeyed.

4 This Mangie Objection (which the Dialogue-dropper hugs in his bosom, and
when he blatters it out of his wooden deske, he is applauded with the loud Hem
of his seduced Auditory) is borrowed from Old Thomas Cartwright, who, in his
days, poisoned many credulous people with such Scabby Similitudes, and with
some other such like popular insinuations, page 95.

B. A third Reason, why it is not left in Man's power to institute the solemn
day of God's worship, his Sabbath Day, or to appoint him what proportion of
time they please, is: Because an indefinite time must either bind to all
moments of time, as a debt, when the day of payment is not expressly dated, is
liable to payment every moment: Or else it binds to no time at all The natural
equity of God's positive Law, requires convenient, and sufficient time. The
precept of the Church determines the day or time in special: Now t^is being
performed, the d^y and time for the solemn worship of God, is made definite
and certain.
.

For if the Law of God bind Us not to an express, determinate time or day
consecrate to his service: Then the not allowing of him a set time or day, is
no sin at all. For what God's Law commands not, therein man is not bound: And
where no set Law is of a set time or day, there is no transgression, if a set
time or day be not observed. So as by this reason, If the Law of the 4th.
Commandment prescribe no set sacred time or day for rest and sanctification,
it is a mere Nullity. For to say there is a natural equity in it for some
sufficient and convenient time, and yet no man can define, what this sufficient
and convenient time is; nay all the heads and wits in the world put together,
are not able to determine it, it is as to say, there is a world in the Moon,
consisting of Land and Sea, and inhabitants, because there are some black
spots in it: which is yet not a more Lunaticke opinion, than that is
presumptuous and absurd.

Has not the profane world found by woeful experience, and that of late
days, within these two years last past, wherein men have taken a liberty to
profane and pollute but a part of the Lord's Day, that this is a most horrible
sin? And a sin it cannot be, but as a breach of one of God's Holy
Commandments; for where there is no Law, there is no transgression. The
profanation (I say) of the Lord's Day is clearly showed to be an horrible
presumptuous sin, and in special a bold breach of the fourth Commandment, by
those many remarkable judgments of God, which have fearfully fallen upon
fearelesse Sabbath breakers, and that (I say) within these two years last
past, the like whereof cannot be paralleled in all the Histories of all the
Centuries since the Apostles times.

Which alone (if men were not altogether possessed with the spirit of
stupidity, and of a croced conscience) were sufficient to teach their dull
wits, that the fourth Commandment is still in force, commanding the
Sabbath Day to be sanctified, the profanation whereof we see so terribly
punished by divine revenge. A point also which our Homily has noted: which
were sufficient to admonish the Adversary of his presumptuous oppositions
thereunto.


Answ.
1. Divine Laws being general, or indefinite, oblige to obedience in
particulars, when the special Object commanded or prohibited by any other just
Laws, is reduced to the Divine general Law by lawful consequence. For
example: Thou shall not steal, is general: Therefore thou shall not without
license from the Owner, or without other lawful authority, take away thy
Neighbors Ox or his Ass: and yet Meum and Tuum, thy Neighbors Ox and his
Ass, are made his own by humane Law. So likewise in this present Question,
the general equity of the Divine Law, is; Christian people must observe a
convenient and sufficient time for Divine Worship, etc. And Christian Princes,
and the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, having lawful Authority to appoint
such Observations as are subservient to true Religion, have ordained
Christmasse, Easter, and the Lord's day of every Week for Divine Worship and
Religious Duties: Ergo, Christians are obliged by the general Equity of the
Divine Law, to observe Christmasse, Easter, and the Lord's Day, after that the
Rulers and Pastors of the Church have appointed the same to be done to God's
glory.

It is a frantic Paradox to maintain, That Christians are obliged to nothing,
but such things only as are definitely and in particular commanded, by some
express written Law of GOD in holy Scripture: For many things which are in
Nature and kind indifferent, when they are commanded by Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, or any other lawful autho^ity, come within the compass of God's
general Law, and that general Law obliges people to perform them; Mediante
Praecepto Parentis, Heri, Magistratus, Ecclesiae, etc. by a mediate precept of
Parent, Master, Magistrate, or Church, page 93.

2 To the Objector's Argument, the answer is; Where God's Law commands not,
either in particular or in general, there is no sin: but if God's Law command
in general, That we must obey every lawful ordinance of the Church, being
subservient to God's glory, and the edification of his people: and the Church
commands us religiously to observe the Lord's Day; Christian people are bound
in conscience to obey Bernard. d. Praecept. and Dispens. cap. 12. Sive Deus,
sive homo vi^^rius Dei mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pari profecto
obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia deferendu^, ubi tamen Deo contraria non
praecipit homo.
: and if they do otherwise, they transgress God's Commandment, and are
guilty of sin, page 93.

3 Whereas this Scribler affirms, that no man is able to define a convenient
and sufficient time for God's worship, etc. and compares the undertaking
thereof to the imagination of the being of a World in the Moon, etc. I doubt
not but that this quaint conceit, makes him prick up his ears: but upon due
examination it will prove as ridiculous as the Man in the Moon: For if any one
presume to define things which are remote from humane cognizance, not having
sufficient means to prove his affirmation, he justly deserves to be condemned
of rashness and folly: But the Governors in the Christian Church, want not
complete and sufficient means to enable them to set down and determine,
convenient and sufficient time for God's public worship: for they have many
general Rules, laid down in holy Scripture, for the ordering of
Ecclesiastical affairs: they have likewise Presidents of the Divine Law in
ancient time: they have the practice and example of the Saints of God to direct
and lead them: and Christian prudence has enabled them in former ages to
appoint sufficient and convenient days and times for God's solemn worship:
and in these days, they have both understanding, and authority to do the like.

4 God's vengeance upon malicious profaners of the Lord's Day, is no sufficient
argument to prove, that this day is expressly or literally commanded, to be
observed in the Christian Church, by the particular Precept of the fourth
Commandment. For wilful transgression of the Precepts of the Church,
commanding such actions and offices, as are religious, holy, and subservient to
God's glory, brings God's heavy judgments upon profane and disobedient people.

5 In the close of the former Argument, Brother B. casts dirt in the Face of
him whom he styles his Adversary; saying, This were sufficient to admonish the
Adversary of his presumptuous oppositions thereunto. But where, or when, has
his Adversary delivered any Position in his late Treatise, or elsewhere, in
defense of profaneness upon the Lord's Day, or upon any other day? For honest
and sober recreation upon some part of the Holyday, is far more remote from
profaneness, than the factious and viperous deportment Aug. c. Petilian. li. 2
Idipsum vipereum est, non habere in ore firmamentum veritatis, sed venenum
maledictionis.
of this Roarer, against such as comply not with him in his presumptuous
Dictats.

B. Mr. Hooker, Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. Sect 70. has these words: If it be
demanded whether we observe these times (to wit, Holy Days) as being thereunto
bound by force of Divine Law, or else by the only positive Ordinances of the
Church: I answer to this, That the very Law of Nature it self, which all Men
confess to be God's Law, requires in general, no less the sanctification of
times, than of places, persons, and things unto God's honor. For which cause
it has pleased him heretofore, as of the rest, so of time likewise to exact
some parts by way of perpetual homage, never to be dispensed withal, nor
remitted: again, to require some other parts of time with as strict exaction,
but for less continuance; and of the rest which were less arbitrary, to
accept what the Church shall in due consideration consecrate voluntarily unto
like religious uses.

Of the first kind, among the Jews, was the Sabbath Day: Of the second, those
Feasts which are appointed in the Law of Moses. The Feast of Dedication,
invented by the Church, stands in the number of the last kind. The Moral Law
requiring therefore a seventh part throughout the age of the whole world to be
that way employed, although with Us the day be changed, in regard of a new
revolution begun by our Savior Christ: yet the same proportion of time
continues which was before; because in reference to the benefit of Creation,
and now much more of Renovation thereunto added by Him, which was Prince of the
World to come; we are bound to account the sanctification of one day in seven,
a duty which God's immutable Law does exact for ever.

You see that in terms he agrees, and jumpeth with the express Doctrine of
our Church, in the Homily touching the perpetual morality of the fourth
Commandment: We are bound (says he) to account the sanctification of one day
in seven, (which before he says is now our Lord's Day) a duty which God's
immutable Law does exact for ever.


Answ.
Mr. H. in the passage aforesaid, delivers nothing in substance differing
from the Bishop.

1 He says, that God's natural Law requires the sanctification of times in
general: and he affirms the same concerning places, persons Melanch. loc.
com. in 3. Praecept. and Steckel. Annot. ib. Sicut nullum certum locum, ita
neque tempus certu^, nominavit Deus in novo Testamento, sed haec reliquit
Ecclesiae sta^uenda. page 58.
etc. But the sanctification of particular places, is required by no express
special Law in the new Testament, but only by the equity or general Law of
Nature, and the practice and example of holy people in ancient times.

2 He affirms not, that the observation of the Lord's Day is commanded by
special and express words of the fourth Commandment, for he acknowledges a
general Law only, which can be no other but the natural Equity and Analogy
of the fourth Commandment.

B. Bishop Andrews says, etc. It has ever been the Churches Doctrine, that
Christ made an end of all Sabbaths by his Sabbath in the Grave: That Sabbath
was the last of them. And that the Lord's Day presently came in place of it.

The Lord's Day was by the Resurrection of Christ declared to be the Christians
day: and from that very time (of Christ's Resurrection) it began to be
celebrated as the Christian Man's Festival. For the Sabbath had reference to
the old Creation, but in Christ we are a new Creature, a new Creation by him,
and to have a new Sabbath, etc.


Answ.
1. If Christ (according to Bishop Andrews) made an end of all Sabbaths, then
he m^de an end of the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. And from hence it is
consequent, that the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment was not simply moral,
or of the Law of Nature; for that which is such, is unchangeable and
perpetual: and besides, the observation of the Lord's Day, cannot be enjoined
by a Law or Commandment which is ceased.

2 Bp. Andrews saying, The Lord's Day was declared to be the Christians
festival by the Resurrection of Christ, and was celebrated rather than any
other Day, proves, that the celebration thereof, was not grounded upon the
special Law of the fourth Commandment (as this Dialogist has formerly said)
but upon our Savior's Resurrection. Neither does the learned Bishop teach,
that it was grounded upon Christ's Resurrection as upon a Law: but according to
the common vote of all Antiquity, his meaning must be, that our Savior's
Resurrection was a motive persuading and inducing the Christian Church to
observe that day rather than any other.

Lastly, by new Sabbath, the Bishop understands the Christian Sabbatisme,
which is, ceasing and resting from the deeds of sin, especially upon the
Lord's Day, and upon other Festival days which are devoted to godliness, and
to Religious Offices.

B. Bp. Andrews in a Catecheticall Tractate delivers these following: That
the old Sabbath was no Ceremony. The day is changed, but no Ceremony proved. It
were not wise to set a Ceremony in the amidst of moral Precepts. The Law of
Nature is the Image of GOD: Now in GOD there can be no Ceremony, etc. The Law
of the Decalogue is totally of the Law of Nature.

Now from the Premises we observe, what was the judgment of that learned
Prelate, etc. He shows plainly, that the Lord's Day coming in place of the
old Sabbath Day, and so becoming our Sabbath Day, is by necessary consequence
grounded upon the fourth Commandment, the Law whereof is perpetual, because
naturally moral. So as hence I might frame this Argument: That day which comes
in place of the old Sabbath, is commanded in the fourth Commandment: But the
Lord's Day is come in place of the old Sabbath: Therefore it is commanded in
the fourth Commandment.


Answ.
1. It is not certain to Us, that Bishop Andrews was the Author of the
Pattern of C^techeticall Doctrine, cited by the Objector: or if in his younger
days, before he had thoroughly examined the Question of the Sabbath, he
delivered the passage here mentioned, yet after his riper years, and when he
was come to maturity of judgment, he has not in any Tractate, published by
himself, while he was living, or by some Reverend Bishops, after his decease,
maintained the former Doctrine.

And in very deed, he could not, in his riper years (being a man of great
learning, and judgment, and thoroughly versed in Antiquity) maintain the same.

For 1. It is apparently false, and repugnant to Scripture, and all Antiquity,
that the fourth Commandment was entirely moral, and had no Ceremony in it.
This is effectually proved by the Bishop, page 161. 163. etc. and all
exceptions and objections to the contrary, are solved and cleared.

2 It is an infallible Verity, that the Law of the fourth Commandment, in
respect of one determinate weekly day, was temporary, and legally positive
Tertul. adv. jud. ca. 4. Manifestum itaque est non aeternum, nec spiritale
(Evangelicum) sed temporale fuisse praeceptum, quod quandoque cessaret.
. Read the Bishop's Treatise, page 28. 29. 30. etc.

3 Bishop Andrews having said, The Lord's Day presently came in place of the
Old Sab. The rude Dialogist frames this Argument following: That which comes
in place of the Old Sabbath, is commanded in the fourth Commandment. But the
Lord's Day is come in place of the Old Sabbath. Therefore the Lord's Day is
commanded in the fourth Commandment.


When the Bishop read this Argument, propounded with no little pride and
ostentation by the Dialogue br^acher, he admired the ignorance and stupidity of
the Man. For the major Proposition, is so notoriously false and absurd, and
refuted by so many instances, that he is (...) (...). Aiunt liberidem proprie
significare membranam extrema, qua faetus vaccarum obtegitur: in qua and ipsa
vestigia duntaxat oculorum apparent.
, as blind as a Calves Kell, who cannot discern the rudity and falsity of it.
As for example: The Sacrament of Baptism succeeded, and came in place of
Circumcision: The Holy Eucharist in place of the Legal Passover: Evangelicall
Sacrifices in place of Legal and Leviticall: The Evangelicall Law, in place of
Moses Law.

If now one shall argue, Ergo, the Sacrament of Baptism, is commanded by the
Old Law of Circumcision: and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by the Old Law
of the Legal Passover, etc. shall he not declare himself to be void of
common understanding?

Although therefore the Lord's Day came in place of the Old Sabbath day of the
fourth Commandment; Yet it was not commanded or observed in the Christian
Church, by authority of that Law: any more than Baptism is command by the Law
of Circumcision.

But now the contrary to that, which the Objector imagines, may be concluded
by this argument, namely:

That day, which comes in place of the Old Sabbath Day, is not commanded by the
Old Law, but by some other new Law: For these two days, differ in kind, the
one being Legal, and the other Evangelicall; now even as that which is merely
Legal, is not commanded by the Law of the Gospel, but by the Old Law: even so
that which is merely Evangelicall, is not commanded by a precept of the Old
Law:

But the observation of the Lord's Day, considered as a particular Holy day,
grounded upon our Savior's Resurrection, is merely Evangelicall, according to
Brother B. himself H. B. Law and Gospel reconcil. p. 51. That which gave it a
stamp of divine institution, was the Lord's own act, in blessing and
sanctifying this Lord's Day, with his blessed and glorious Resurrection.
.

Therefore the Observation of the Lord's Day, is not commanded by the Old Law of
the fourth Commandment.

A. I remember the Treatiser confesses, that the Apostles themselves at
sometimes observed this Day as Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. page 211.


B. At sometimes only? What? no oftener than he finds expressly mentioned?
This is like him in Oxford, who in his Sermon said that the Jews kept the
Sabbath, but once in 40. years, during their abode in the wilderness. This he
gathered, because he found it but once mentioned: but he might have found it
twice, if he had looked well. So as this is a most beggarly kind of reasoning.

How injurious an imputation is it to the Apostles, to say that they kept the
Lord's Day sometimes, when as they taught and commanded This bold companion
powers out his own fancies, and takes that as granted, which is impossible to
be proved. Zanch. de oper. Red page 610. Nullibi legimus Apostolos hoc cuipiam
mandasse: tantum legimus quid soliti fuerint facere Apostoli and fideles eo
die: Liberum igitur reliquerunt.
others to observe it weekly, as has been noted; Did Christian People
immediately after Christ's Ascension observe this weekly day, and did not the
Apostles themselves? This is too grossly repugnant to good reason, to our
Homily, and to the witnesses produced.


Answ.
1. The Bishop's words page 211. are, The Apostles themselves as sometimes
observed this day, etc.

Now the ingenuous Reader must consider the reason, why the Bishop spoke thus
reservedly, which was: Theo. Brab. had objected against the Lord's Day, that it
could not be proved by Holy Scripture, that the Holy Apostles constantly
observed the Lord's Day, or that they commanded the observation thereof, two
weeks, or one Month together in all Christian Churches.

In answer to this Objection, the Bishop held it not sufficient to cry out,
this is too grossly repugnant to good reason, and to the Homily, and to Doctor
Andrews, and it is impudent: but if he would speak to purpose, he must
confirm his answer, by testimonies of Scripture.

Now when he had searched with much diligence, he could find none such:
Therefore he carried himself like himself, in affirming no more than he
was, without qui^^ies and cavills, well able to prove. It Is an easy matter,
like a P^^-gun, to blurt out paper shot: but if one have to deal with an
intelligent adversary, he shall be sure to come off with disgrace, if he make a
noise only, and prove nothing.

2 The Objector says: that it is an injurious imputation to the Apostles, to
say, that they kept the Lord's Day sometimes, when as they had taught*
Christian people immediately after Christ's Ascension to observe it generally
in all Churches.

Now in this assertion, there is:

1 Petitio principii: for this Dictator, neither already has, nor at any time
hereafter will be able to demonstrate out of Holy Scripture, That the Apostles
presently, and immediately after Christ's Ascension, commanded all Christian
Churches to observe the Lord's Day. For the Apostles themselves, and namely
Saint Peter were not resolved of the cessation of all Legal Ceremonies
presently after Christ's Ascension, Act. 10.14.

2 Until the Conversion of the Gentiles, the Christian converts among the
Jews observed the Old Sabbath Day, and the Apostles joined with them in their
Synagogues, preaching the Gospel to them upon that day, Acts 13.14. They came
to Antioch, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and after the
reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue said unto
them, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of Exhortation for the People,
say on, Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 17.2. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto
them, and three Sabbath Days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.

3 Saint Paul was not called to be an Apostle of the Gentiles, at the very
instant of time of Christ's Ascension, and yet he was the first of all the
Apostles, who in holy Scripture (above twenty years after Christ's Ascension)
is reported to have preached the Gospel, and broken bread upon the Lord's Day,
Acts 20.7. etc.

A. These two witnesses ( Bishop Andrews, and Mr. Hooker) and these instances,
I perceive, come full home to the Homily, and Dr. Andrews calls the Lord's Day
our New Sabbath.


Answ.
I do earnestly entreat the impartial Reader to consider, that this
Dialogue-former has not one sound, or probable argument, in his whole
Treatise, either to prove his own Tenet, or to confute his Adversary; His only
color is (and this may mis-leade a weak and improvident Reader) to wit,
certain passages in the Homily, and in some modern Authors of our Nation,
which according to outward sound of words may seem to favor him;

Therefore it must be observed:

1 The greatest Doctors Aug. de Praed. sanct. c. 14. Quid opus est, ut eorum
scrutemur opuscula, qui priusquam ista haeresis oriretur, no^ habuerunt
necessitatem in hac difficili ad solvendum quaestione versati, quod procul
dubio facerent, si respondere talibus cogerentur?
at sometimes, and before Errors and Heresies are openly defended, are not,
neither can they be so circumspect in their writing, as to avoid all forms and
expressions, all sentences and propositions, all and every Tenet, which in
after times may yield advantage to the Adversaries of truth, but in Homilies,
and Sermons especially, Divines use to speak more freely, and not to handle
Questions Scholastically, or in a precise Doctrinall way.

Before the Pelagian Heresy did arise, not only many Greek and Latin
Fathers, but even great S. Augustine himself August. d. Praed. Sanct. cap. 3.
Neque enim fidem putavi Dei gratia praeveniri, ut per illam nobis daretur quod
posceremus utiliter: nisi quia credere non possemus, si non praecederet
praeconium veritatis: ut autem praedicato nobis Evangelio consentiremus nostrum
esse proprium, and nobis ex nobis inesse arbitrabar: quem meum errorem,
nonnulla opuscula mea satis indicant.
maintained some passages which savoured of Pelagianisme: S. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
in Ioh. Hom. 17. Hinc admoneri poss^mus, Deum suis in nos beneficiis, nostras
non praevenire voluntates, sed a nobis incipiendum esse. Sed cum nos prompto,
paratoque animo, ad suscipiendam gratiam exhibemus, tunc multas nobis offert
salutis occasiones. Sixth. Senens. Bibl. lib. 5. Annot. 101. Dicendum cum
Ani^no, Chrysostomum interdum naturae nostrae vires plus oequo extulisse, ex
contentione disputandi eum Manichaeis and Gentilibus, qui hominem asserebant,
vel natura malum, vel fati violentia ad peccatum compelli. Hieron. c. Ruffin.
l. 2. Certe antequam in Alexandria, quasi daemonium meridianum Arius
nasceretur, innocenter quaedam, and minus caute loquuti sunt ( Clemens
Alexandrinus and alii.)
in some of his Homilies is very broad, in advancing the natural power of
Free Will to perform good works. But after that heretical spirits had vented
their heterodoxall opinions: Then Divines became more circumspect, and wary;
and they punctually, distinctly, and exactly propounded their Doctrine.

I shall now crave leave to apply the former passage to the present occasion.

Before there arose Controversy in our Church concerning the Sabbath, or at
leastwise before the Controversy grew to an height, Divines spoke and writ
more freely: and they were not always so cautelous and circumspect, as to
foresee the evil construction which Adversaries of truth might make of their
writing and speaking. But now when the Sabbatarian Heresy Aug. d. bon. pe^sev.
cap. 20. Didicimus singulas quasque Haereses intulisse Ecclesiae proprias
quaestiones, contra quas diligentius defenderetur Scriptura Divina, quam si
nulla talis necessitas cogeret.
for the necessary observation of the old Sabbath, and a fanaticall opinion of
some others for the observation of the Lord's Day in a more precise form than
the very Judicial Law it self obliged the Jews to keep the old Sabbath:
when, I say, these errors sprang up, and were defended with an high hand, and
obtruded upon the Church, A necessity was cast upon us to examine all such
Positions as were the grounds of such errors; and to examine all terms and
forms of speaking, which were incident to the Question in hand.

Now if upon evidence of truth we shall in some passages dissent from some men
of note, living in this Church before us, or use other terms in our writing or
disputing: Nay, if we shall in some things have altered our own former opinion
and forms of speaking Cyprian. Ep. (...) Quirin. Nec debere unumquemque pro eo
quod semel imbiberat, and fervebat, pertinaciter congredi: sed si quid melius
and utilius extiterit, libenter amplecti. Non enim vincimur quando offeruntur
nobis melio^a. Aug. ^. Crescon. l. 3. c. 3. Sicut laudabile est, a vera
sententia non amoveri, ita culpabile est in fals^ persistere, quam nunquam
tenere prima lau^ est, secunda mutare: ut aut ex initio vera permaneat, aut
mutata falsa, vera succedat. Aug. d. bon. persev. cap. 21. Propterea nunc facio
libros, in quibus opuscula mea retractanda suscepi, ut nec meipsum in omnibus
me secutum (...) isse demonstrem.
, we trust that godly Christians will not impute this unto us as an offense,
but in their charity will judge us (as the ancient Church did Saint Augustine,
to wit) that what we do in this kind, proceeds from the care we have, in
fair and perspicuous manner to maintain and defend Truth.

In the last place our Reader must observe, That the Objector himself
regards not the express or literal sense of the Book of Homilies; neither
receives the same as the Doctrine of the Church of England, but only according
to his own private interpretation; for in his Plea to an Appeal, traversed
Dialogue wise, betwixt Asotus, Babylonius, and Orthodoxus, page 14. he
declares himself in manner following:

The Appealer had affirmed, That if a person* justified, and consequently in
the state of Grace, should commit any foul and malicious crime, to wit,
Adultery Aug. in Ioh. tr. 41. Crimen est peccatu^ grave, accusatione and
damnatione dignu^. Cyprian. d. pudicit. Adulterium, fraus, homicidiu^, mortale
crimen est. Bernard d. Praecept. and Disp. c. 12. Adulterium quocunque modo,
quocunque perpetres animo, turpe flagitium est, ac criminale peccatum.
, etc. and should continue in that sin a Month, a Year, or for a longer time,
acting the same again and again, or as often as opportunity served: That then
such a person ceased to be justified, and in the state of Grace, until he had
forsaken his sin; for no person can be justified and consequently be in the
state of grace, unless he have remission Chrysostom. d. Poen. Hom. 5. Remissio
peccatoru^ fons salutis and poenitentiae munus. Poenitentia medicamentum est
peccatum extinguens.
of his sin from God, Romans 4.7. But there can be no remission of sin from God,
unless a sinner Amb. Ep. 76. Debet poenitentia prius damnare peccatu^, ut
gratia possit abolete. Tertul. d. Bapt. c. 10. Poenitentia an^ecedit, Remissio
sequitur.
repent him of his sin, Acts 3.19. Luc. 13.5. and 24.47. and in offenses of
such quality as adultery is, there can be no sufficient repentance, unless the
offender forsake his sin Aug. lib. 50 hom. 2. Si etiam totum dares, and
peccatum non desereres, teipsum desereres. Id. d. Eccles. Dogm. c. 54.
Poenitentia vera est poenitenda non admittere. Idem d. Temp. Ser. 7. Ista est
vera poenitentia, quando sic convertitur quis, ut non revertatur; quando sic
poenitet, ut non repetat. Idem. de Civ. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 25. Non sunt membra
Christi, qui se faciunt membra meretricis, nisi malum illud poenitendo esse
destiterint, and ad hoc bonum reconciliatione redre^int Hier. Ep. ad Sabinian.
Si peccato mortuifuerint, tunc eis remittetur peccatum. Quod quamdiu in peccato
vixerint, non dimittitur.
, Pro. 28.13. Esaias 1.16, 17. and 55.7. An Adulterer therefore continuing in his
sin, and committing the same as often as opportunity serves, is not justified
before God: For God who calls it an abomination in us Men to justify the
wicked, Prove. 17.15. cannot himself justify any sinner continuing in his
wickedness; and therefore every such sinner cease to be justified, until he
have repented and forsaken his sin.

The Author of the Appeal (at this present a learned and Reverend Bishop)
maintained the former Doctrine by the words of the Homily, affirming that the
Doctrine delivered in the Homily was the Doctrine of the Church of England,
page li. 32.

In answer to the former, Brother B. sets his gloss upon the Homily, saying
Plea to the Appeal. lb. As neither the Church of England her self avoucheth,
or concludes any thing for Doctrine and matters of faith, but so far as is
consonant to the word of God: so neither are we to measure her doctrines, but
by the only line and rule of the Scriptures. Ib. For the Articles and H^milies
of the Church of England, we subscribed unto the^ indeed: but not to the
private sense, which every particular man may put upon them. Idem. Christ.
Conf. and Compl. p^g 92.
, that we are to measure the Doctrines of the Church of England by the line and
rule of holy Scr pture: and that we must not take the words of the Homily at
the first rebound, according to our own fancy, but so far as the same is
consonant to the word of God, page 14.

But if this Rule which the Dialogue Dauber has approved, is authentical;
then we can see no reason, wherefore it may not be lawful for us, as well as
for him, to expound the words of the Homily in point of the Sabbath, according
to the sense of holy Scripture. And if we may do this, then it is undoubtedly
true, that it was not the intent of the Homily to make the 4th Commandment a
Precept of the Law of Nature; or a moral Precept purely, entirely, and
properly such.

Our request likewise is, that Br. B. would make a review of a confident
Argument propounded by him against the Appealer in his Plea, page 17. the scope
whereof is* That a Person once justified, and in the state of Grace, if
afterward he become an Adulterer, or wilfully commit any other the like crime
or sin, and continues therein, yet he still remains in the state of Grace,
without any diminution of his faith, no not in the degrees.

His Argument is as follows; A mortal Father begets a mortal Son: So the
immortal God can beget no Son, but he is immortal.

Now it is impossible for the immortal God to dye, no not for a moment.

Of this nature also is the Borne of God H. B. Plea to the Appeal. Now this
being so clear a proof, if any places of Scripture seem to be opposite, they
are so only in sound, not in sense.
, he cannot fall away totally, that is, dye in his spiritual life, no not for
a moment.

But upon the foresaid ground, Br. B. may proceed further, and conclude, that
no person once regenerate, can possibly sin at any time, in thought, word, or
deed, neither can he die a temporal death. For if God Almighty, being a
Father of the regenerate, has begotten all his sons, in nature like
himself, and it is impossible for God Himself, either to dye, or to sin:
Then it will likewise be impossible, for any Regenerate Persons to sin, in
thought, word, or deed, they cannot at any time covet or lie, or transgress
any Divine Law, neither can they dye a temporal Death.

The learned Author of the Appeal, believes that Br. B. was pleased to act
Asotus his part (although he styled himself Orthodoxus) when he propounded
the former Argument.

For although it is true; that an immortal father, begetting a son of the same
nature and substance with himself, every such natural son, must be
immortal, like unto his natural father (as appears in the second person of
the Trinity, according to his Deity Aug. c. Faust. Manich. li. 3. ca. 3. Vnicum
filium habet Deus, qu^m genuit de substantia sua, de quo dicitur, cum in forma
Dei esset, non rapinam arbitratus est, se aequalem esse Deo: Nos autem non de
substantia sua genuit; creatura enim sumus, quam non genuit, sed fecit.
) yet it is extreme false, and most absurd to affirm, that all such Persons as
are the Sons of God, merely by his Voluntary Election, free gift, or by
Creation, or Adoption, and so far as they imitate and obey him Id. Sermon. Dom.
in Mont. c. 46. Vnus naturaliter filius est qui nescit omnino peccare. Nos
autem, potestate accepta, efficimur filii, in quantum ea quae ab illo
praecipiuntur implemus. Id. in Psa. 44. Ille creando pater: sed nos illum
imitando filii.
, Matthew. 5.45. do partake the essential, and natural proprieties and
Attributes of God himself their heavenly Father. For Adam was the son of God
by Creation, Luke 3.38. And Infants baptized are regenerate with the Holy
Spirit, and made the Children of God by Adoption: and yet notwithstanding Adam
by disobedience fell from grace, and became mortal: and all Infants regenerate
in Baptism are mortal, and many of these coming to years of discretion, by
sin and Infidelity fall away from the state of Grace, and Adoption August.
Ep. 59. Quid dicturus est de Infantulis parvulis, qui plerique accepto in illa
aetate gratiae Sacrame^to, qui sine dubio pertinerent ad vita^ aeternam,
regnumque caeloru^, si continuo ex hac vita emigrarent, sinuntur crescere, and
no^nulli etiam Apostatae sunt.
, received in their Baptism.

Prosper Aquitauicus Prosp. ad artic. falls. impos. cap. 7. Cyprian. Ep. 76.
Nonnulli de illis, qui sani baptizantur, si postmodum peccare caeperint,
Spiritu immundo redeunte quatiuntur: ut manifestum sit diabolum Baptismo fide
credentis excludi, si fides postmodum defecerit, regredi.
, S. Augustine's Disciple and interpreter, says as follows: Ex regeneratis
in Christo Jesus, q^^sd^^ relicta fide and ^^is moribus apostatare a Deo, and
impiam Vitamin su^ ^versione finire, multis (quod dolendum est) probatur
exemplis. Among those which are regenerate in Christ Jesus, that some persons
by forsaking faith and good manners fall away from God, and and their wicked
life in Apostasy, is proved, (the more is the pity) by many examples.

A. Sir you have abundantly satisfied me in this point, and, I suppose, every
Rational man, and true bred son of the Church of England: and surely I
wonder so learned a man should commit so foul an error, as not to search
better into the Doctrine of our Church, so clearly expressed in the Homily.


Answ.
In the Bishop's Epistle prefixed to this Treatise, and in the precedent
examination of the Objections out of the book of Homilies, the judicious
Reader will observe this former babble of Br. Asotus, fully confuted, both by
the express words of our Statute Law, and also by many other weighty arguments
and authorities.

B. You need not wonder at it, we have all known him to do as great a matter
as that: for was not his hand to the approbation of a Book in printe, (though
afterward called in by Sovereigne authority) which contains, and maintains
many, sundry Tenets both Pelagian and Popish, flat against the clear Doctrines
of our Church: and whereby he has as yet made no public recantation, to
remove the scandal from the Church of England, and to satisfy so high an
offense given.


Answ.
One H. B. some few years past, vented an envious and illiterate Pamphlet,
against the Author of the Appeal, and against his Approver, H. B. Plea to an
Appeal. Pres. to the Reader.
accusing them, that they avow, approve, and stiffely maintain gross and
grievous heresies, devised by the Devil:

The principal, and most notorious of all the rest, he makes the Appealer's
Tenet concerning the loss of faith and justification: which one heresy (says
he) overthrows the whole tenure and truth of the Gospel: it turns upside
down the very foundation of our salvation, it reviveth directly in part, and by
consequence altogether, that wicked Heresy of the Pelagians.

The Appealer in the Treatise, (which. H. B. entertaineth with such foul
language) affirms, that it seemed to him; A justified person, by committing
foul and wilful sin, might really fall away from grace, and cease to be
justified.

The 16. Article of our Churches Doctrine, and the words of our Homilies The
first and second part of the Sermon of falling from God, page 54. and page 57.
seemed to him, to maintain this position: and Saint Augustine, and his
followers were of this judgment.

H. B. after much prating and ignorant disputing, coming at length to Saint
Augustine, says as follows: Saint Augustine is so copious in this point of
perseverance (to wit, that justified persons cannot fall away from grace,
either totally or finally) that I marvel that any man, who has read St. Aug.
of these points, would ever meddle with him in this matter, to wrest one
mangled testimony, against so many pregnant proofs of truth.

Now Br. B. was forced to this desperate assertion, because otherwise he must
have been proclaimed a malicious Calumniator, in accusing the Appealer of
Pelagianisme, and devilish Heresy.

For Saint Augustine was a professed Adversary to the Pelagians, and to all
their devilish Heresies, and therefore if this most learned, and godly Father
in his disputations against Pelagians, and their Adheres, expressly and
constantly maintained, that some regenerate and justified Persons might really
fall away from saving and justifying grace; then it is certain that the said
Tenet is not Pelagian.

Saint Augustine's Positions concerning the former question.
First, this Holy Father distinguished justified Persons, into two kinds or
sorts, to wit:

1 Some of them are God's Children according to his secret and eternal
Predestination Aug. de Corrept. and great. ca. 9. In illa praedestinatione sunt
filii ejus, nondum nati sunt filii ejus.
.

2 Some justified persons are his Children, propter susceptam temporaliter
gratiam, because for a time only, (namely during their perseverance,) they Ib.
c. 8. Mirandu^ est quide^, etc. quod filiis suis Deus quibusdam, quos
regeneravit in Christo, quibus fidem, spem dilectionem dedit, non dat
perseveratiam.

Ib. ca. 9. Filiis suis non praedestinatis, Deus perseverantiam non dedit.


are partakers of divine grace.

The first of these are God's sons, because according to his eternal purpose
they are predestinate to the final receiving the inheritance prepared for his
Children.

The Temporary are not his Children according to his eternal prescience Aug.
Ib. Non illos dicit filios praescientia Dei. Prosp. ad artic. falls. impos.
sent. 7.
, and because he foreseeth they shall not finally persevere, and obtain the
Crown of everlasting glory.

Secondly, St. Aug. affirms of both these sons, the Temporary, as well as the
Perseverant Aug. de Bon. persev. ca. 8. Vtrique vocati fuerunt, and vocantem
sequuti: utrique ex impiis justificati, and per lavachrum regenerationis
utrique renovati. Id. de Cor. and great. ca. 6. Si aute^ jam regeneratus and
justificatus in mala^ vitam sua volu^tate relabitur, certe ille non potest
dicere, non accepi, quia accepta^ gratia^ Dei, suo in malum libero amisit
arbitrio Prosp. ad artic. falls. impos ca. 7.
, that they were called of GOD, and they followed or obeyed his calling;
Vtrique ex impiis justificati, both of them being naturally impious, were
justified, and regenerate or renewed by the laver of Regeneration.

Thirdly, he teaches, that the temporary, during the time of their
perseverance, were endued with faith working by Charity Aug. de cor. and gra.
ca. 6. fide^ quae per dilectione^ operatur. Ib. c. 8. came qua Christian
viverent dilectionem dedit. Ib. c. 13. In fide quae per dilectionem operatur
incipere vivere.
: Acceperunt fidem quae per dilectionem operatur: They had received faith
working by Charity: They lived justly, and faithfully for a time Ca. 8. cu^
fideliter and pie viverent cum colueru^t bona fide.
, They lived piously with hope of immortality, not foiling their Conscience
with foul crimes Id. de Civ. Dei. li. 11. c. 12. Quos videmus just and pie
vivere cu^ spe futurae immortalitatis, sine crimine vasta^te conscientiam.
: They heard the voice of Christ, and obeyed it Id. in Ioh. tr. 45. qua^diu
recte sapiunt, audiu^t vocem Christi.
: Lastly, during the time of their perseverance, Non simulaverunt justitiam,
They played not the Hypocrites, neither was their righteousness fained Id. d.
cor. and gra. c. 9. Deum coluerunt bona fide. c. 8.
.

Fourthly, St. Augustine his Tenet was, that justified and regenerate persons
of both kinds have fallen away, and possibly they may fall away from
justificant grace. The Predestinate may fall away for a time, but so, as they
shall undoubtedly by Repentance, and forsaking their sin, recover Aug. de civ.
Dei. li. 17. c. 8 c. Faust. Manich. li. 21 c. 81 and 88. d. Doctr. Christ. li.
3. ca. 21. In Psa. 126. In Johan. tr. 66. and tr. 103. d. Bapt. c. Do^. li. 1.
c. 11. d. cor. and gra. c. 6. and 7. and 8. and 13. Ad art. falls. impos. art.
13. Hypognost. li. 6. ca. 7. Novimus aliquos etiam perfectos ex labor multorum
annorum prolapsos in ultimo vitae suae and perisse.
.

The non predestinate do fall away in such manner, as that they either perish
in the act of their sin, or if they live, they fall into hardness of heart,
and are never renewed by repentance.

Fifthly his Doctrine is, that if the Temporary and non perseverant had been
taken out of this life by temporal death, before their Apostasy, they must
undoubtedly have been saved.

But God Almighty, foreseeing their voluntary Apostasy, permitted them to
prolong their days in this present evil world, until they fell into damnable
crimes, and continued in the same without returning into the state of
justifying grace Aug. d. corrept. and gra. cap. 8. Respondeant si possunt, cur
illos Deus, cum fideliter and pie viverent, non tum de hujus vitae periculis
rapuit, ne malitia mutaret intellectum eorum. Idem. d. Bon. persev. cap. 9* and
10. and 13. d. Pec. mer. and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 21. Id. ad Vital. Epist. 107.
Cur quidam non permansuri in fide and sanctitate Christiana, tamen accipiant ad
tempus hanc gratiam, and dimittantur hic vivere donec cadant, cum possint rapi
de hac vita, ne malitia mutet intellectum eorum, quod de sancto immatura aetate
defuncto scriptum est in libro Sapientiae, quaerat quisque ut potuerit. Idem d.
Praedest. sanct. cap. 14. Quis audeat negare Christianum justum, si morte
praeoccupatus fuerit, in refrigerio futurum? Item si dixerit justum, si a sua
justitia recesserit in qua diu vixit, and in ea impietate fuerit defunctus, in
qua non dico unum annum, sed unum diem duxerit, in poenas iniquis debitas hinc
iturum, huic perspicuae veritati quis fidelium contradicit? Forro si quaeratur
a nobis, utrum si tunc esset mortuus quando erat justus, poenas inventurus
esset an requiem, nunquid requiem respondere dubitabimus? Haec est tota causa
cur dictum est, raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectum ejus. Ibid. Quare
aliis concedatur ut ex hujus vitae periculis dum justi sunt auserantur, alii
vero justi donec a justitia cad^nt, in eisdem periculis vita productiore
teneantur, quis cognovit sensum Domini? Ib. Cur autem hic tenuerit casutum
justum, quem priusquam caderet posset auferre, justissima omnino, sed
inscrutabilia sunt judicia ejus. Idem ad Paulin. Ep. 59. Non sunt in ista
voca^^one, qui in fide quae per dilectionem operatur, etiamsi aliquantulum
ambulant, non perseverant usque in finem: and utique potuerunt rapi, ne malitia
mutaret intellectum eorum.
.

Sixthly, this Orthodoxall Father (according to the Tenure of holy Scripture)
constantly taught, that Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, Righteousness
and Unrighteousness, cannot cohabit at one time in one and the same subject:
and consequently, that foul and wilful sins are not compatible with saving
and justifying grace.

If any Christian (says he) shall love an Harlot, and adhere unto her, and be
made one flesh with her, jam in fundamento non habet Christum, He retains not
Christ in the foundation Aug. d. Civ. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 25. and cap. 26.
.

They are not lively members of Christ, who make themselves members of an
Harlot, until by repentance they forsake that sin, and by returning unto
good, reconcile themselves unto God.

He who lives in hatred or malice only with one Man, loses God, and the
benefit of his former good Id. d. Spir. and Anima. c. 58.
.

Covetousness is the root of all evil, and Charity is the root of all good,
and these twain simul esse non possunt, cannot be together Id. lib. Quinquag.
Hom. Hom. 8.
.

Lastly, upon the former ground, he deterreth faithful Christians from
denying the Faith in time of persecution, and from killing themselves in any
case whatsoever, affirming that the same is Scelus inexpiabile, an impardonable
crime in all persons whatsoever: and auferendo sibi presentem vitam, abnegant
and futuram, by destroying their present life, they deprive themselves of the
future blessed life Id. d^nendac. ad. Consent. c. 6. and d. Civ. Dei. li. 1. c.
17. etc. 26. Euchirid. ad Laurent. ca. 70. and d. patient. c. 13. ad Gaudent.
c. 18. etc. 19. Ep. 38 and 52. and 61.
.

But now quite contrary to this Doctrine of S. Augustine (according to H. B.) a
person once justified, and in the state of grace, although he couple with an
Harlot, or live in envy or malice with his Neighbor; or be a Schismatic in
the Church, and a Rebel in the Common wealth: or if he deny the Faith in time
of Persecution; or to prevent worldly misery he shall murder himself: he
neither falls totally nor finally from grace; he sins not unto death H. B.
Plea to an Appeal. page 16. and 17. and 23. and 33.
, his faith remains entire without diminution: it fails not, no, not in the
degrees: and if any places of Scripture seem to be opposite, they are so only
in sound, and not in sense.

Seventhly, S. Augustine's Tenet was: That because of the frailty and
mutability of man's will, and by reason of peril of man's falling into sin,
(he being overcome by temptation:) no person ordinarily, or without special
revelation, during his mortal life, which is a warfare on earth, can be
infallibly certain of his own final perseverance: and God Almighty, to humble
Man, and to move him to watch and pray, lest he fall into temptation; and to
stir him up to work out his salvation with fear and trembling, has reserved
the knowledge hereof in his own secret Counsel Aug. d. C. Dei. li. 11. ca.
12. Qui licet de suae perseverantiae praemio certi sunt, de ipsa tamen
perseverantia reperiuntur incertl. Quis enim se in action profect^que
justitiae perseveraturum usque in finem sciat, nisi aliqua revelatione fiat
certus. Id. d. Bon. persev. cap. 1. Asserimus donum Dei esse perseverantiam,
qua usque in finem perseveratur in Christo. Finem autem dico in qua vita ista
finitur, in qua tantum modo periculum est ne cadatur. Itaque utrum quisque hoc
munus acceperit quamdiu hanc vitam ducit, incert^m est. Id. cap. 13. and cap.
22. De vita aeterna quam filiis promissionis promisit non mendax Deus ante
tempora aeterna, nemo potest esse securus, nisi cum consummata fuerit haec
vita, quae tentatio est super terram. Id. d. Cor. and gra. cap. 13. Quis ex
multitudine fidelium, quamdiu in hac mortalitate vivitur, in numero
praedestinatorum se esse praesumat, quia id occultari opus est in hoc loco, ubi
sic cavenda ^st elatio, ut etiam per Sathanae angelum, he extolleretur tantus
collaphiza^etur Apostolus. Id: in Psalm. 41. Novi quia justitia Dei manet, utrum
autem mea maneat, nescio. Ter^et enim^me Apostolus dicens: dui putat se stare,
videat ne cadat. Prosper. d. voc. Ge^t. lib. 2. cap. 37. De nullo, ante ipsius
finem, pronunciari potest, quod in electorum gloria sit futurus, ut
perseverantem humilitatem utilis metus servet, and qui star, videat ne cadat.
.

Conclus. It is evident by the former Positions of S. Augustine, that his
constant and express Tenet in his Confutation of the Pelagians, was: That some
persons really justified, might afterward be overcome by temptations, and
fall away from saving and justificant grace.

And therefore H. B. is mendacious in accusing the Appealer of Popery, and
Pelagian Heresy: for we trust, he will not honor the Papals so much, as to
make S. Augustine one of theirs. And that cannot in any charitable construction
be a Pelagian Heresy, which S. Augustine, the grand Adversary of those
Heretics, in his Answers and Confutations constantly maintained against them.

B. Yea, instead of recantation, I my self have heard him in open Court speak
against both justification; that a Man might be justified to day, and damned to
morrow; and against election of some to eternal life; and against the
sanctification of the Sabbath; saying, I say there is no sanctification of the
Sabbath, but Rest, Rest only. And therefore cease to wonder that this man
should be so fearelesse, either privily to undermine, or apertly to oppugn the
express Doctrines of our Church.


Answ.
1. It was the Tenet of S. Augustine Aug. d. Prad. Sanct. cap. 14.
, and of the faithful in his days, that if a just person forsake his
righteousness, in qua diu vixit, wherein he has lived long, and shall depart
this life in wickedness, in qua non unum annum, sed unum diem duxerit, wherein
he continued not one year, but one day, in poenas iniquis debitas hinc
iturum, he shall pass from hence into eternal punishment due to the wicked.
Huic perspicuae veritati (says Saint Augustine) quis fidelium contradicit?
what faithful Christian contradicts this evident or perspicuous verity?

Now if the former doctrine was maintained for Catholic and Orthodoxall, in
Saint Augustine's days, then he, who says, a man may be justified to day, and
be in peril of damnation the next day D. Overall. Confer. Hampt. Court. p 41.
Whosoever (though before justified) did commit any grievous sin, as Adultery,
Murder, Treason, and the like, did become ipso facto, subject to God's wrath,
and guilty of damnation or were in state of damnation quo ad praesentem
justitiam, until they did repent. Against which doctrine (he said) some had
opposed, teaching: That all such persons as were once truly justified,
although after, they fell into never so grievous sins, yet remained still
just, (...) in the state of justification, before they actually repented of
these sins: Yea, and although they never repented of them, through
forgetfulness, or sudden death, yet th y should be saved w thout Repentance.
, has delivered nothing savoring of Pelagianisme, or repugnant to sound
Doctrine, in the Article of Justification.

2 Br. B. is false in saying, he has heard his Adversary in open Court speak
against God's Election; for the Bishop firmly believes; That God has freely
(without any merit of their own) in his mere bounty and love, for the merit
of Christ, elected all those to eternal life, which shall be glorified in the
world to come.

3 The Bishop truly affirmed, page 143. That the fourth Commandment of the
Decalogue, according to the literal sense thereof; enjoined not such
spiritual, and Evangelicall duties, as Theop. Br. mentioned in his Objection;
to wit, preaching of Christ crucified, and raised from the dead: Prayer to God
the Father in the name of Christ: receiving Baptism, and the Holy Eucharist:
But he maintains that the equity of the fourth Commandment, together with
the Evangelicall Law, requires not only rest from secular labor and
negotiation, but also the performance of spiritual and evangelicall duties,
upon the Lord's Day, and upon other Holy days and times, devoted by the Church
to the service of Christ, page 143.

A. The Adversary in his Book does much except against, and cannot endure,
that the Lord's Day should be called the Sabbath Day. And I remember one
passage in it, wherein he bequarrelleth. H. B. for saying, that the ancient
Fathers did ever and usually call it the Sabbath Day.


B. Concerning that I have spoken with H. B. and he says he will answer and
make good, what he has said against his Adversary. And howsoever those words
indeed, ever and usually, might give Advantage to the Adversary to carpe, yet
being rightly understood, they may pass current enough; for by ever, usually,
he meant that all the ancient Fathers, although they distinguish between the
Lord's Day, and the Jews Sabbath Day, yet they ever took and observed the
Lord's Day instead of the Old Sabbath, and ever used it for the Rest day or
Sabbath of Christians.


Answ.
1. The Bishop's words, page 201. are: I have diligently searched into
Antiquity, and observed in the Fathers, their forms of speech, when they
treat of the Lord's Day: and I find it far differing from the usual
language of the Fathers, to style the Lord's Day the Sabbath Day; And they by
the name Sabbath either understand the Old Legal Sabbath taken away by Christ,
Or the mystical and spiritual Sabbath, which was tiped and represented by the
Sabbath of the fourth Commandment.

2 In the former passage the Bishop speaks not of modern writers, neither
has he denied, that any of these, (especially here in England,) have styled
the Lord's Day, by the name of Sabbath, or Christian Sabbath: for his
assertion, was only concerning the Ancient Fathers Igna. ad Magnes. post
Sabbatu^, omnis Christi amator. dominicam celebret diem, etc. Orig. in Exodus
hom. 7. In nostra dominica, semper pluit Manna, in Sabbato no^ pluit. Clemens
Apost. Constit. li. 7. ca. 24. Sabbatu^ and Dominicum, festos dies agite: quod
ille quidem dies recordatio sit fabricationis mundi: hic vero Resurrectionis.
Athanas. Epist. ad Marcel. Si psallere vis in Sabbato, habes Psalm. 91. Vis
gratias agere in dominico, habes psalm. 23. Ambros. d. sacram. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Greg Nyssen. orat. d. castigat. August. Epist. 86. Hilar. Prolog. in Psalm.
Socrat. hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 8. Tripertit. hist. lib. 1. cap. 9.
: And therefore Br. B. fights with his own shadow, when he produces modern
authorities, to confirm that, which concerns not the point in question.

3 The Bishop, page 205. makes clear ostension, that H. B. had falsified three
places of Saint Augustine: And (to prove himself an impudent Prevaricator) he
had foisted in these words, Hoc est Dominicum, into Saint Augustine's very
text. Contra Adimant. Manich. Cap. 15.

4 This Br. B. for his last refuge, propounds a miserable and ridiculous
argument: to wit, The Fathers observed the Lord's Day in stead of the Old
Sabbath: Ergo, they ever, and usually, called the same, the Sabbath Day.

This argument may be paralleld with one like unto it: The ancient Fathers
observed the Sacrament of Baptism instead of Circumcision: Ergo, the Ancient
Fathers did ever usually style the Sacrament of Baptism, by the name of
Circumcision.

B. Saint Augustine d. temp. Ser. 251. affirms: That the Holy Doctors of the
Church have decreed to transfer all the glory of the Judicial Sabbath, or
Sabbatisme unto the Lord's Day, etc. We must observe the same from evening to
evening, etc. that being sequestered from Rural works, and from all business,
we may be vacant only for the worship of God: Thus we duly sanctify the
Sabbath of the Lord, etc. You see he speaks this not as his own particular
opinion, but as it was the Tenet of the whole Catholic Church, so as the whole
ancient Catholic Church did not only observe, but call the Lord's Day the
Sabbath, etc.


Answ.
1 This Sermon seems to be none of Saint Augustine's, as appears by the
style: Nolite in Ecclesia verbosari, In Ecclesia garriunt and verbosantur.
Cogunt Presbyterum ut abbreviat Missam.

2 The Author of this Sermon, requires the same Vacancie and sanctity, upon
the Birth days of Sa^nts as he does upon the Lord's Day Idcirco, fratres mei,
non sit vobis molestum, in Dominicis diebus, and in natalitiis Sa^ctorum,
divino studere cultui.
.

3 He affirms that the Holy Doctors of the Church translated the glory of the
Judicial Sabbath, upon the Lord's Day Ideo Sancti Doctores Ecclesiae,
decreverunt omnem gloria^ Iudaici Sabbatismi in illam transfer, etc.
: And therefore he could not, without contradiction, ground the Observation of
the Lord's Day, upon the letter or express words of the fourth Commandment.

4 He makes the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment and the Lord's Day, two
distinct, and diverse days of the week; and when he says, sic quoque rite
sanctificamus Sabbatum Domini, etc. He uses the word Sabbath in a mystical
and analogicall sense, and not in a Legal, or literal signification.

5 It is an untruth, that Saint Augustine Aug. ad Ascllic. Epist. 200. Cum
quisque isto modo fuerit verus germanusque Christianus, utrum etiam Iudaeus aut
Israelita dicendus sit merito quaeritur? Quod quidem si non in carne, sed
spiritu hoc esse intelligitur, non debet ipsu^ nomen sibi imponere, sed
spiritali intelligentia retinere, ne propter ambiguitatem vocabuli, quam non
discernit quotidiana locutio, illud profiteri videatur, quod est inimicum
nomini Christiano. Non debemus consuetudinem sermonis humani inepta loquacitate
confundere, etc. inepta insolentia, and si dici potest, imperita scientia.
makes it the common style of the Catholic Church, to call the Lord's Day the
Sabbath: for he was so far, either himself from stiling the Lord's Day the
Sabbath, in a proper or ordinary course of speaking; or from approving this
form of speech in others, that he holds it inept and insolent to give
Judicial names and Appellations, to Persons or things, which are Christian or
Evangelicall: and he gives a reason hereof, because by such ambiguous forms
of speaking, a Christian might seem to profess that which is repugnant to
true Christianity.

B. Hilary. Prolog. in Psalm. Though in the seventh day of the week both the
name and observance of the Sabbath be established: yet we on the eighth day,
which also is the first, do enjoy the festivitie of the perfect Sabbath.


Answ.
The Question is not; Whether the Ancient Fathers have at any time styled the
Lord's Day, a Sabbath, in a mystical and spiritual sense, that is, a day
wherein Christian people ought to abstain from sin. For in this sense they
have styled every day of the Week Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5. c. ^. Qui perfectus
est ratione, operibus, cogitationibus, perpetuo haerens verbo Deo, naturali
nostro Domino, semper agit dies Domini, and nunquam non habet Dominicu^. Tert.
c. Iud. c. 4. Vnde intelligimus magis Sabbatizare nos ab omni opere servili
semper debere, and non tantu^ septimo quoque die, sed per omne tempus. Chrysostom.
in Mat. ho. 40. Quid Sabbato opus est illi, qui per tota^ vitam agit
solennitatem? qui peccatorum immunis, virtutes observat, and colit?
, wherein Christians rest from sin, a Sabbath, page 203, 204.

But whether the Fathers did ever and usually name the Lord's Day the Sabbath
of the fourth Commandment in a proper and literal sense; The Bishop has
proved the Negative, with so many pregnant testimonies of the Fathers, page
202. that no reasonable person can take any just exception.

A. Dr. Wh. denies that Christ upon the day of his Resurrection rested from the
work of Redemption.


B. I conferred with H. B. about this, because it much concerns him to quit
this Question; seeing on Christ's resting on that day, he grounds the
Sabbatisme of it, as agreeable to the fourth Commandment: And in my judgment,
if he can evince and clear it, it will prove unanswerable.

And he tells me, that he has in two several Treatises in Latin Maintaining
your own principles, that the fourth Commandment is purely and simply moral,
and of the Law of Nature, it will be impossible for you, either in English or
in Latin, to solve Theoph. Brab. his Objections.
against Theophilus Brab. fully cleared it, and removed all Objections and
Cavillations, that either Theophilus Brabourne, or Francis White, have or can
bring to the contrary; and he purposes to do the like to D. Wh.

And he made it very clear to me, that Christ's rest from the work of
Redemption from sin on the Cross, and from death in the Grave (which was a
branch of that work) began not till his Resurrection; as for his Ascension,
that was into the place of rest, but his Resurrection was into the state of
rest.

The Bishop's words are: Christ was in action on that day: but the word labor,
is of Br. B. his own coining.
As for D. Wh. his Objection with Theophilus Brabourne, That Christ labored on
that day, H. B. shows it to be absurd and ridiculous, seeing Christ arose with
a body glorified, and impassible: So as his actions that day could not be
called a labor, that thereby the new Sabbath should be broken.


Answ.
1. Our Savior began his Rest from those works of Redemption, by which he
made payment of a price by his blood for our sins Liturg. did give thine
only Son JESUS CHRIST to suffer death upon the Cross for our redemption, who
made there by his own oblation of himself once offered, a full, perfect, and
sufficient Sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, etc. Ordering of Priests: after he had made perfect our redemption by
his death, etc.
, upon the latter part of Goodfriday, immediately upon his saying Consummatum
est, and giving up the ghost, John 19.30. Heb. 10.14. Then he continued in his
Grave and Bed of rest the Sabbath Day following: upon the Sunday he began his
operations of Application of the fruit and benefit of his Passion: and he did
no more rest or cease from those actions upon Sunday, than he did forty days
after.

2 Christ rested as fully upon the Monday, Tuesday, and upon every day
following the day of his Resurrection, from all his afflictive and
satisfactory* Passions, as he did upon the Sunday. If therefore it were granted
that Christ began his Rest upon Sunday, it must be confessed, that he continued
his Rest and Cessation from Redemptive actions every day after: and so the
Sunday was not the only day or time of his Rest.

And if it shall be further objected, that even as notwithstanding the Lord God
ceased, and rested from the work of prime Creation, on every day of the week
following, as much as he did on the first Sabbath; yet the seventh day was made
the Sabbath, because the Lord on that day began his Rest: Therefore because
Christ began his rest upon Sunday, the same must be the Christian Sabbath of
the fourth Commandment.

Our answer is, that God's resting or ceasing from the work of Creation, did
not ordain the Seventh day of the Week to be the Sabbath day Walaeus d. Sab.
c. 7. Deus in creatione rerum quievit die septimo: sed nisi Deus hanc suam
quietem in exemplum adduxisset et praecepto confirmasset, nunquam ecclesia Vet.
Testamenti ad ejus hebdomadalem observationeni fuisset divinitus obligata.
Quemadmodu etiam de die Paschatis and Pentecostes, qui Dei singularibus
beneficiis sunt consecrati, judicandum est eos no^ nisi propter Dei accedens
mandatum, in veteri Testamento necessario fuisse observandos.
: for it was God's express Commandment and Law which did this, and his Rest
was only a Motive (and that merely in his own good pleasure) of sanctifying
that particular Day.

But now concerning the Lord's Day, we find no such express and particular
divine Law or Commandment in holy Scripture; and therefore Christ's resting
from all his Penal sufferings, upon the day of his Resurrection, cannot make
that day of the week a particular Sabbath Day of divine institution, unless
some such express divine Law as the Jews received for their Sabbath, can be
produced.

But if the Objector will obstinately contend, that the Resurrection of Christ
in it self contains a Mandatory Law to observe the Lord's Day, let him first
deliver a true definition of a Law, and then prove that the said definition
belongs to the Resurrection of Christ.

A Law (say the Iurists) is a Precept of a Superior being in authority,
containing a Rule or Measure of things to be done, or not to be done.

But neither this, nor any other true definition of a Law Aquin. 1.2. q. 90.
ar. 4. Lex nihil aliud est quam quaeda^ rationis ordinatio ad bonum commune, ab
eo qui curam communitatis habet, ordinata. Salas d. leg. Lex est quod Rex vel
Respublica jubet, verbo, vel scripto, ab eo qui curam communitatis habet
premulgata.
, or of a Commandment, agrees to the Resurrection of Christ.

Therefore the Resurrection of Christ may be a motive or cause impulsive,
inducing the Church to make a Law, but it is not of it self any formal Law.

And if our Savior's Resurrection has the force of a Law to ordain the day
on which he rose, to be the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. We can observe
no reason, why the day of his Ascension Walaeus d. Sabb. pa. 158. Quod affertur
Christum eo die resurrexisse, ac proinde eundem ad cultum suum, Resurrectione
sua co^secrasse, necessariu^ argumentum non habet. Quia Christus diem Iovis suo
in coelos ascensu consecravit, nec propterea tamen sequitur, eum singulis
septimanis, in memoriam ascensus ejus esse observandum: Nam licet haec Christi
resurrectio argumentum praebuerit Ecclesiae Apostolicae, ut hunc diem caeteris
ad habendos conventus praeferret: Non tamen sequitur Christum hoc suo facto
eundem diem in eum sinem instituisse.
on which he entered into his eternal Rest, should not likewise have the force
of a Law, to ordain Thursday to be a Christian Sabbath: because if our
Savior's beginning to rest shall make a Sabbath: certainly the perfecting of
his Rest should much more do the like.

3 This Objector falsifieth the Bishop's words foisting in the word Labor,
instead of the word Action, and then he brayes in his rude tone, absurd and
ridiculous.

But every reasonable Creature knows there may be action without labor, as
appears in the actions of God Almighty Aug. d. Civ. ^^. lib. 12. cap. 17 No^
itaque in ejus vacatione cogitetur ignavia, desidia, inertia: sicut nec in ejus
opere, labor, conatus, industria. Novit quiescens agere, and agens quiese ere.
; and in the actions of the blessed Angels, and of the glorified Saints in
Heaven. And therefore bold B. is a false brother, in corrupting and perverting
the Bishop's form of words; and the Bishop's assertion is most true, That our
Savior having finished all sorrow and labor upon his Passion-day: He was in
action upon his Resurrection day: and he was in Action likewise forty days
after.

B. Lest neither the Church of England in her public Doctrine, nor the pious
works of her grave and learned Sons may perhaps satisfy the Adversarie's
importunity; yet I hope the writings of his more pious, and no less learned
Brother, D. John White (and those also both republished and vindicated by Fran.
White from the Jesuits Calumnies, White dyed black, etc.) will a little
qualify him.

How D. John White does not only call the Lord's Day the Sabbath Day, as once,
Sect. 38. 1. and twice, Sect. 43. digress. 46. 6. But he also condemns all
profane sports and recreations on that day, and among the rest Dancing for one.
And for this he alleges the example of the Papists, as the most notorious
Sabbath Breakers in this kind.


A. Does he so Sir? This seems strange to me, that so great a Clerk as Fran.
White should so far forget himself, as not to remember what his Brother has
writ; Surely if it be so, it will be a cooling-Card, and no small disgrace to
his Lp. when so worthy and reverend a Brother shall be brought as a witness
against him. But I pray you, for my better satisfaction, relate to me the very
passages and words of D. John White.


B. I will, in digress. 46. the Title whereof is, Naming certain points of the
Popish religion, which directly tend to the maintenance of open sin, and
liberty of life: now among many foul and profane practices (as he calls them)
this he notes for one, namely, the profanation of the Sabbath, in these words:
That they hold it lawful on the Sabbath Day to follow Suits, Travel, Hunt,
Dance, keep Faires, and such like. This is that has made Papists the most
notorious Sabbath Breakers that live.

And Sect. 38. n. 1. He says: Let it be observed if all disorders be not most
in those parts among Us, where the people is most Pope-holy, etc. And for mine
own part, having spent much of my time among them, this I have found, that in
all excess of sin, Papists have been the Ringleaders in riotous Companies,
in drunken meetings, in seditious assemblies and practices, in profaning the
Sabbath, in quarrels and brawles, in Stage Plays, Greenes. Ales, and al
Heathenish customs, etc. Thus this reverend Divine Candore notabilis ipso,
whom all the Jesuitical smoke out of the bottomless pit cannot besmeare or
besmudge, or dye black with all their black mouthed obloquies.


A. Surely these are very pregnant passages. And it makes me tremble to think,
and amazeth me, How one White is so contrary to another: As also how the
Libertinisme dispensed with now a days on the Sabbath, tends to bring Us
Protestants to be like to the Papists, in their profane times, in taking up
their Heathenish, savage, and barbarous manners and customs.


Answ.
This rude Dialogist has a Palsy in his brain, which causes him to tremble:
For the matter it self affoordeth no occasion of any such passion.

For there is not any contradiction, between the two brethren in their
Doctrine: For the one brother called the Lord's Day, the Sabbath in a mystical
sense: And the other brother says, it is not the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment, in a literal and proper sense. One brother condemns Papists
for using profane, ungodly, savage, and heathenish pastimes upon the
Lord's Day: The other Brother maintains that some kind of pastime and
recreation, namely such as is not Vicious, either in form, or quality, or in
Circumstance, may be lawfully used, upon the Lord's Day.

But the Objector (as his manner is) wastes many words, but avoydeth, and
declineth the true state of the question.

B. Me thinks the very reading of the fourth Commandment every, Lord's Day
might stop his mouth: saving that he has found out many inventions to elude
the nature and property of this Commandment, as page 158. 159. etc. which I
hope H. B. will meet withal.


Answ.
It was one of Theoph. Brabourn's arguments ad hominem, to prove, that we are
to observe the literal Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, because this
Commandment is read in the Church every holy day, and after the reading
thereof, we beseech God to incline our hearts to keep that Law. For that
Commandment enjoined the observation, of the seventh day Sabbath, to wit the
same Sabbath, which the Old Testamen established, and the Jews observed.

Now this argument being popular, and plausible. The Bishop is persuaded, he
did good service, in solving the same upon true grounds. And because this
Objector is not able (holding his own Principles) to give any solution, or
satisfactory answer to it: He should not like the Dog in the manger, have
barked against others, and done nothing himself.

B. The twentieth Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, He also perverteth, whiles he
confounds the Lord's Day with other Holy days, which the Injunction does
clearly distinguish: for that liberty, which it dispenses with, touching work
in Harvest time, is not spoken of the Lord's Day, or Holy day, as is there
called and set alone by it self: but of Holy and festival days only of
humane institution.


A. I thank you for this observation.


Answ.
In which words does the Injunction clearly distinguish the Sunday from the
other Holy days, in respect of labor in Harvest? bold Br. B. cease to prate
and outface, and prove what you say: otherwise none will credit you, but
Goslings of your own brooding.

1 The Queens Injunction speaks in general, of all holy days in the year,
and it sets down no difference between Sunday, and the other Holy days,
concerning working in Harvest.

2. Queen Elizabeth's Injunction, was taken Verbatim out of an Injunction of
the same quality of King Edward the sixth, which was grounded upon the Statute,
Quinto and Sexto, of Edward the sixth.

Now in this Statute,

1 The Sunday is made one of the ordinary Holy days of the year. All the
days hereafter mentioned, shall be kept, and commanded to be kept Holy
days, and none other: that is to say, all Sundays in the year, the days of
the feast of Circumcision, Epiphany, etc.

2 In this Statute, no special privilege (for abstinence from necessary
labor) is given it more than the rest Statute Edward sixth, provided always,
and it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, it shall be lawful to every
husbandman, labourer, fisherman, etc. upon the Holy days aforesaid in harvest,
or at any other time of the year, when necessity shall require, to labor,
ride, fish, or work any kind of work, at their free wills and pleasure, any
thing in this act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

3 In our present Liturgy, the Sunday is ranked among the other Holy days, in
these words: These to be observed for Holy days, and none other: That is to
say all Sundays in the year: the days of the feast of the Circumcision of
our Lord Jesus Christ: of the Epiphanie: of the Purification of the blessed
Virgin, etc.

4 The Homily formerly cited by the Objector, grants liberty to people to
exercise some labor on the Sunday in time of great necessity: and Queen
Elizabeth's Injunction (agreeing with ancient Imperial Laws Cod. Justinian.
li. 3. Tit. 12.. 3. Constant. A. Elpidio. Omnes Iudices, urbanaeque plebes, and
cunctarum artium officia venerabili die solis quiescant. Ruri tamen positi
agroru^ culturae libere libe^terque inserviant: quoniam freque^ter evenit ut
non aptius alio die frumenta sulcis, aut vineae scrobibus mandentur, ne
occasion momenti, pereat commoditas caelesti provisione concessa.
) specifieth one kind of bodily labor, to wit, working in harvest. Therefore
the Homily by labor understands not only bodily works of absolute necessity,
such as are mentioned by the Objector, to wit, about scare-fires, and invasion
of enemies: but all labor in general which is of urgent necessity, and which
was not in those times prohibited by Civil or Ecclesiastical Law.

A. I am occasioned to ask your judgment of those passages of his touching
Recreations on that day, in which argument, he has spent many leaves.


B. But without any good fruit. And as his discourses are hereupon large, so
they require a large refutation, which I hope. H. B. will perform.

He distinguishes Recreations into two sorts: 1. Honest and Lawful; 2.
Vicious and unlawful, etc.

I note his pitiful enterferings, by equivocations, contradictions Let the
Judicious Reader examine, by what Arguments, this blu^dering beast confirms
his rude accusation.
, and the artifice of his purest natural wit, in spinning a curious web of
so fine a thread, as wherewith, though he may think to cover himself, yet it is
pervious, and penetrable to every eye.


Answ.
Whosoever shall read the Treatise with impartial judgment, will perceive
that the Bishop in his Doctrine concerning Recreations, has proceeded
plainly, distinctly, and without equivocations or contradictions.

For. 1. He delivers a definition of Recreation in general, out of approved
Authors, page 229.

2 He divides Recreations into two kinds, to wit, into honest, and lawful,
and into such as are vicious, and unlawful.

3 He defines these two species of Recreations, approoving the first kind, if
they be used in due time, and with due circumstances: and condemning the latter
upon all days and seasons.

But it seems this son if confusion is offended, because the Bishop's
Treatise concerning Recreations is so clear, and exact, that he can find no
defective passage in it, on which he might fasten his envious jaws.

B. If I might be bold You have superlative boldness but little truth and
honesty.
, I would ask him what he thinks of promiscuous meetings of wanton youth in
their May-games, setting up of May-poles, dancing about them, dancing the
Morice, and leading the Ring-dance, and the like, unto which Dr. Wh. in the
former passage, page 266. does not obscurely point as it were with the finger:
Are not these obscene or lascivious and voluptuous Pastimes?


Answ.
1. This Momus deals like one Vrbicus in Saint Augustine: Who wanting
Arguments to prove, That Christians were obliged to make the Sabbath of every
week a fasting day, fell into a bitter invective against luxurious feasting,
drunken b^nquetting, and lewd drinkings Aug. Ep. 86. Cum cum argume^ta
deficiunt, quibus probet Sabbato jejunandum, in luxurias convivarum, and
temulenta convivia, and nequissimas ebrietates invehitur, quasi non jejunare,
hoc sit inebriari.
.

Brother B. is destitute of firm Arguments, to prove that all bodily exercise,
and civil recreation is simply unlawful, upon any part of the Sunday: and
therefore he imitates that Sectarian, and declaimeth against lascivious and
profane sports and pastimes.

Now his Adversary maintains no Recreation, which is profane and lascivious,
or which is vicious in quality or circumstances, either upon Sunday Clem.
Apost. Constable. li. 5. ca. 9. Neque in Dominicis diebus qui sunt dies
laetitiarum, permittimus, vobis, quicquam inhonestum loqui, aut agere.
, or upon any day of the Week, Page 229, etc.

2 Whereas the envious man demands, what we think of promiscuous meetings
of wanton youth, setting up May-Poles, etc.

Our answer is, that when he has proved by sound arguments, such meetings and
pastimes as the laws of our kingdom, and the Canons of our Church, have
permitted (after that the Religious offices of the day are performed) to be in
quality or circumstance, dishonest or vicious, we must proclaim them to be
unlawful at all times, but especially upon the holy day B. Ely. Treat. p. 230.
If they be used upon the Lord's Day, or on other festival days, they are
sacrilegious, because they rob God of his honor, to whose worship and service
the Holy day is devoted: and they defile the souls of men, for the clensing
and edifying whereof, the Holy Day is deputed.
.

B. I note how poorly he plays the Divine or Doctor, by giving indulgence or
more liberty to such as have quesie stomachs, and cannot digest those wholesome
meats, which God's word, and all sound Divines and Doctors do prescribe This
Goose-quil antiquum obtiner: for be gaggles only, but produces no sentence of
Gods word truly applied: nor one sound Divine or Doctor, who is adverse to the
Bishop's Tenet.
, etc.

Give Man a power thus to dispense with part of the Lord's Day, which is an
incroachment upon the fourth Commandment, according to the Doctrine of our
Church; and why may not Man assume unto himself a power (as the Pope does) to
dispense with Servants and Children, by allowing them some time, wherein they
shall be free from the Control of their Masters and their Parents.


Answ.
If there be no Divine Law prohibiting people to use honest and sober
recreation upon some part of the Holy Day, then he is no poor. Divine or
Doctor, which yields such liberty to people, as God has not denied them.

But there is no Divine Law written or unwritten, prohibiting people to use
honest and sober recreation upon some part of the Holy Day.

Therefore he that yields such liberty to people is no poor Divine or
Doctor: But he which upon false grounds denies it them, is a proud Pharisee.

2 They which grant liberty to Children and Servants to disobey their Parents
and Masters, take upon them power to dispense with a Divine Law, which is
properly moral, and of the Law of Nature.

But they that grant license to Christian people, to use sober and honest
recreation upon some part of the Holy Day, dispense with no Divine Law, either
Moral, Natural, or Positive.

Therefore the Objector's comparison is between things which are altogether
unlike.

B. Our Treatiser does miserably abuse the Scripture, and so turn the grace of
God into wantonness: for he says, p. 257. The Law of Christ is sweet and
easy, Mat. 11.30. And his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.


Answ.
He abuses not the Scripture, who expounds and applies the same rightly.

But the Bishop has expounded and applied the two Texts of Scripture, Matthew.
11.30. and 1 John 5.3. truly and rightly:

Therefore the Objector is a false accuser, in saying the Treatiser has abused
the Scripture.

The Assumption is proved in manner following:

The Bishop delivered this Proposition: All Divine Evangelicall Ordinances
necessary to the salvation of every Christian, are possible with ord^nary
diligence, and likewise with comfort to be observed: for the Law of Christ is
sweet and easy, Mat. 11.30. and his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

Now the foresaid Texts are truly expounded, and they do fully confirm the
Bishop's Proposition.

Therefore the Dialogue-dauber is a rude Blatterant Hieron. ad Ripar. Quicquid
amens loquitur, vociferatio and clamor est appellandus.
in saying, the Treatiser has miserably abused the Scripture.

B. And what then? is Christ's Law so sweet and easy, as that it gives
indulgence to profane libertinisme? This is to make the Gospel a sweet Fable,
as that Atheistical Pontifician said.


Answ.
1. Christ's Law is so sweet and easy, as that it commands no external
service, or duty necessary, Necessitate medii to be performed by all
Christians, which they may not by the assistance of Divine Grace be able to
perform with ordinary diligence and comfort Arausic. Council. ca. 25. Hoc etiam
secundu^ fidem catholica^ credimus, quod accepta gratia per baptismum omnes
baptizati Christo auxiliante and cooperante quae ad salutem pertinent, possint
^c debeant (si fideliter laborare voluerint) adimplere.
. This Position is confirmed by the Bishop, page 257. both by sentences of holy
Scripture, and by testimonies of ancient Fathers.

And from hence it is consequent, that it is no sin, much less no mortal
crime, equal to Murder, Adultery, and Theft (as the Novell Sabbatizers preach,
page 235.) for Christian people to use some intermission from religious and
spiritual actions, and likewise some recreation upon some part of the
Lord's Day: and they are not obliged during the whole day (which according to
the Sabbatarian Tenet contains 24. hours) to forbear to speak any words,
or think any thoughts, or to perform any works or actions, which concern
either pleasure or profit, (read page 249.) because it is morally impossible
for them with comfort and ordinary diligence to continue 24. hours together,
in spiritual and religious exercises and meditations.

2 The Law of Christ condemns all profane libertinisme: but why does Br.
Asotus style such recreation as neither is vicious in form, quality or
circumstance, by the name of profane liberty* And other recreation than this
the Bishop maintains not, either upon Sunday, or upon any other day, page 229.

3 The Bishop entreats Br. B. to resolve him, whether it is not a Doctrine of
Libertinisme to animate Christian people in disobedience of lawful Authority;
to teach them it is a branch of their Christian liberty, to be their own
guides in point of Religion; to deprave, or to neglect the Common Service, and
other Duties, enjoined by the precepts of the true Church, whereof they are
members, to malign Ecclesiastical Governors, and to proclaim them Veins of
the Pope: and to be of a Papal Spirit, if they presume to instruct the
inferior Clergy in point of Religion: To bequarrell godly and learned
persons, who comply not with the new Sect, in their fanaticall asseverations:
and to censure, and control all things, which are not suitable to their own
groundless and senseless traditions.

Now in good earnest you Br. B. many judicious men are of mind, that the
fomenting of these humors in Christian people by Doctrine or example, is a
more proper act of profane libertinisme, than such bodily exercise and
recreation, as the Laws of our Kingdom and State have permitted.

B. I observe a very improper, and so an untrue, speech, where he says: if
they should (upon Puritan Principles) restrain them wholly from all repast.
Who (I pray you) does restrain the people, from all repast on the Lord's Day?
Or is profane sport a repast, to feed the rude Vulgar? it seems so: and
liberty to youth is as their meat and drink.


Answ.
It appears by the Law of the Sabbath, Exodus 23.12. That one end and use
thereof was, the refreshing of the people upon the seventh day, after six days
toil and labor: And the old Sabbath, and other Festivals, were Dies
Laetitiae, days of mirth and rejoicing: and sober and honest recreation, upon
some part of the old Sabbath, was prohibited by no Divine Law, page 237.

Now if in the time of the Gospel, Christian people upon Principles borrowed
out of the Talmud, and the Rule of Pharisaicall Tradition, should be surcharged
with such rigid Ordinances, as are imposed by Novell Sabbatarians, page 235,
236. 249, 250. and he wholly restrained from all recreation, upon any part of
the Holy Day, One end of the Holy Day, should be destroyed: and Christian
people must be deprived of that liberty which God and nature have granted: and
from hence it will be consequent, that the Holy Day, instead of a day of
Refreshing, shall become a day of Oppressing people with an heavier burden,
than in right ought to be laid upon them: and this would make the Holy Day more
unwelcome than the plough-day: and besides, it might engender in peoples
minds, a distaste of their present Religion, and manner of serving of God, page
266.

This passage highly displeases the Dialogue-broacher; but instead of solid
answer and confutation: First, he carpeth at the form of speech, affirming
that it is improper, but wherein he declares not; then he says it is untrue,
this likewise is easily said, but impossible to be proved. After this he
equivocates, saying; Who (I pray you) do restrain the people from all repast
on the Lord's Day, that is, who restrains people from eating and drinking on
the Lord's Day? And lastly, he declineth the true state of the Question; for
whereas his own Tenet is Universal, to wit, that all civil recreation is
unlawful upon the Sunday: in his disputation he opposes some kinds of
bodily exercises and recreations, which seem to him to be lascivious, profane,
and really vicious in their proper form and quality.

B. Page 266. He says, some Recreations (not prohibited by our Laws) our
religious Governors allow upon Holy Days. And Page 232. Civil recreation not
prohibited in terms, neither yet by any necessary consequence from the Law,
cannot be simply unlawful. And page 231. No just Law, Divine,
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, does totally prohibit the same.

To this I reply, that those sports forespecified, are prohibited, by Law both
Divine, Ecclesiastical, and Civil. 1. By Divine Law, as Romans 13.13. Gal.
5.21. 1 Pet. 4.3. etc. 2. By Ecclesiastical Laws and Councels, etc. 3. By
just Civil Laws, etc.


Answ.
1 It is an infallible verity, and confessed by the Dialogue-forger himself,
that nothing can be vicious or sinful, unless it be prohibited expressly
or virtually, by some just Law Aug. d. pec. mer. and remis. l. 2. c. 12. Neque
peccatum erit, si non divinitus jubeatur ut non sit. Br. B. Dialog. p. 11. A
sin it cannot be, but as a breach of one of God's holy Commandments; for
where there is no Law, there is no transgression.
, Divine or Humane.

But sober and honest repast, recreation, or pastime, upon some part of the
Holy Day, is prohibited by no Divine Law, nor by any Ecclesiastical or Civil
Law of our State and Church.

Therefore sober and honest recreation, etc. upon some part of our Holidays,
is not vicious, sinful, or unlawful.

Now the Objector in his reply declineth (as his manner is) the true state of
the Question, and inveigheth against certain particular Exercises and
Recreations, excepted against by some learned Divines, and which have been
prohibited by public authority in foraigne Nations.

But the Bishop in his Treatise proceeded no further concerning recreations,
than is before expressed: to wit, that such are neither vicious in form,
quality, or circumstance, may lawfully be used upon some part of the Holy day,
if they shall be permitted by lawful authority.

And the maine reason of his forbearance was, because in the first part of his
Treatise, he undertook to deliver no other Doctrine concerning the old Sabbath
or the Lord's Day, but such only as seemed to him, both to be Orthodoxall, and
also Catholic: and therefore he declined the Question concerning Pastimes and
recreations in their particular, (leaving the same to a public determination
of the Church and State) by reason there now is, and in former times has been
diversity of opinion, among godly men, concerning the quality of such
particulars.

And if Br. B. esteems those bodily exercises and recreations, to be profane
and vicious, which his gracious Majesty in a royal Edict, permits his
Subjects, with sundry cautions, limitations, and provisoes 1. None to be
permitted, which were prohibited by any former Laws, or by any Canons of the
Church.

2. None to be used but after the end of all Divine Service and afternoon
Sermons.

3. The said recreations are prohibited to all persons, both Recusants and
Conform in Religion, who are not present in the Church at the Service of God.

4. Every person must resort to his own parish Church, and be there present at
Divine Service.

5. Each Parish by it self, to use the said recreations after Divine Service:
and no Meetings, Assemblies, or concourse of people ou^ of their own Parish, on
the Lord's Day.


: let him in his Disputation and Objections proceed humbly and modestly (as
becomes a loyal Subject, addressing himself to his Sovereign) and propound
weighty arguments, sufficient to convince those who are of contrary judgment:
but in the mean time let him abstain from scandalous abusive passages against
his Majesty; and likewise against other persons, who being Subjects, and
persuaded that it is their duty to be obedient to Royal Authority, unless
such things be commanded as are, Aperte contra Deum, that is, in very deed, and
not in some men's opinion only, repugnant to the Law of Christ Promptuar. Iuris,
tr. 9. cap. 5. n. 68. In dubio semper praesumitur pro justitia legis, donec non
express appareat pro contrario: and sic in dubio tenentur subditi obedire.
Bernard. d. praecept. and dispens. cap. 12. Quicquid vice Dei praecipit homo,
quod non non sit tamen certum displicere Deo, haud secus omnino accipiendum est
quam si praecipiat Deus. Ib. Ipsum quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum, in hiis
quae aperte non sunt contra Deum audite debemus.
.

B. Edition second of his Dialog. page 28. Enough to settle me, and every good
subject of his Majesty in this belief, that the Declaration for sports, and
the urging of it, to be none of his Majesty's act: but a mere plot of some
Popish Priests, and Prelates, to eat out, and tread down Religion, and to
Usher in Popery, Atheism, and profaneness into the Church.


Answ.
If Lucifer himself should preach or write, that wicked and lying fiend could
hardly utter any thing more false, seditious or scandalous, than is contained
in the former passage.

1 His sacred Majesty now is, and has ever been so gracious and Religious, as
that his princely care and desire is, to have his Subjects under him, to lead
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: and therefore it is
far from him, to be guided, or overruled by Popish Priests and Prelates in
any matters of Religion.

2 If his Majesty's declaration shall be duly examined, it tends to the
repressing of Popery: for no subjects are thereby permitted to use any sports
or pastimes upon the Holy day, but such only, as shall duly frequent the
Church, and be present both at Divine service, and at the Sermon.

3. The Royal edict grants no liberty to any subjects, though conform in
Religion, to use any sports or pastimes upon the Sunday, formerly prohibited by
the Laws of the kingdom; nor yet until all the Religious offices of the day
shall be finished, and duly performed: and therefore it can be no means to
usher in Atheism and profaneness into the Church.

4 Such manner of Preaching and Writing, as this venomous Dogmatist uses in
his fiery Sermons, and in this and in some other of his unlicensed Pamphlets,
are very apt and ready means to impoison his Auditors and factious Disciples,
with disloiall thoughts against his Majesty's government, and with desperate
intentions against his subordinate Ministers, and consequently to usher in
rebellion and sedition, into the Church and State.

A. I remember the Bishop of Elye's maine argument (as I understand, and
apprehend) to prove his recreations to be lawful on the Lord's Day, is:
because honest and necessary labor is lawful on that day.

Answ. The Bishop's maine argument, to prove some pastime and recreation upon
the Lord's Day, to wit, such as is not vicious in quality or circumstance to be
lawful, and which is used after such time as the religious offices of the day
are performed, is: because such recreation is not prohibited by any Divine Law,
natural or positive, nor by any necessary inference from the same.


B. But, as I conceive, the Parallel does no way hold, as will appear
clearly by these particulars.

1 Honest labor is necessary on that day in respect of necessity only, it
being unlawful, if not necessary, and may be deferred: but there is no
necessity of sports and pastimes, unless in some instant dangerous infirmity
of the body, and some moderate recreation be prescribed by the Physician.

2 Honest necessary labor is lawful in the foresaid sense, on any part of the
Lord's Day, even in time of Divine Service and Sermons: But so are not sports
and pastimes by the Bishops own confession.

3 Labors absolutely honest and necessary, as to quench fires, to make up Sea
breaches, to defend the assaults of enemies, attending persons dangerously
sick, are lawful all the day long, and for many successive Lord's-Dayes
together: but sports and recreations may not be used all the Lord's Day long,
nor on every part of the day, nor many days together.


Answ.
1. It is false, that no labor may be used upon the Lord's Day, but such only
as is of absolute necessity. For then it must have been unlawful for the
sick of the Palsy, and the lame man at the poole of Bethesda, after they were
healed, to have carried their beds upon the Sabbath day, Mark. 2.11. Ioh. 5.9,
10. for this was not a work of absolute necessity, but such as might have been
deferred until the evening of the Sabbath, or until the next morning.

2 The Netherland Divines handling this question, speak as follows: Non
audemus improbare, quod post Arelatense Concilium Constantinus in suis
constitutionibus tempore pluvio, aut alio necessitatis casu, permittit, ut
messes, and vindemiae, etiam Die Dominico colligantur: We dare not disallow
that, which after the Council of Arles, Constantine the great in his Imperial
constitutions permitted people in rainie weather, and in other cases of
necessity, namely in the time of Harvest, and Vintage, to gather in their
Corn, and Wine upon the Lord's Day.

B. But again, admit that sports, and pastime and recreations are not
expressly inhibited within the letter of the Law by these general words, no
manner of work, but only by consequence; yet it follows not, that honest
labor is more unlawful than honest Recreations, as they are termed: For the
Bishop and Fathers generally conclude, that rest from sin is the chief thing
commanded, and sin it self the principal thing prohibited in the fourth
Commandment, yet neither of them is commanded or prohibited within the words
of this Precept. Therefore sports and pastimes by the same reason may be more
prohibited by it on the Sabbath, than labor, though not expressed. For
profane Atheism is more unlawful, at least more heinous, than the
worshipping of false Gods; yet this last only is expressed in the very letter
of the Law: So Perjury is more heinous than mere taking the Name of God in
vain, in ordinary discourse, and common swearing: Sodomie, Incest, and
Buggery, more odious sins than Adultery, or Fornication, though the other be
only within the intention of the Law, and by way of consequence prohibited by
the 1. 3. and 7th. Commandments; the latter by the express letter and words
thereof.


Answ.
That which is directly, formally, expressly, literally, or by a necessary,
and immediate inference prohibited by any Law, is ordinarily more unlawful,
than those things which by a remote and probable inference only are concluded
to be repugnant to the Law.

The sins mentioned by the Objector, Atheism, Perjury, Buggery, etc. are not
only prohibited by necessary inference, and by the intention of the special
precepts of the Decalogue, but also by the Law of nature, and by other express
Negative Precepts, delivered in the Old and New Testament.

But whereas corporal labor was expressly, and in literal terms prohibited
the Jews, upon the Legal Sabbath Day: Honest and sober Recreation upon some
part of the Lord's Day, in such manner as the Bishop maintains the same, is
prohibited neither by the express words of the 4th. Commandment, nor by any
formal and necessary illation, from the words and sentences of that
Commandment; nor yet by the Law of nature, nor by any negative precepts of the
Old or New Testament.

Therefore if bodily labor expressly and literally prohibited by the fourth
Commandment, was, notwithstanding that prohibition, in many cases lawful
among the Jews: Then honest and sober recreation, such as is neither vicious
in quality nor in circ^mstances, being neither expressly, nor virtually
prohibited or condemned by any Divine Law, natural, positive, or Evangelicall,
must be held to be lawful, until the Opposers thereof shall be able to make
it evident by demonstrative reasons, that the same is repugnant to some divine
Law, according to all, or some of those forms, which are before expressed.

A. There remains yet one thing to be cleared, and that is about the
judgment of the reformed Churches beyond the Seas, which the Opposite Author
pleads to be all for him.


B. It Is true, and I cannot but smile, when I think of it: That they which
make no bones even in open Court to vilify the prime pillars of those
Churches, yea and to nullify the Churches themselves, as if they were no true
Churches, as having no lawful Ministers, because in Prelates to put them in
orders; should notwithstanding daigne to grace them so much, as to call them
in, and to account them competent witnesses in the cause. But a bad cause How
can that be esteemed a bad cause, which is confirmed by the common and
consent^e^ testimony of the most godly and learned Divines, both A^elent and
modern?
is glad of any Patron or Advocate to plead for it, though the Clyent have
openly stigmatized him for a Rascal. But what stead will the reformed Divines
stand him in? Certainly in the point of sports and Recreations, they will
utterly fail him, yea and disclaim him too. In the point of the Institution
of the Lord's Day, indeed, and the Obligation of it to Christians, a great part
is for him, though the better part Br. B. Should have named some of those,
which he accounts the better part; for he is so precipitate and impudent in
his affirmations, that judicious persons can give no credit to his own bare
word.
is for Us, this is confessed of Us.


Answ.
The Bishop in his Treatise has made clear ostension, that his Tenet
concerning the Sabbath and Lord's Day, is consonant; 1. To the Unanimous
sentence of Primitive Antiquity. 2. To the Doctrine of the Church of England,
testified, and authorized by statute Law. 3. To the common Vote of the best
learned Doctors of the reformed Churches The Augustane, and Helvetian
Co^fessions. Melancton: Calvin: Bucer: Bullinger: Peter Martyr: Musculus: Beza:
Zanchius: Chemnitius: Visinus: Brentius: Hospinian: Hemmingius: Pareus:
Herbrandus: Marbachius: Zepper^: Battus: Wolaeus: Rivetus: Poliander: Gomorus:
Thysius: Gualter: P^scator: Zegedinus: Steckelius. Isenmanus, and alii.
beyond the Seas.

The former Remonstrance has produced two effects: 1. I has giv^n (...) all
wound to Br. B. and to his Assistants, by declaring, that they are solitary,
and singular in their Sabbatarian Tenet. 2. It has yielded full satisfaction
to all judicious, honest, and godly Readers concerning this question.

But the Dialogue-Barker, perceiving his cause to be desperate, in his
obstinacy, nevertheless, spurneth against the pricks, and proceeds rudely
and wildely in manner following:

1 He introduces his interlocutory Assistant, one Br. A. who scratcheth his
fellow Mule Mutuu muli scabunt: dictum, ubi improbi and illaudati se vicissim
mirantur and praedica^t.
, and prateth in manner following: You have so fully cleared this point about
Recreation, from all the Subterfuges of him, that has so moyled himself, to
make something of nothing, etc.

But wherein has Br. B. cleared the point, etc? He has alleged some
Decrees of Foraine States and Churches, which nothing concern the Bishop's
Tenet: for they do not so much as intimate, that all bodily exercise, and
Recreation, and namely such as is neither vicious in quality, nor in
circumstance, nor yet prohibited by the present state wherein people live, is
simply unlawful, or morally evil upon some part of the Holy day.

2 Br. B. Himself, to manifest his gravity, says, I cannot but smile, etc.
But besides his merriment, the ridiculous man utters no word, or sentence,
savouring of truth, or sounding to reason: For,

1 Upon the matter he confesses, that the positions of the Sunday Sabbatarians
here in England, are singular, and different from the common sentence of other
Churches; for otherwise to what purpose serves his speech, page 6. The Church
of England (to wit Br. B. himself, and his own Sabbatarian Allies) is more
clear, and sound in the point of the Sabbath, than any Church in the world;
for it is as clear as the Noonday, that the Orthodoxall part of the Church
of England accords with the Primitive Fathers, and with the School Doctors,
and with the best learned in the Reformed Churches; and renounceth the
temerarious Doctrine of H. B. and of other Novell Teachers, concerning the
Sabbath.

2 Whereas this Objector denies us the suffrage of Reformed Churches,
pretending that some amongst us have vilified their prime Pillars, etc.

Our Answer is, That this man does not always write or preach Gospel H^^^on.
ad Julian. Diacon. Mendacia faciunt ut nec vera dicentibus credatur.
: for quite contrary to his report, we reverence and much respect, all learned
and godly Divines, in what Church soever they live, or teach: yea, although in
some Theological Questions we take liberty (upon just reason) to dissent from
them.

But admit the Doctors aforesaid were adverse to us, and we to them in many
more Positions, than indeed we are; yet notwithstanding it might be lawful for
us to use their Testimony in all Questions, wherein they maintain Catholic
and Orthodoxall Verity Iren. li. 4. ca. 14. Vera and contradictioni minime
obnoxia est probatio, quae ex dictis adversariorum elicitur.
.

S. Paul used the Testimony of Heathen Poets in matter of truth,
notwithstanding they were enemies to Christian piety Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 57.
Infidelium and adversantiu^ religioni testimonia, majorem habent fidem. Et hoc
est ex omnipotenti sapientia Dei, ut inimici veritatis fiant ipsi testes
veritatis. August. c. Petilian. Don. li. 2. ca. 30.
: and Christians likewise use the Testimony of Jews and Rabins, concerning the
number and integrity of the Books of Canonical Scripture. S. Augustine used
the Testimony of Saint Cyprian against Donatists and Pelagians Aug. d. Bapt. c.
Don. l. 2. c. 1. and. l. 3. c. 11. and l. 4. c. 1. and l. 6. c 7. c. Crescon.
Gram. l. 3. c. 1. d. praedest. sanctor. c. 14. d. pec. mer. and remis. l. 3. c.
5. c. Gaudent. l. 3. c. 1. Epist. 107.
, who was adverse to him in the point of Rebaptizing. Tertullian, Origin,
Lactantius, etc. had their errors: yet they that use their testimony (when
they speak divinely) were never as yet censured, by any sobero conscientious
Writers, as maintainers of a bad cause, or bringers in of Rascals to be their
Advocates.

B. Certainly in the Point of Sports and Recreations, Reformed Churches will
utterly fail him; yea, and disclaim him too, etc.

For the Ministers of the Seventeene Provinces reformed, and the neighboring
Churches in Germany, petitioned the States of the United Provinces, for the
reformation of the manifold profanation of the Lord's Day.


Answ.
The Bishop maintains not, but opposes and condemns all profanation of the
Lord's Day. And as for honest and sobe^^ rec^^^tion, the best Divines of the
United Provinces, approve the same upon some part of the Lord's Day.

The Divines of Leidan, in Synopsi purioris Theologiae, Disp. 21. write as
follows: Neque tamen omnis recreatio hic prohibetur, ut quae etiam inter
fines Sabbati est: scilicet quae divinum cultum non impedit, and sacris
peractis, honest, decenter, moderate, and sine scandalo and offensione fit.
Nevertheless all bodily recreation (upon the Lord's Day) is not here
prohibited, because the same is one of the ends of the Sabbath: namely, such
bodily exercise and recreation, as is no impediment to Divine worship, and
which is used in honest, decent, and moderate fashion, without scandal or
offense, after such time as the sacred and religious offices of the day are
performed.

And in like manner Walaus himself, (whom the Obiector cites) de Sab. ^ap. 6.
page 131. Vltimo quaeritur an recreationis, ^t oblectationis opera fidelibus
Sabbato sint concessa? Recreationis quaed^m opera, hoc die esse concessa, non
(...) Deus inter sines Sabbati, hoc quoque refere* Exodus 23 (...) respiret,
(Iunius vertit, (...) recreetur) filius (...) tuae. Et Christus ipse die
Sabbati (...), Luc. 14. Et sanc cum dies Sabbati fuerit fostus, refe^^ quoque
Laetitiam Coeli, hominis recreatio, atque anima and corporis vlres reficit,
quemad mod^m sapi^ns inquit, Prove. 17. Animus laetus medicinam facit, spiritus
autem fractus exsiccat ossa. Atque ideo etiam in Ecclesia Apostolica, Agapae
erant institutae, translatae (ut videtur) ex conviviis sacrificiorum Veteris
Testamenti, ad (...) mutuam testandam, and honestam recreationem usurpanda^, 1
Cor. 14.20. Jude v. 12. Imo and dieb^s Domini^is, ad gaudium propter memoriam
res^^^^^ (...) ^are in Ecclesia Primitiva, ^^f^^ ^ui^ Aug. Epist. (...). ad
(...)

We dare not deny some kind of r^creati^^ to be lawful upon the Lord's Day*
for God himself makes the refreshing of the son of the Handmaid, and of the
Stranger, one of the ends why the Sabb^th (...) ol^, ^^od. 23.12. And Iunius
translates the word refreshed ((...)) (...) recreated: Also Christ himself
upon the Sabbath Day went to a Feast, Luke 14.1. And forasmuch as the Sabbath
is a Festival day, honest recreation upon that day, is a represent of heavenly
joy: and according to the Wiseman's saying, Prove. 17.22. A merry heart does
good like a Medicine. Also in the Apostolical Church, certain Love Feasts,
called Agapae (being translated from Feasts used at Sacrifices in the old Law)
were ordained to testify brotherly love among Christians, and for the exercise
of honest recreation: and upon the Lord's Day, to the end Christians might
testify their rejoicing for the memory of Christ's Resurrection, it was held a
nefarious thing in the Primitive Church, to make that day a fasting day, as S.
Augustine shows, 86. Ep. ad Casulanum.

Rivetus in Exodus 20. Honestae tamen recreationes quae spiritus refocillent,
and mutuum alant consortium, a solennitate illius di^i non sunt excludendae.
Honest recreations which refresh the spirits, and cherish mutual society,
ought not to be excluded from the solemnity of that day.

A. Sir, I heartily thank you for your sweet conference, which I could be
content might last yet a whole Summers-day: But the Day now bidding us farewell,
leaves us to bid one another good night.


B. And so good night to you Brother.


A. And to you also good Brother.


Answ.
After a due and impartial Examination of the former Dialogue, the Bishop
protests once again, that he has observed no one passage in it, which
meriteth any approbation: And therefore Brother A. is fallen in love with his
own shadow, when he styles the same a sweet conference Ambros. Ep. 40. Vt
filii etiam deformes delectant; sic etiam scriptorem indecores sermones sui
palpant. Lud. Vives. Sicu: pueri complectuntur and exosculantur specula in
quibus imaginem sui aspiciunt, etc.
.

But let not Brother Asotus deceive himself: for his Dialogue is neither
sweet, nor savoury, either in matter, or in form; but very rude, wild,
malicious, and factious.

The maine Position of this Dialogue, to wit, That the Bishop's Treatise of the
Sabbath, overthrows the Doctrine of the Church of England, etc. is confuted
in manner following:

1 The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Lord's Day, and all
other Holy days, is the same at this present, it was in the reign of King
Edward the 6th, and in the reign of King JAMES, Anno primo.

But the Bishop in his Treatise consents with the Doctrine, concerning the
Lord's Day and other Holy days, maintained by Statute in the reign of King
Edward the 6th, and in the reign of King JAMES, Anno primo. Ergo,

The Bishop in his Treatise, has not overthrown the Doctrine of the Church of
England, concerning the Lord's Day and other Holy days.

2 The present Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the old Sabbath,
and the Lord's day, is the same which the Fathers of the Primitive Church
received from the holy Apostles, and which they taught Christian people in
ancient time, page 13.

But the Bishop in his Treatise maintains the same Doctrine, which the
Primitive Fathers received from the Holy Apostles, and which they taught
Christian people in ancient time. Ergo,

The Bishop in his Treatise has not overthrown the Doctrine of the Church of
England, concerning the old Sabbath, and the Lord's Day.

3 The present Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the old Sabbath,
and the Lord's Day, is the same which is commonly maintained by all Reformed
Churches in Christendom.

But the Bishop in his Treatise, consents with all the Reformed Churches, in
their common Doctrine of the old Sabbath, and of the Lord's Day, page 271. Ergo,

The Bishop in his Treatise has not overthrown the Doctrine of the Church of
England, concerning the old Sabbath, and the Lord's Day.

4 That the Homilies appointed to be read in the Church of England, must not
always be expounded according to the sound of words, but according to the
Line and Rule of holy Scripture, is the Tenet of H. B. in his Plea to an
Appeal, page 14.

The Bishop in his Treatise, has expounded the Homily, of the Time and Place
of prayer, appointed to be read in the Church of England, according to the Line
and Rule of Holy Scripture; and according to this sense and exposition, nothing
is delivered in the Homily, repugnant to the Bishop's doctrine, concerning the
old Sabbath, and the Lord's Day. Ergo,

The Bishop in his Treatise has not overthrown the Doctrine of the Church of
England, contained in the Homily, of the time and place of prayer.

Brother B. in his Dialogue has these remarkable Passages following.
1 The Tenet of the Dialogist is, That the 4th Commandment of the Decalogue,
delivered in this form of words: Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath Day, etc. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall do no manner of work, etc. The Lord rested the seventh day, etc.
commands in express terms, the religious observation of the Lord's Day: and
the same is a commandment of the Law of Nature.

Now from hence it is consequent: 1. That Saturday and Sunday, being two
distinct and several days of the Week, if the Commandment be natural and
express for the one, it cannot be natural and express for the other, unless
the one day were named, expressed, or described in the same, as well as the
other.

2 That the Jews were obliged to the religious observation of the Saturday by
the Law of the fourth Commandment, which was Positive in respect of that day:
and Christians are bound to keep holy the Sunday, by the very same
Commandment, as by the Law of Nature.

Now all judicious men confess, that the 4th. Commandment concerning keeping
holy the saturday, was a Positive Law: Therefore we desire Br. B. to clear
this contradiction: to wit, how it is possible that the Law of the fourth
Commandment, concerning Saturday, being Positive, The same Law (according to
his Tenet commanding Sunday) can be Natural.

Again, let this bold Bayard resolve Us, how the observation of the
Lord's Day, can be said to be expressly commanded in the fourth Precept of the
Decalogue, when Saturday only, and no other day is expressed, either by the
words of that Precept, or is concluded from the words or sentences thereof, by
any formal or necessary illation.

Lastly, let him resolve Us, how we may rightly conclude from the express
words of the fourth Commandment, that Sunday is to be kepr holy by that Law:
For if this man will argue rightly, he must proceed in this or the like
manner. The fourth Commandment literally and expressly, enjoyneth the
Observation of Saturday: and the Precept concerning Saturday is Legally
Positive: Therefore Christians must observe Sunday, by virtue of such a Law as
was Legally Positive for keeping of Saturday.

Gentle Br. B. lick over your Calfe once again, and please not your self, nor
abuse your Reader with such absurd Bulls, and contradictions Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. Ho. 38. Nihil est errore magis imbecillum, suis ipsis alis implicatur,
nec oppugnatione aliunde opus habet, transfigit ipse se.
.

A second Passage of Brother B.
Unless the keeping the first Day of the week for Sabbath be commanded, H.
B. Dialog manuscript cited in the Bishop's Treatise of the Sabbath, page 89.
the Divine Authority of it will not appear (says Br. B.) for only God's
Commandment binds the Conscience.

But no Divine Commandment is expressly delivered in the Old, or New
Testament concerning the Religious Observation of the Lord's Day.

Therefore if Br. B. his first proposition is true, and if he be not able to
produce some Divine Commandment out of the Scripture, for the Religious
Observation of the Lord's Day: he must (if he adhere to his own principles) be
compelled to grant Theoph. Brabourne, that the observation of the Lord's Day,
is an act of superstition, and will worship.

A third Passage of Brother. B. H. B. Dialog. page 15. 16. It were not wise to
set a Ceremony, in the midd st of moral precepts: It is a principle, in God
there can be no ceremony, but all must be eternal: and so in his Image, which
is the Law of nature and so in the Decalogue.

There can be no Ceremony at all in the Law of the fourth Commandment, because
Saint Paul reckoned the Sabbath Day, among the Ceremonies of the Old Law,
Colos. 2.16. And all the Primitive Fathers ranked the Sabbath and Circumcision
in the number of Legal Ceremonies.

A fourth Passage of Brother B.
The Primitive Fathers did ever, and usually style the Lord's Day the Sabbath
day of the 4th. Commandment, in a proper, and literal sense. The reason;
because sometimes (but yet very seldom) They named it Sabbatum, in a
mystical, and analogicall sense, that is, an Holy day, on which Christian
people must have a special care, to abstain from sin.

A fifth Passage of Brother B.
Because the Lord's Day succeeded, and came in place of the Old Sabbath:
Therefore the Observation thereof is commanded by the particular Law of the Old
Sabbath: As if one should say, Baptism succeeded and came in place of
Circumcision: Ergo it is commanded Christians, by the Old Law of Circumcision.

A sixth Passage of Brother B.
The Bishop's of England may not use the Testimony of Divines of reformed
Churches, because they dissent from them in some Theological questions; As if
one should argue: Protestants may not use Saint Augustine's testimony against
Pontificians or Pelagians, because they have refused his Tenet, concerning the
absolute damnation of Infants departing this life, before they were baptized
Aug. Epist. 106. Parvulos non baptiz^tos, vitam habere non posse, ac per hoc
quamlibet tolerabilius omnibus qui etiam propria peccata committunt, tamen
aeterna morte mulctari. Id. d. Pec. Mer. and Remiss. li. 1. ca. 16. Et li. 2.
ca. 4.
.

A seventh Passage of Brother B.
All were the true bred Children of the Church of England, etc. who maintained
Brother B. his dictats concerning the old Sabbath, and the Lord's Day;
witness, Master Cartwright; Master Fenne; Old Master Gilby; Master Snape;
Master Lord; Master D^d, Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Oxenbridge, Master Sheere-wood,
Master Johnson, Master Nutter, etc.

An eighth Passage of Brother B.
The fourth Commandment is simply and entirely moral, binding Us Christians
to observe the Lord's Day. The reason is, because the Law of the fourth
Commandment, according to the proper, and literal sense thereof, was given to
the Jews only, for keeping holy the Saturday, and not to the Gentiles, for the
observation of Sunday.

A ninth Passage of Brother B.
The Holy Apostles presently, and immediately, after Christ's Ascension, taught
and commanded all Christians to observe the Lord's Day weekly and to renounce
the Old Sabbath. The reason, because Saint Paul some twenty years after
Christ's Ascension Chytr. in Cronol. Anno Christi quinquagessimo quinto, venit
Paulus in Troadem, and inde in Macedoniam.
, commanded the Corinthians, to give Alms upon the first day of the week, 1
Cor. 16.2. and Saint John many years after that styled Sunday by the name of
the Lord's Day.

A Tenth Passage of Brother B.
The first day of every week throughout the whole year, is the Sabbath day of
the 4th Commandment, because our Savior began to rest from some of his
Redemptive actions, upon the latter part of Good Friday: and because he rested
in his grave, the whole Sabbath day before his Resurrection: and because he
rested as much upon Monday, Tuesday, and upon other days following, as ^e did
upon Sunday.

An Eleventh Passage of Brother B.
To give Christian people any liberty, to do any manner of work, or to use
any bodily exercise or pastime upon any part of the Sunday, is to imitate the
Pope in dispensing against God's moral Law. Proved, because brother B. is able
to produce no Divine or Evangelicall Law, recorded in holy Scripture, which
prohibiteth all bodily exercise, and sober and honest recreation upon some part
of that day.

A Twelfth Passage of Brother B.
It is unlawful to use any sober and honest recreation, to wit, such as is
neither vicious in quality or circumstance, upon any part of the Lord's Day:
because all profane, ungodly, obscene, and lascivious pastime, is prohibited
upon that day, and upon all other days throughout the year: as if one should
say, it is not lawful to eat or drink upon Sunday; because surfe^ting and
drunkenness are unlawful upon that day, and upon all other days.

A Thirteenth Passage of Brother B.
The Bishops of the Church of England have not power to instruct the inferior
Clergy in matters of Religion, because they have not received miraculous
grace, Ex opere operato: Proved, because brother B. by his mother wit, without
ordinary grace, or moral honesty, supposes himself qualified like an
Apostle, to correct and instruct all men both simple and learned, in the most
profound Questions of Theology.

A Fourteenth Passage of H. B.
It is a gross Solecisme in Divinity, Law and Gospel reconciled. page 52.
to admit an Institution to be Apostolical, and yet to deny it to be of Divine
Authority (and consequently to make it temporary and mutable,) Proved, because
Episcopal Authority was of Apostolical institution Iren. lib. 3. ca. 3.
Fundantes igitur and instruentes beati Apostoli Ecclesiam, Lino Episcopatu^
administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt. Succedit autem ei Anacletus, post eu^,
tertio loco ab Apostolis Episcopatu^ sortitur Clemens. Polycarpus in Asia, in
ea quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia constitutus Episcopus (ab Apostolis) Tertul. c.
Haer. cap. 32. Hier. Catalog. in Clement. Ignatio. Polycarpo, etc.
; nevertheless, according to Br. B. the same is not Divine: but the Prelates of
the Church of England, who exercise such Authority, are Veins of the Pope: and
the maintainers thereof are guided by a Papal spirit, Dialog. page 3.

A Fifteenth Passage of H. B.
The fourth Commandment being a part of the Law written in Adam's heart,
needed not any express Commandment more than the rest Ib. page 42.
: Proved, because it was made known by Divine Revelation only, and not by a
natural impression, that God created Heaven and Earth in six days, and rested
the seventh: and if the observation of the Sabbath was commanded Adam, the same
was the Saturday Sabbath of every week, and not the Sunday; and God Almighty
himself appointed the first day of the Week, to be one of the six working
days.

A Sixteenth Passage of H. B.
Ib. page 45.
The seventh Day being an inseparable Circumstance of the substance of the
fourth Commandment, cannot be separated from the Sabbath. The Reason, because
Christians were taught by the Apostles, to make the first day of the week their
weekly Festival, and not the seventh day.

A Seventeenth Passage of H. B.
To rest from all labor, Ib. page 47.
is of the very Essence of the Sabbath* The Reason, because our Savior
maintained, that some labor, which was not of absolute necessity, might
lawfully be used upon the Sabbath Day.

An Eighteenth Passage of H. B.
Who can deny the keeping of the Sabbath to be moral, Ib. page 41.
but he must withal proclaim open enmity to God's worship and Man's
salvation. The reason, because the Apostles taught Christians to observe the
Lord's Day, being not the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, but a new Holy
day grounded upon the Resurrection of Christ.

A Nineteenth Passage of H. B.
The Commandment of the Sabbath is moral, and so no less perpetual than all
the rest: Ib. page 38.
The reason, because it was a shadow of good things to come; and it was
abrogated by the Apostles, and changed into another day.

The last remarkable Observation concerning Br. B.
It is lawful, when a man cannot otherwise solve an Objection, to pass by
both the Premises of an Argument, propounded in due form, and to deny the
Conclusion, for example:

No Law which is mutable in respect of the proper material Object, is a Law of
Nature.

But the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, was mutable in respect of the
proper material Object.

Ergo the Law of the fourth Commandment was not a Precept of the Law of Nature.

Again, no moral action is unlawful, unless it be prohibited by some Divine
Law, express, or virtuall, or by some humane or Ecclesiastical Law.

But bodily exercise or Recreation, not being vicious in quality or
circumstance, (if it be used upon some part of the Holy day) is prohibited by
no Divine Law express, or virtuall; nor by any humane, or Ecclesiastical Law.

Ergo, some bodily exercise or Recreation, not being vicious in quality or
circumstance, may be permitted and used upon some part of the Holy day.

This Doctor indocilis, when he meets with any such Arguments, will not be
so simple as to trouble himself about the Premises (as the Subtle Logitians
use to do) but he holds it a more commodious, and compendious way, to pass
by the Premises with humble silence, and then to spend his fury upon the
conclusion, raving and declaiming against his Opposites in manner following.

1 I note how poorly he plays the Divine, or Doctor.

2 The Adversary has abused the Scripture.

3 It is a Lunaticke Opinion.

4 H. B. has showed it to be absurd, and ridiculous.

5 It makes me tremble to think, and it amazeth me, how one White is contrary
to another.

6 This seems strange to me, that so great a Clerk, as Francis White, should
so far forget himself.

7 It will be a cooling Card, and no small disgrace to his Lordship.

8 He once approved a book, which contains and maintains many and sundry
Tenets b^th Pelagian and Popish: and one Capital and enormious error is found
in the same (taken out of S. John's Canonical Epistle) to wit, no murderer
has eternal life abiding in him. He that commits Adultery, commits
sin: and he that commits sin, is of the Devil, and consequently being
formerly just, (according to Br. B.) he remains in the state of grace, who
during his continuance in sin without actual Repentance is of the Devil, and
has not eternal life abiding in him.

9 But let me a little excuse the good Old man, and the rather because the
Puritans stick not to cast him in the teeth with White died Black.

10 In the mean time, it is good policy a little to pull in the H^rne^, and
perhaps the Buzze may somewhat possess the good Old man with a Panick fear,
lest not only be loose what he has, but, which is much more, what his many
merits may hope for saving that Saints merits are not so high flowne in the
Church of England, but they are easily over soared by Simon Magus, flying to
the top of every Pinnacle of the highest Temple upon Angels wings.

11 Examine, I pray thee, whether the long custom of Court-smoothing, and
Eare-pleasing, specially in Divine matters, have not bred such a delicacy in
the souls taste, as that down right Zeal Iam. 3.14. If ye have (...) bit^er
zeal, envying and strife in your hearts, glory not.
, for God's glory, can handly find a stomach to take it down, or digest it,
but is rejected as a bitter Pill or Potion of such Patients, as account the
Remedy worse than the Disease.

12 How many yer are there in these days, who would be counted Bishops of
Christ's flock, and not Popish, or Antichristian; who yet look to little
else, but the silencing of such as stumble at their Ceremonies and Hierarchy.

Now these, and other such like scandalous, and irreverent calumniations are
vented by H. B. (who styles the Puritan ^ reformed Christian H. B. Plea to an
Appeal, as he hates to be reformed, so one piece of his Sermon must be an
invective against a Reformed Christian, his Puritan.
) instead of real answer and solution of such Arguments, as confound his
erroneous, and presumptuous dictats.

The Conclusion.
THE Author of the late Treatise of the Sabbath Day against Th. Brabourne,
having duly and impartially examined a brief Answer, digested Dialogue-wise,
between A. and B. is able to observe nothing at all therein, material,
substantial, or subservient to truth: but the whole Dialogue consists of
vain jangling, absurd disputing, factious cavelling; and his maine Position,
to wit, that the fourth Commandment was naturally moral, in respect of one
particular weekly day, is repugnant to all Orthodoxall Divines, both ancient
and modern, and it crosses his own Tenet, concerning the observation of the
Lord's Day.

If the man were of a meek and humble spirit, or a lover of truth, one might
persuade him to entertain a fairer means of resolution, than his irregular
and unlicensed Dialogue way: To wit, if he find himself unsatisfied touching
the question of the Sabbath: he should address himself to some learned and
judicious Persons Bernard Ep. 8^* Plerisque imo cunctis sapie^tibus co^tingere
solet, in rebus videlicet dubiis, plus alieno s^ quam proprio judicio credere.
, and submit himself to a private conference, as Theoph. Brabourne did: for
there is no means so profitable, so speedy, and ready for discovery of truth
as this*

In writing and printing unlicensed Pamphlets H. B. Plea to an Appeal, Truth
she complains of hard usage, how she is driven to seek corners, since she
cannot pass the Press, cum privilegio.
, there uses to be much mistaking, sometimes of the true state of the
question, and many times of the Adversaries Tenet, likewise false and
sophistical Argumentation, misunderstanding of terms, impertinent
digressions, tautologies, and unnecessary repetitions, false citing of Authors,
etc. But in conference the former things may easily be avoided, or presently be
discovered.

Now if the Author of the Dialogue (or if any other, that is unsatisfied) think
good to entertain the former course, he may reap much benefit by it, and
thereby declare himself to be a lover of Unity, Verity, and Peace.

But on the contrary, the venting of Lawless, and contentious Pamphlets, is
infamous, scandalous, and factious: it fomenteth schism, and contention in
Church, and State; it disquieteth and offends peaceable and godly minds; the
same provokes public authority: and the Adversaries of our Doctrine and
Religion, are thereby much confirmed in their error.

Therefore I desire all those, who are lovers of truth and sincerity, to be men
of peace Cypr. de simpl. Pral. Pacem quaerere debet and sequi filius pacis, a
dissensionis malo continere linguam suam debet, qui novit and diligit vinculum
Charitatis.
, and to show themselves adversaries to schism Id. de unit. Eccles. Possidere
non potest indumentum Christi, qui scindit and dividit Ecclesia^ Christi.
, and contention in the Church and State, wherein they enjoy their livelihood
and their liberty.

And for your self, Dialogue B. cease to affect popular applause; be not
overwise and wilful in your own conceits; refer the handling, and deciding
of profound Questions of Theology, to such persons as are qualified with
judgment and learning, and with greater humility and modesty than your self
Hier. c. Ruffin. Navem agere ignarus na^is timet: Abrotonum aegro non audet
pr^p^^^re, nisi qui di^^^ci^ dare: Quod medicorum est promittunt medic^,
tractant fab^il^^ fabri.
: Nec erubescas de commutation^ sententiae tuae; Non es enim tantae
authoritatis and famae, ut errasse se pudeat: Think it no disgrace to alter
your opinion; for you are not of so great Authority or fame, as that it can be
any shame for you, to relinquish your error.

Also consider impartially with what irreverent language Cypr. de unit.
Ecclesia Lingua Christum confessa non sit maledica: non turbulenta* non
conviciis and litibus perstrepeus audiatur: non contra fratres and Dei
sacerdotes, serpentis venena jaculetur.
you have entreated many worthy Fathers and Pillars of our Church; and with
what bitter and envious zeal you have traduced conformable Persons of very
good quality: and what scandal you have given to many people, by abating (as
much in you lies) their love, and due respect toward that Religion, and form
of Church Government, which is settled in our State.

Lastly, consider well Saint Hierom his Instruction: Bonum est obedire
Majoribus, parere Praefectis Erasm. Schol. in Hieron. In some Copies it is read
Praefectis, and in some other Perfectis.
, and post regulam Scripturarum, vitae suae rationem ab aliis discere, Nec
Praeceptore uti pessimo, praesumptione sua. It is a good and safe way for
people of meaner quality to be teachable, and obedient to their superiors; to
be guided and instructed by such as are of greater perfection than themselves:
and after the rule of holy Scripture, to order the course of their actions by
direction of others, but in no wise to make presumption, which is a perverse
Counselor, to be their Leader.

Salomon's Counsel is: Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not,
Pro. 9.33. He that loves instruction, loves knowledge: but he that hates
Correction is a fool, Pro. 12. When Pride comes, then comes shame, but
with the lowly is wisdom, Pro. 11. Only by pride does man make contention, but
with the well-advised is wisdom, Pro. 13.

Now let all this which has been spoken persuade Dialogue B. to cast away
from him, pride, envy, and contention; to cease to be arrogant Chrysostom. in Romans
hom. 20. Nihil hominem adeo stultum facit quemadmodum Arrogantia.
, to learn yet at the last, to understand his distance Ib. Qui seipsum
ignorant, quomodo quae supra se sunt cognoscat? Quemadmodu^ enim qui phrenesi
laborat, cum seipsum non agnoscat, and oculus cum ipse caecus sit omnia reliqua
me^bra in tenebris su^t: ita and Arrogantia se habet.
, and in the fear of God to humble and submit himself to his learned,
lawful, and godly superiors: And let him not give just occasion to have
Salomon's sentence applied unto him, Though thou should bray a fool in a
mortar, like wheat with a Pestle, yet will not his folly depart from him,
Prove. 27. ver. 22.

FINIS.

