Relation of sixtene martyrs glorified in England in twelve months. With a
declaration, That English catholics suffer for the catholic religion, and
That the Seminary priests agree with the Jesuits.

By Thomas WORTHINGTON

Printed at Doway, by the widow of James Boscard.

1601.

THE MANNER OF PROCEEDING, AGAINST M. JOHN RIGBIE, a Catholic Gentleman put to
death in London, this present year, 1600.
AMongst other common occurrents, which minister occation of speech and
discourse, in sundry parts of the world, it is neither the least, nor of
least importance that is daily reported of many Catholics, put to death and
otherwise afflicted, these late years in England. Whose present hard state,
and the true cause thereof, though the best and mightiest Princes and Potentates
of the Christian world (as also many others of al estates) do well see and
know, and with compassionable charity do many ways, like the good
Samaritan, Luc. ^
releue and assist them: yet there be two other sorts of men, the one not
sufficiently well, the other very il affected, toward these distressed
Catholics. For the former seeing and not regarding their calamities, pass on
their ways, like the Iudaical and carnal Priests and Leuits, as if it nothing
at al pertained to them, either to take notice, or to have care and compassion
of their neighbors miseries. Of which kind of people, I have little more now to
say, but heartily pray God, to make them more merciful, that they may find
mercy in the time of need. For that I am here principally to deal with the
last sort, who more actually persecute Catholics: not only depriving them by
violence, of their goods, liberties, and lives: but also accusing and
slandering them of heinous crimes, whereof they are most free and innocent: to
make them odious, or their martyrdom less glorious, amongst the ignorant at
home, and strangers abroad: saing and auouching with great words, oaths, and
protestations, that they die not, nor suffer not, for cause of Religion, but
for matter of treason against their Queen and Sovereign: though in their
consciences they can not but know it to be far oterwise. For why else
(besides other proofs) are they so unwilling to report, and so loath to hear,
what manner of treason this is, but for that, when the same is sincerly
declared, it easily and evidently appears, to be no other thing, then mere
Religion, and necessary confession of the Catholic faith? As has been very
often proved, not only by other irreprouable testimonies, and manifest
demo^strations, but also by their own tribunals, in public place of Justice,
in the most principal cities and towns of the Realm: as at London, York,
Lanceston, Chenceford, Lancaster, Winchester, Durram, Newcastle, Carlel,
Oxford, Dorcester, Gloucester, Wrixam, Warwike, Darbie, Stafford, Bewmatis,
Nottingam, Canturbutie, Lincoln, and other places. But for so much as our
adversaries persist still, in auouching and mantaining their pretended Justice
in this behalf, I shall for the more honor of God, more manifestation of the
truth, and better information of such as be not sufficiently satisfied,
sincerly relate an other example of trial, made in the cause of a Catholic
gentleman, put to death in London the 21. day of June this present holy year
1600. In which narration, for avoiding of al partiality, I will omit other
proofs of our Religion, and just commendations of the party (which may
notwithstanding hereafter be more largely published) and simply in two
words, touch those only points which concern the necessary knowledge of
his person, and pertained directly to the cause of his death: and then set
before your eyes the whole process, as it passed before many vvitnesses, in
form and show of public justice. The diuulging whereof in print, no reasonable
men, and namely the Magistrates and others that concurred in this action, can
not dislike, nor possibly be offended therewith, except their consciences
accuse them, of some unjust dealing against the person, whom they have so
publikly apprehended, examined, indicted, judged, and bereued of his life.
Briefly therefore, his name was M. John Rigbie, one of the younger sons of M.
Nicolas Rigbie of Harrock, in the County of Lancaster ge^tleman. Who coming
to years, ad use of reason co^petent for that purpose, so sufficiently learned
the principal articles of his faith, that continually even to death, he held all the same, to be undoubtedly true, and necessary to salvation: as well appears
by that which here follows. He attained also the Latin tongue and further
proceeded not in learning. The rest of his youth he spent partly in his fathers
house, partly in service: where through human frailty for fear of
punishment, and in hope of temporal preferment, joined with il example and
earnest persuasions, of some worldly friends, he yielded so far to the
Protestants Parliament laws, made for the abolishing of the holy Sacrifice,
and other Catholic Rites, and for practice of the new form of english
service, as to hear sometimes the same service. But being afterward very
sorrowful for having so conformed him self, by exterior act, and personal
presence, in the Protestants Chruches, (Which is there the note and character
(...). 13
of conformity to their religion) and thereby also depriving him self, of the
holy Sacraments, and necessary food of his soul (for none may (...). 13
^ate of the Altar of Christ, that serve the Tabernacle: and much less, that
serve a new Religion, which was never approved in Gods Church) he resolved by
Gods grace, to leave again that course of life, and so was absolved from his
sins, and reconciled to God, by a Catholic Priest. And thence forth lived
in great peace of his conscience, and alacrity of mind, with zeal and fervor
of devotion: by word and example, dravving so many as he could, to the like
good estate, for their souls health. Amongst others (which I may not here
omit, though I promised brevity) by his earnest prayers, most dutiful
endeavor, and Godly persuasions, he procured his own father to be reconciled
to God, in his old age. by which work of singular piety, and by many others,
he daily prepared the way, to the glorious crown, that he now possesses.
Whereunto likvvise concurred certain other occasions, which it pleased God also
to permit and to use, in bringing him to this blessed end.

For being (as is well known) in the service of Sir Edmund Hudleston knight, he
was sent by his master, to Sir Richard Martin Alderman of London, about
certain business. Where the young man dealnig somewhat roundly and sincerly, as
it became a faithful servant in his masters affairs, this Sir Richard
conceived offense and displeasure against him. Which he still bore in mind
(like Herod and (...)
Herodias, waiting opportunity to be revenged of S. John Baptist) til a fit
time happened for his purpose, as shortly it fell out by this accident.

Maistris Fortescue a Catholic widow, and daughter of the same Sir Edmund
Hudleston, was sommoned to the Sessions at Newgate ^o^ cau^es of Religion: who
being sick, and not able to appear, was to send one to testify the same for
her in that Court. Whereupon this master John Rigbie her fathers man, and hers
also when she needed his service, was ready (as God would have it for his more
glory) to do this good office for her that day. And so going to the Sessions
house, when Maistris Fortescue was called, he appeared and answered, that she
was sick, and not able to come thither. The commisioners demanded, if he
would auerre the same by his oath, he said he would so do. A book was by and by
offered him. Whereon he was commanded to lay his hand (as the manner is) and so
he did: as being ready to confirm by his oath, that which he had in commission
to answer, according to his opinion and knowledge. But the commissioners being
much discontented, to be thus frustrat of the gentlewomans appearance, the
forsaid Sir Richard Martin (perceuing him to be the same man that had
heretofore been with him, and had offended him) suddenly and with choler
begaine to examine him of his own faith and religion, before he was otherwise
apprehended, or accused, or had any cogitation of answering for him self.
Which nevertheless he did with admirable resolution and courage, to the
astonishme^t of his adversaries, and great edification of many, as well present
as others that have since heard thereof, and doubtless also of more yet, which
may hearaster hear of it. Our. B. Saniour geving him mouth and wisdom (as he
(...)
promises in such case) which al his adversaries were not able to resist and
gainsay. So from this examination he was carried to prison amongst thieves, and
often after examined, and removed from prison to prison, and at last condemned,
and put to death, al in such sort as now you shall here read. And that for the
former and greater part, written by him self word by word as follows.

A Copy of my examination the 14. of Febru. 1600. taken before my Lord mayor
of London, M. Recorder, Sir Richar Martin, Justice Dale, with others.

Coming to the Sessions to take my oath, upon occasion (to testify that
Maistris Fortescue was sick and not able to appear in that place) and having
the oath tendered, and my hand upon the book to swear, suddenlye spoke Sir
Richard Martin, and said: What are you that will swear? a papist? to whom
taking my hand back, I answered, I am a man. but what more, says he? at which
his reply (not able to forbear laughter) I said: Sir what can I be more then
a man? he then said: art thou a Papist, a Protestant, a Puritan or what
Religion art thou of? at which I something staying, he said presently: will thou go to Church, or no? This ^ of te^^ here vrg^^ ^.
to which I said, No. I thought so, said he, he may swear what he list, and
has his Priest at home to absolve him, I warrant you. Sir, said I, I do not
use to make false oaths, and if I did, I so easily. Then spoke my Lord Mayor,
will you not go to the Church? No my Lord. were that is ^^e Ca^^olique ^^th.
which ^ bele^^ at ^ ti^^, in ^ pla^ by all ^ most ^ri^^ns. ^cen. ^^n. ^^.
which I believe. and what do you believe? That which the whole Catholic
Church believes, what is that? that which I believe, my Lord. so I would not be
brought from that, by no means. I will warrant you, said Alderma^ Martin, he
believes as his Maistris believes. I pray God I believe no worse, said I. whose
man are you? said my Lord Mayor. Maistris Fortescues, my Lord. how long have
you served her? these four or five years. who preferred you to her? one
Claiton a brother in law of mine. is he a Catholic? No, my Lord a Protestant.
were you a Catholic when you came to her? No my Lord, but alvvayes
Catholikely brought up. How chanced it that you altered your religion? when
I came to riper years, my Lord, and considered mine own estate better, I very
well perceived that course vvherin I the^ lived, was not the course where in
to be saved. vvherup^^, I altered my Religion. What, said Justice Dale, vvilt
thou take the oath of the Supremacy? Sir said I, now you seek my blood, I
know not all that belongs to that oath. there be many can answer you better
then I. I vvil not swear. No, said they al at once, why? We have al taken
it, if thou deniest it, thou art a traitor. To which I ansvvered, I am no
Traitor, my Lord, but a true Subject. That which your lordship and others have
done, is nothing to me, I vvil not swear. And if the Pope should send in
forces, to invade this Realm, whose part would you take, the Queen's or the
Popes? I ansvveared, the Queen's my Lord. But if he should come to settle the
Catholic Religion (as you term it) whose part would you then take? Good my
Lord that concerns my life. I vvil not answer it. what, art thou not a
Priest? said Sir Richard. No, far unworthy so high a calling? Nor a friar?
No. Nor taken ^nie orders, nor profession upon you? No more then professed my
self, by Gods grace, to live and die in the Catholic Church. Were you never
out of England? No my Lord. look if he be not bald, said Justice Dale. No I
vvarrant you, said I. send for a Barber, said my Lord Mayor, and cut of his
hair presently. So we rested til the Barber came. Then they set me on a
vvarme stone, where the Irons were in heating to burn felons vvithal; and
the barber (...) to play his part. But (...) had sitten a little, the stone
burned th^^^ ^o my hose, and the fire under burned my ^egges. Whereupon I spoke
and said, I (...) to hot, my Lord. And presently they ansv^ered al, thou must
fit hotter yet. Nay th^n said I, put under more fire in Gods name, vvhearat I
heard no one word. but, ^^ and by, they spoke unto the barber, and bade him
cut me close to the head. When to ^ ansvvered, in this quarrel, head and al^ if
it please you, my Lord. When he had done they bade me pay the barber. I said,
No, my lord Mayor should: yet stay said I, thou ^halt not take al these pains
for nothing. So I took forth my purse, and gave him th^e^ pence. Where at
there was great laughing, and I not the least merry, I am sure Then my Lord
called me again. How (...) vvil you yet go to Church? I ansvvered (...) my
Lord, this has not any vvhit^ ^^^^ted me. What Countriman are you? A
Lancashire man my Lord, What is your name? Rigbie. what more? John Rigbie.
where about in Lancashire? about two miles from Latham, at a house called
Harrock was I borne, my Lord. I am more sorry, said he, for I know honest
gentlemen of that name. If there were any honesty amongst them, said I, I
hope in Jesus he vvil grant me part by descent. Then said Sir Richard Martin,
Sir Sir, what prayer do you use daily to say, for the Pope? Sir said I, I
know not what you mean. Yes said he, that you do, for you say this daily
prayer: and began to repete certain words, which were neither English,
Latin, French, nor Spani^h, I am sure: but he meant (as it seemed) to have made
Latin of it. I have forgot it, and so did presently, for except it had been
written it was impossible to carry it a way. Only the three last words I
remember, which were, pro^ostra Papa. VVherat not able That ^ for ^ she ^^
to forbear laughter, I used an oath or two saying: by my faith and troth, I
never heard so simple a sentence come forth of any Catholics mouth: and for
mine own part, though I understand Latin, I do not understand what you said.
VVherat all the bench laghed with me for company. So my Lord Mayor commanded
the keeper to take me again to his custody. And I stood amongst the fellons
til night, and so went to nevvgate my nevvlodging. where I learned some neck
tricks, and there rested.

The next day at nine of the clock when my Lord chief Justice was set in his
place, I was sent for to the Sessions house. where presently his Lordship
asked my name. I ansvvered John Rigbie. What Cuntriman are you? a Lanca^hire
man my Lord. How long have you continevved in these parts? some four or five
years, my Lord* with whom? in service with M. is Fortescue. whose daughter
(...) his daughte^ where lives she? with her faither. Who preferred you to
her service? a brother inlavv of mine, one Clayton, my Lord. What religion
were you of, when you came to he^^ i^ heart a Catholic my Lord. but you
went to Church said he. I did my Lord sometimes, but alvvayes intended by Gods
grace to become a Catholic. Who persuaded you to that course, to alter your
Religion. No body my Lord, but mine own conscience. for when I considered
mine estate, I found that I was not in the right course to be saved. and
therefore I resolved by Gods grace to profess that Religion vvherby my soul
might be saved. VVil you not go to the Church? No my Lord* you lived in Sir
Edmund his house? I my Lord. Does Sir Edmund go to the Church? I my Lord. And
my Lady also? for any thing I know, my Lord. For I took no great heed of any
bodies going, but mine own. How long have you refused to go to the Church?
these two or three years my Lord. You went to the Church once, then can you
not be, as you say, a Catholic, but you must be reconciled. How say you then
were you reconciled or no? whereto not knovving what to answer, I stayed a
little. and his lordship again bad me speak, then I ansvvered: my lord to
satisfy your lordship in this point, I took not upon me, to profess my
religion with out a certain ground (...) ^atholique. I was in deed
reconciled my ^^rd. well said: says he, and by whom? by ^e M. Buckley my
lord, was he a Semina^ie Priest? he was a Catholic Priest my lord. where
was it done? in the Clinck. ^^ovv came you acquainted with him? by a
Lancashire man, a kinsman of mine. Where is he? dead my lord. how many times
since, have you senne him, at your Maistris house? Never in my life, neither
before nor since. What others have you seen there? not one my lord? how
many more know you thath are Priests? Not one my Lord. Where is that Buckley
now? in heaven I make no doubt. in heaven! how know you that? he suffered
Martyrdom for the Catholic Religion. Did you never see him before, and could
he persuade you so fully? I my lord. for by Gods grace I doubted not in any
one article of my belief. Al which examination they writ down and gave it
me to set my hand to it first, for honor sake, before my lord chief Justice or
any of the rest, which I did. and then they set their hands to it also. Then
my lord commanded the keeper to take me, and to put on me an iron chain.
which when it came I willed him to put it on, in Gods name, and said alovvd:
I would not change my chain, for my Lord Mayor his great chain, and gave the
fellow six pence for his pains. By and by my Lord chief justice sent me word
to provide my (...), for I was to be arrayned forthwith. I bad the messenger
tell his Lordship. I never heard so good nevves in my life before, and so I was
commannded to the common Gayle. But (expecting every day to be arreigned) the
Tuesday following, I was removed to the whit Lion in Southvvork. and was
there quiet til the third of March, not hearing any more what should be done
with me.

On vvensday, the third of March in the common Sessions with a number of
felons I was brought to my trial. In the forenon^ I was called and appeared,
but nothing was said to me. When the Justice went to diner we also went
home to prison. and benig at dinner Justice Gaudie sent his man for me, and I
went willingly with my keeper. And so coming to them at Justice Dale his
house where the Judges dined, Justice Gaudie commanded the chamber to be
voided, saing there were matters of importance to be dealt in. Some went
away, but the most part stayed. There he called me unto him, and asked my
name, which I told him. were not you committed by my Lord chief Justice, and
examined by him at Newgaae? I my Lord, I was so. You know your own hand if
you see it? I my Lord. so he shevved me my hand, and I said: This is my hand. I
pray you give me leave to speak for my self. You shall, said he. I well
perceive you have thougt better of the matter since, or are grown far more
skillful. This manner of answering for your self before, would have served your
turn better: but now it will not. I sent for you to this end. I am told by one
of my Lord of Canturburie his gentleman, that you thought you had answered
before ignorantly, and are now sorry for that you have done, and willing to
become a good Subject, and go to Church. If you will so do, her Majesty is
merciful, and her Laws will take pity upon you. How say you, will you go to
Church now? No my Lord. Good my Lord, believe. We were told, you were a ^imp^^
young man, and willing to recant. but we see now, thou art a resolute wilful
fellow, and there is no remedy, but law must proceed. I would be sorry, my
Lords, to give your Lordships any cause to think that ever I meant to recant
knowing nothing wherein I have offended, but only uttered my conscience. If that
be so great a matter of offense, let me have law, in the name of Jesus. Gods
will be done. Then spoke Justice Dale, a Justice of Peace; thou art a cogging
cosening fellow, and getts thy lining, no man knows how, by cogging and
lying. Sir, said I, for my getting I need not much to bragg of it, and for my
lying and cogging you speak of, I would gladly you should know, that the
Auncestres of the house, from whence I came, were gentlemen five hundred yeaes
before your grandfather was Justice. And so I stopped his mouth. And the Judges
committed me unto my keeper for that time. The next day being thursday we went
again to the Sessio^s at S. Margarits hill. Where about 2. of the clock in the
afternone, I was called to the bar to be arayned. the Clerck said: John Rigbie
hold up thy hand, where beseeching my sweet Savior Jesus, our Blessed Lady,
and all the holy company of Angels, and other Saints to pray for me, I held
up my hand merrily. So the Clerck read the Inditment, which when I had heard, I
beseech you, my Lord, said I, grant me liberty to speak. anon you shall said
he. So I gave place, and the rest came to the bar, for we were six arreigned
at that time together, five fellons, and my self. About an hour after I was
called again and bidden, hold up my hand. which I did as before my Inditment
was read again, and it was a sharp one. Then my Lord bad me speak, and I
answered to four principal points, briefly in this manner.

First, my very good Lords, whereas I am charged in mine Inditment, that I was
reconciled, it is very true; to God almighty I so was* and I thinck lawfully
might be. and as I remember, it is also allowed in your book of common prayer,
in the visitation of the sick, that if any man find himself burdened in
conscience, he should make his confession to the Minister. Which confession
manifests a breach between God and his own soul, and by this humble
confession he craves pardon for his sins, and reconciliation to God again by
the hands of his Minister. Secondly whereas I am charged, that I was reconciled
from mine obedience to her Majesty, and to the Romish Religion: I will depose
the contrary. For I was never reconciled from any obedience to my Prince, for
I obey her still* nor to aine Religion: for although I sometimes went to Church
against my will, yet was I never of any other Religion, then the Catholic,
and therefore neded no reconciliat^^ to Religion, which I never stood against
Thirdly, whereas (in my former answer; I said, I went to Church, it is true,
for fear of temporal punishment I so did, but never minded to fall from the old
Religion, and therefore neded no reconciliation to Religion. Fourtly and lastly
I humbly beseech your good Lordships, as you will answer it before God, to
explicat the meaning of the statute to the Jury, if the meaning thereof be, to
make it treason, for a man fallen into the displeasure of God, through his
sins, to be reconciled to God again by him, to whom God has committed the
authority of reconciliation. If this be treason, Gods will be done. Then said
both the Judges, it was by a Romish Priest, and therefore treason. I answered,
it was by a Catholic Priest, who had the liberty of the prison, and was
fry for any man to come unto him, to relieve him: and therefore by the statute
no treason. Again, my Lords, if it be not inquired of, within a year and a
day, there can be no advantage taken aganst me by this statute, if you wrong me
not. Whereto replied one that sat under the Judges: All this will not seru^ thy
turn, for the Jury must find it treason. and so gave them instructions, that
it must needs be treason. Nay then Sir, said I, if it must be, let it be. Gods
will be done. Then said Justice Gaudie, Good Rigbie, I pray you thinck not in
any sort, I go about to seek your death. her Majesty, and her laws be
merciful. If you will yet conform your self, and say here, before the Jury go
forth, that you vvil go to Church, and submit your self, we vvil proceed no
further. My Lord, said I, if that be all the offense I have committed, as I
know it is; and if there be no other way but going to Church to help it, I
would not vvish your Lordships to think, I have VVh^^ (...) vvho^ vvor^^ does
^ Iudg^ the ^^ quisit^ of (...) vvh^^ they ^^ must ^^ find t^ be the truth*
consider of it, you see what is said: you cannot but find it treason by the
Law. And so when the rest were arraigned, they went forth, and stood not
long to thinck upon the matter, but came again, and I was called, and bidden
again hold up my hand, they bad the Jury look on the prisoner, whether is he
guilty or no? and, who shall speak for you? they al said: the foreman. I
beseech you, my Lord, said I, may it please you to command silence, that I may
hear my verdict. which his Lordship did. but the foreman spoke so softly that
I could not hear him. I willed him to speak up, and not to be afeard. Then he
said, Guilty. To the which I said, with a loud voice, Laus tibi Domine Rex
aeternae gloriae. And so went fr^^ the bar. When the rest were arraigned, and
judgment was to be given, I was first called* and Justice Gaudy said, what
can thou say for thy self, wherefore thou should no^ have judgment of
death? I answered, if that which before I said, will not serve, I can say no
more. Good Rigbie, said he, thinck not I seek ^our death* will you yet go to
Church* No, my Lord. why then, said he, judgment Deo gratias. al is but one
death, my Lord, and aflea biting in comparison of that, which it pleased my
svvete Savior JESUS, to suffer for my salvation. I humbly ^^ is ^ pa^^ of
^^ts, which ^o the ^an^ents God, faith Ie^^. ^o^. ^^.
thank your Lordship, for your great pains: and friely forgive your Lordship,
and this poor Jury, and al other persecutors in this cause who soever. Well
said, says he, in deed you show your charity. and then gave judgment to the
rest. And when he had done he called us together, and began his exhortation
persuading us for our end. vvilling us to send for a Minister, and provide for
death. I desired his Lordship to spare my presence, and bestovv that counsel
else where. For I hope I am as well provided, as by his exhortation I should
be. If you be, said he, it is the better for you. God speed you well. and so
we parted. I pray God forgive them al. and amend them, if it be his vvil. Amen.

Christo lauds, and sanctae Matri eius honor. Amen.

Thus much he writ himself, after he was repriued: and sent it, to a dear
friend, who keeps safe the original. For Justice Gaudy who pronounced
sentence of death against him the fourth of March, caused him for that time, to
be repriued. and so he continued prisoner in the whit Lion in Southvvork above
three months more.

On thursday the ^9. of June, in the Assizes holden at S. Magarets hill in
Southvvorke, (Justice Kingsm^l sitting upon criminal causes, and Justice Gaudy
upon civil matters and suites in Law, who in lent Assizes before had the
contrary offices) M. Rigbie was produced again to the bar, and asked by
Justice Kingsmel whether he would yet go to the Church, or no? And he
ansvvered (I thanck God) I am the same man that I was. It is not lavvful to go
to your Church. I vvil brought a strong pair of shackells. which M. Rigbie
taking into his hands, kneeling down, and making the sign of the Cross,
kissed them, and gave them again to the keeper, and so going unto the block,
the kepers man riuited them on very fast on both his legs, and so they
continued all that day, and the night following. The next day, being friday, he
was brought again to the Sessions house in the forenoone. Where after he had
stood a while the irons fell from of his legs upon the ground. vvherat he
smiled. the keeper demanunding why he smiled, he told him, his shackles were
fallen of, and bad him riuite them on faster, which he did as he thought very
sure: but within a little space they fell of again, whereupon he called again
upon his keeper, and willed him to make them faster. For I esteem them, said
he, Jewels of to great price to be lost. The kepers man, that had put them
o^twise before being much amazed, refused to do it again. I will fasten them no
more, said he, for I thinck it is not Gods vvil you should wear any irons.
in so much that the keeper commanded an other of his men to do it. And then
Master Rigbie remembering that a Catholic maid in the prison, called Mercy
had that morning told him, that the night before she saw in her dream, as she
thought his irons fall of from his legs, said to his keeper, now the maids
dream is found to be ^rue. and sent also word thereof to the maid from the
Sessions house. Most men that saw it, or have heard of it, undoubtedly thinck
it to be miraculous. What the Judges with the rest of the bench, and others in
authority thinck of it, is hard to judge. They knew not be like them selves
what to say. and therefore neither that day, nor afterward spoke at al to the
prisoner. but consulted amongst them selves, and with much difference of
opinions, and often altering of there purposes, at last one concluded, that
which others misliked, that he must dye. In the mean time, returning that
evening with his keeper to the prison, he was permitted to lodge in his
accustomed chamber. where many had before visited him, being much delighted
with his mild and sweet conversation. And now many more resorted unto the
prison to see him, upon the report of his irons so strangely salling of his
legs. Amongst other things, a Catholic prisoner in the same house, demanded
of him, what he thought of that falling of, of his chains. He answered, that
he hoped, the bands of his mortality should shortly be loosed. as in deed it
proved. An other, considering that oftentimes men of excellent corege, and
resolution of mind, do notvvithstanding sustain great conflicts, between the
soul and the body, betwe^ reason and the sensual part, asked him, how he felt
him self? I am said he, I thank our Lord, in very great comfort, and
consolation of mind. the residue of his time he spent likevvi^^ vertous
exercises, with great devotion (...) quent prayer, much abstinence, watching
and fasting, more and more, as his end drew ne^e^.

O^ saturday in the morning word was brought him, that he should dye that
day. he ansvvered very cherf^lly: Deo gratias. It is the best tidings that ever
was brought me, of an^^ thing sithence I was borne. so willingly ^^ believed
that which he desired. though mos^ men did not yet thinck it probable, for the
reasons aforesaid. For it is well knovve^ and reported by such as could tell,
that the Judges put his name twice in the Calenda^ of those that were to dye,
and twice ou^ again the same day, before he was executed* For Justice Gaudie
endeavoring to repriue him longer, Justice Kingsmel urged, and would needs have
him to dye. And in fine Justice Gaudy seenig his inte^tio^ crossed by Kingsmel,
who the third time put his name in that calendar agane, and so delivered it up
amongst those which should dye, turned himself from the company, and was by
some seen to vvepe. This uncertainty, especially the Calendar being brought to
the keeper, his name leaft out, after it had been twice sent for, and altered,
deceived many of his friends, who had a purpose, to have been present at his
death, had they not thus been persuaded to thinck undoubtedly, that he was
again repriued.

The same day the Minister of Saint George his Church, adjoining to the prison,
coming ^o Master Rigbie, he curtously saluted him and asked who he was. The
Minister said, I am parson of Saint Georges parish: and hearnig you are this
day to dye, am come by commandment to confer with you, and to instruct you. I
thank you, said M. Rigbie, for your pains. but we two are opposite in
Religion. Therefore I am not to confer with you in matters of faith. I have
long looked

Betwixt five and six of the clock in the afternone M. Cheek, one of the
vndershrifs officiers, coming to the prison, called for M. John Rigbie, saing
they staid for him. He ansvvered, I am ready for you, good M. Cheek. May it
please you to stay but a very little while, and I come. Ad so hastening he
went most sweetly and curtously to salute, and take his leave of his fellow
Catholic prisoners, and other fre^des then present with him: who al with
great respect (as to one going to possess a Kingdom, for revvard of his
faithful service) every one humbly kneeled unto him, and he with like respect
to them, as to Gods designed Martyrs, also kne^led: and to their great
consolation embraced, and saluted every one of them with a kiss^ of peace. In
which devout manner leaving them, and desiring their charities, to assist him
in this his journey, toward his own country, with their devout prayers,
promised them that he would remember them (as they requested) in his assuredly.
Then going down into the yard, he found the hurdle at the stayers foot ready
prepared. Where he kneling down, and first signing himself with the sign of
the Cross, framed himself to say some prayer. but presently one Master More,
the vndershrifs deputy, interrupted him. and he rising smot his hand upon the
horse, merrily saing, Go thy vvayes, this is the ioyfulest day that ever I
knevv. And signing himself again with the sign of the Cross, laid himself
gently down upon the hurdle, with great alacrity of mind, as well appeared
by his svvete Angelical contenaunce. which the standers by curiously
observing, some asked him, if he laughed from his heart, he answered? yes verily
from my heart. And bear witness with me, al good people, that I am now
forthwith to give my life only for the Catholic cause. Master More taking
exceptions said, No Master Rigbie, you dye for treason in the highest degree,
for being reconcilid by a Seminary Priest. Yes Master More, said he again,
for neither can that be treason. nor yet I dye not for that only. For as you
know the Judge offered me oftentimes to save my life, for only going to
Church. Then pulling his hat down to shadovv his eyes, bad them, In the name
of our Lord go on. and so settled himself to his devotions. But they making a
little stay, he said merrily: when go you? I think your horse is not able to
draw me. At which words they went forvvard, and he fell unto his prayers.

In the way toward the place of execution, called S. Thomas Watering, came
ryding as was thought two courtiers. but shortly one of them was known to be
the Earl of Rutla^d, and the other was Captain Whytlock in his company. they
coming nere the hurdle, and viewing the prisoner, the Captain demanded of
him, what he was, of what years, and what might by the cause of his
condemnation to this kind of death? M. Rigbie looking up, and hearing some name
the Earl of Rutland, supposing the Captain to be the Earl, took of his hat
and desired his honor humbly to pardon him, in being so undutiful as to have
been covered in his presence, for I knew not (said he) of such honorable
asse^blie. and to your questions may it like your honor, my name is John
Rigbie, a poor gentleman, of the house of Harrock in Lancashire: my ag^ about
thirty years, my judgment and (...) demnation to this death, is only and
merely for that I ansvvered the Judge, that I was reconciled; and for that I
refused to go unto the Church, to hear the English service. Whereat the
Captanine seemed to meruel: and said, sure it is very strange, that any man
should be put to death for that. undoubtedly, said the prisoner, it is for no
other cause ^^ do assure you. The Captain wished hi^ to do, as the Queen
would have him (that is ^^rt, the Earl and the Captain posted away, much
astonished at his courege and constancy.

The Captain often related these particulars, and vvithal added that he had
seen many dye, but never had, nor should see the like to him: for modesty,
patience, and undoubted resolution in his Religion. And that it would not be
good for our state, to put such men to death.

Now the prisoner being in place, to end this tragedy, the officiers brought
him from the hurdle to the cart. where he kneled down and said the Parer
noster, Aue Maria, Credo, and Confiteor al alovvde, until he came to those
words, the holy Apostls S. Peter and Saint Paul, whereat the ruder sort of
the people exclamed, that he prayed to Saints. and so he was not permitted to
come to the end. The executione^ helping him up into the cart, he gave him an
angel of gold, saing: here take this in token that I friely forgive thee, and
al others, that have been accessarie to my death. Thou shall have more, a poor
su^e of fustian, and a new shert which I put on this morning. I would it
were better for thee. Then taking of his hat, he threw it from him. And making
the sign of the Cross, he vewed the multitude (which was very great) rovvnd
about him. And with cherful contenance holding his hands before his breast,
with his eyes closed, he meditated a little while. And after looking up, seemed
to make cou^^^nance to some of his friends in the press. The executioner in
the mean time vnt^^e^ his garters. himself untrussed his points* and that so
nimbly, as the beholders merueled, to see a man in such case, so quick and
active, and nothing dismade for death so nere approaching. Taking also his
falling band from his neck, he rolled it on a heap, and cast it from him, as
far as he could. Whereupon some said: that will be taken up for a Reliqu^. His
clothes being taken of al to his shert, the hangman offered to put the halter
over h^^ head, which he stayed, taking it betwixt bot^ his hands, so kissed
it, and gave it to hi^ again saying: Now do your pleasure with it. And
presently he put it over his head. Beginning then to speak to the people, More
the vndershrifes deputy bade him pray for the Queen, which he did very
affectionatly, as might appear to come from a charitable, and loyal heart. The
deputy asked him: What Traitors know thou in England? If thou know any
reveal them. God is my witness, said he, I know none. VVat! says the deputy
again, if he vvil confess nothing, drive away the cart. Which was done so
sudainly, that he could neither speak to the people: nor recommend his soul
again to God, as he was about to do. Again the deputy very shortly commanded
the hangman to do his duty: meaning that he should cut the rope, and let him
fall down, which was so incontinently done, that he stood upright upon his
feet, like to a man a little amazed, til the butchering fellows clasping
about him, by maine force threvv him on the ground. Where coming again
perfectly to himself, he said alovvd and distinctly: God forgive you. Jesus
receive my soul. And immediately an other cruel fellow standing by (who was no
officer at al, but a common porter) set his foot upon the Martyrs throat, and
so held him down, that he could not speak any more. VVherof the same fellow
made great vaunt, and bosted afterward, until some of the more civil people,
reprehending him for his bad mind, and hard heart, he began to be ashamed of his
fact, and denied it to others, that charged him therewith. Others held his
arme^ and legs whiles the executioner dismembered, and vnbovveled him. And
when he felt them pulling out his heart, he was yet so strong, that he thrust
the men from him, which held his arms. Finally they cut of his head, and
divided his quarters, disposing of them in several places about Southvvork, as
is accustomed. The people going away muttered much at the cruelty used in the
execution. And generally al sorts bevvayled his death.

Thus you have a plain and sincere narration of this ma^s death, and of the
cause thereof. Which was, as you see, for being reconciled and ^o^ (...) to go
to the (...) Church. For he was in deed condemned for the one, and executed
for the other. Now whether either of these, or both together be treason; or may
truly be so called; is the principal question of controversy, touching this
man's and other Catholics suffering in our country.

For resolution whereof, if but in England it self, the greatest number of
voices of al^ English persons (supposing that al durst and would speak that
they think) might decide the matter, there were no great doubt, but the verdict
would be clear and absolute, for the Catholics in this behalf. For not only
Catholics themselves, which (God be thanked) are a very great number: but
also most Protestants, and in manner al Puritanes, and some others of diverse
other sects, take these facts of Catholics to be mere matters of conscience,
and void of al treason: and but those few only, in whose hands the
government of the Realm now specially consists, with a few more that follow
the sway of authority, do hold or profess the contrary opinion. Or else if
the whole state of the land, of former times, from our first conversion to
Christ, to these late years: Or finally if the whole Christian world, both of
times past and present might be Judge (as by all reason it should) then sentence
would easily be for us, and al further dispute would be (...). For neither in
England before our days; nor else where before nor as yet in all Christendom; no
not in those other places which are also divided from the Roman Church, is
there any such opinion holden nor such laws made, that to be reconciled, or
absolved from sins by a Catholic Priest, should be treason, but only in
England, within these last 40. years. For albeit in Geneua, and in some parts
of Germany, as also in Holland, and some other like places, they punish with
less penalties, such as go to Confession, hear Mass, or otherwise practice
the Catholic Religion: yet none such are in any of those places esteemed nor
judged Traitors, nor bereued of their lives for the same. Neither are any
punished at al, but only in England for refusing to swear, that they think in
their conscience that the King, Queen* or Prince, is and ought to be supreme
head, or supreme governor of the Church, immediately under Christ, in all causes
as well spiritual as temporal. For asking, or receuing any manner of
dispensation, indulgence, or other grace of the Sea Apostolic. For having an
Agnus Dei, Beads, Grains, Crosses, Medails, Images, Pictures, or other
things, blessed by the Bishop of Rome. For persuading any person to be a
member of the Catholic Roman Chruch. ^or having authority subordinat to the
same Roman Chruch, to absolve from sins. For being made Priest in any
English College or Seminary without the Realm, and so returning into their
country. And for the like things enacted and made as heinous crimes by new
Parliament laws. Al which pertain directly, and evidently to Gods special
Service, Sacrifice, Sacraments, spiritual regiment, relief and health of
souls. And so are matters of Religion, most really distinct in nature and
substance, from matters of temporal state; and much more from treason, and from
al disobedience to temporal Princes. Whose Sovereignty, and security both is
and always has benne most specially maintained and never oppugned by the
Catholic Religion. For even as Christ him self and his P^t.
obedience, and al dutifid honor and service to temporol Powers and Princes,
and diligently Tim.
to pray for all such both publikly and privately: so al Catholics in England,
and every where continually do the same. And namely this holy Martyr (as
appears before) (...) 32
acknowledged and yielded al temporal power, and authority to the Queen, still
professing and behauing him self as a faithful and loyal subject, serving her,
and praying for her, and even to death denying and detesting al treasons and
travtors. How wrongfully therefore he was condemned to death, may sufficiently
appear by that which has benne here said. First because the Laws or statutes
pretended against him, are not sufficient Laws, whereby to condemn him,
depending wholly upon false and unlawful grounds, if in deed he had benne of
an other Religion before, and afterward reconciled to the Catholic. Secondly
because his proper case was such, that by the same statutes he could not be
convinced, as him self very well declared at his arraignment. Neither by the
statutes An^ Eli^ ^. ^ and ^
against reconciliation, for that he was always in faith a Catholic, and
therefore neded not reconciliation to any Religion, nor was so reconciled, but
only absolved from his sins committed of frailty. Nor by the An^
statute aganst receiving or releuing Catholic Priests; because the Priest
that absolved him, had at that time so much liberty in prison, that al men
that would might come to him and releue him. And much less is there any
thing at al in that statute prohibiting any man to be temporally or
spiritually releued by him. But al their accusations and proofs failing, the
Judges also and the whole bench being silent, and most men expecting that the
prisonner should be quit, and fry from sentence of death, then came in the
common vndersong (the fauburden of such tragical pagents) from a companion that
sat beneth, saying; All this will not serve thy turn; for Pag^ 20.
the Jury must find it treason. If it must be (says finally the happy
martyr) let it be. Gods will be done. And so I will say no more in a matter so
clear, touching the pretensed cause of his condemnation to death.

It rests only, to speak a word or two more of his refusal to go to the
Protestants Church. Which as it was the particular cause, that the said
sentence was given, so was it also the principal cause that the same was put
in execution: for otherwise either it had not been pronounced, or had been
remitted or annullated, if at any of ten or twelve times, when it was
publikly urged unto him, he would have yielded thereto.

And first it is a thing certain and evident, that this refusing or omitting
to be present, at the public Service of a contrary Religion, is no where
else so grievously punished, as now in Englad. For the Catholic Church to
begin with al (because her adversaries count her very severe) is so far
from urging or forcing, those that be not Catholics, to be present at Mass,
Matines, or at any public Office in the Church, that she aloweth none such
at al to enter in, nor to abide there, though they should desire it. And has
for this purpose a special Order of Clergy men, who are called Ostiarij;
whose office is to admite only the obedient children of the Church, and to
keep out, or drive out al others. And if by ignorance, force, or otherwise,
any that ought not, happen to be there, incontinently as the same is
perceived, the Sacrifice, and al other public Offices do cease, til they be
got out again. In other places, especially in the most parts of Germany,
straict Laws be ordained, that none shall be constrained to any practice, or
outward conformity in any other Religion, then them selves like and allow of.
and that al persons may friely, without impechment or molestation, use that
Religion, which in their consciences they hold to be best, and most aualable
for their souls health. Whereby innumerable persons of diverse Religions,
notvvithstanding their diversity of opinions in matters of faith, and their
daily frequenting of diverse Assemblies in distinct Churches, live and converse
together, each one according to his profession, trade, and traffike, in all
peaceable and quiet manner. Only in England, and in few other places, the
Catholic Rites, Offices, and especially the Sacrifice are prohibited: and a
certain conformity, or external show, is required and exacted (in every
province, country, or kingdom diversely, as their doctrines be diverse) upon
smaller, or upon greater penalties. Which in England are more and more
augmented these later years. For vvheras in the beginning of the An. ^ Eliz^
Queen's reign, it was prohibited to say or hear Mass, under the pain either
of paying an hundredth Marks, or else of suffering six months imprisomnent: in
a latter statute, the price or penalty is increased; that who An. ^
soever hears Mass, must both suffe^^^ whole years imprisonment, and also
pay ^^ hundredth Marks. And he that says Mass^ must be committed to the next
Jail, for ^ whole year, and also pay two hundredth marks; or else remain in
the Jail, until he shall pay it. And if he be a Jesuit, or a (...) 27.
Seminary Priest, then both he, and those that entertained him, must al dye
for it. The Priest as a traitor, the other as fellons. Again vvheras in the
said former statute, al persons above the age of xvi. years are commanded to
be present at their new form of service (brought in place of the Catholic
Office, and Sacrifice at the same time abolished) every Sunday and Holy day,
upon pain of paying xij pence for every days absence: the same is not only
augmented in the other statute (to a far greater price, then Christians pay
for use of their Religion in Constantinople) to xx. pounds for every months
absence from their Church: but also without statute, Christians in a Christian
Realm (which is much to be pitied and justly wondered at) are finally
persecuted to death, for not committing an act, and a sin against their
conscience. As was manifest in this blessed Martyr, and in many others. Who
if they would but have yielded in this one point, should not have dyed, for all
their other supposed treasons.

But if any man will yet doubt, or seem to meruel, why this Martyr (and the
(...) o^ many others) would not in all this long combat, being so often and
so earnestly urged thereto, save his life by once saying he would go to the
Church: himself plainly and publikly answered the Judges, and the Mat. 10. ^^
16. Joan. 12.
whole world, that he could not do it, because he should by so doing, not
have saved but have lost his life. and therefore he lost it in this world, and
so found life everlasting. Rightly considering that better it was, to fall into
the Dan. 13.
cruel hands of men, then into the just wrath of God almighty. Who is a
ieliouse Exo. 20. sequ^^
God, that neither vvil suffer his people to serve other gods, nor him self to
be served in other manner, then by Moses, and by his other high Priests he has
appointed. VVherof (besides many others) we have a most terrible Nu. 1.
example in the people of the Jews, that did not sever them selves, from the
Tabernacles of the impious, as they were commanded, but yielded to the Opposites
of Moses, and were invvrapped in their sins. And so not only Core, Dathan,
and Abiron, the heads and ringleaders, with their vviues, children, and their
retinewes, were swallowed up in the gaping earth, descending alive into hell;
and their two hundredth and fisteie accomplices and cooperators, al devoured
with fire from heaven: but also their other adherents, and partners in the
schism, to the number of fourtene thousand seven hundredth of the people,
perished in like sort by the same fire: which ceased not devouring those that
had any way participated in the same revolt, til Aaron sent by Moses, had
apeazed the wrath of God, with Sacrifice and other prayers. And shall we think
that the same God vvil not as justly and seuerly, either in this world or in
the next, punish us Christianes, if we join our selves in profession, or
practice of a contrary Religion, to that which Christ, and his Apostles, and
their Successors taught and observed, and which our country was first
converted unto? No assuredly. For he is the same just God still, to Jews and to
Gentiles, to Israilits and Christians; Jesus Christ yesterday, and today, the
same (...). ^at. ^^.
for ever. Who commands us, not only not to believe those that shall say: Lo
here is Christ or there: but also not to go out, of the fellowship of al nations
christened, into one corner, town, or country: as S. Augustine understands
^ugde ^^it. ^^cle. 13. ^ Cor.
that place. And the Apostle admonishes us the same, more at large: No
society (says he) nor fellowship: no agreement, no participation, no consent
can be between Christ and Belial; and none ought to be, in the public
prayers, nor in assemblies for the service of God, between Catholics and who
so ever of contrary Religion. Go out of the mids of them, and separate
yourselues: says our Lord, and touch not the unclean, and I will receive you.
And contrariwise at the last day, he will bring Psalm. 124.
those that decline into obligations (for love or for fear of the world) with
the workers of iniquity, as testifies the Royal Prophet. Who likewise
admonishes us in an other Psalm by his own example, or rather in the person
of every faithful soul, saying: With Psalm. 2^.
them that do vuiust things, I will not enter in. I have hated the Church of the
malignant: and with the impious I will not sit. And the Prophet Elias cries
unto such as would serve both God 3. Reg 1^.
and his enemy: How long halt you on two ways, if our Lord be God, follow him:
but if Baal, follow him. Good Tobias a youth in captivity, Tob. ^
would not go (as many did) to Ieroboams golden calves, but fleeing their
compagnies went to Jerusalem, to the Temple of our Lord, and there adored. The
three children Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago in the like captivity, fearing
God more then men, ansvvered boldly, Be it known to thee o King, Dan. ^
that we worship not thy God, and we adore not the golden statue, which thou
have erected. Old Eleazarus 2. Man 6.
would not eat, nor seem to eat swines flesh, against the law; but rather
choice a glorious death, then a werisome or hateful life, if by dissimulation
in so religious a cause, he should have procured damnation to his own soul,
and also eternal ruin of many more by his example. Read also the history of
the ca: 7
mother and her seven sons, al martyred for the same cause. And generally the
Jews did Io. 4^
not converse, nor communicate with ^^ Samaritanes in spiritual affairs;
vvhos^ custom herein our Savior approves, an^ gives express sentence for
the Jews in this behalf; and that the right adoration, and salvation was of
the Jews part. Because they had good ground for their Temple in Jerusalem,
and the Samaritanes none at al. for their worshipping in Garisin. An other
general rule our Savior gives, He that ^at. ^2.
is not with me, is against me; and he that gethereth not with me scatters.
Whereupon S. Jerome ^p. 58. ^amas.
proves, that al they do scatter, that ^^ there not with the rest of the
Church, an^ particularly that gether not with the chief^ Pastor thereof,
succeding Saint Peter. To the same effect the Apostle says: you can not drink
the Chalice of our Lord, and the Chalice of (...). Cor. ^0.
devils: you can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of
devils. And to such Neuters as would serve al turns he cries: Bear not the
yoke with infidels. for what participation ^ Cor. ^.
has justice with iniquity, what society is there between light and darkness;
finally, What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? And what be the
Idols that now molest the Church (says S. Jerome) but Heresies? ^ ^oset. ^ 1.
^mos. ^. ^ab. 2. ^oph. ^^.
Wherefore all that look to have feloship with Christ and his members in his
body and blood, must fly from the feloship of al infidels, and abstain from
al partipicipation in causes of Religion, with those that have erected an
other Altar or table, or that have erected a contrary form of ^eruing God,
against the Altar and Sacrifice of Christ, and his Catholic Church. And in
novvise conform them selves to these new procedings, by going to their
Churches, which is the proper mark of their society. Apot. 13.
And therefore most constantly refused by this glorious Martyr, so manfully
fighting this good fight. whereby himself has joyfully received a Crown of
glory; God almighty is specially glorified; his Saints highly honored;
Catholics much edified, and comforted; and the Protestants greatly ashamed
and confounded. Our Lord grant al Psalm. 69. 128.
those, may be frutfully ashamed, happilly confounded, and quikly turned back,
that now hate Sion. Amen.

A. BRIEF

A. BRIEF MENTION^^ NINE OTHER MARTYRS, AN^ certain other Catholics
persecuted for the sa^^ cause, this same year, With an answer to our
Adversaries objection, of discord amongst Catholics.
AT York in Lent last was arraigned M. Christopher Wharton Priest, Master of
Art of the University of Oxford, suspected and accused to be a Seminary
Priest. and the^upon indicted of hiegh treason, for returni^^ into England,
contrary to the statute man in the year of our Lord, 1585. Who w^^ An. Reg.
Eliz. ^7. ^ M. Robert Ander^on. Io. Sands. W. Tom ^on. To. Debdal. Ed. Burden.
Hugh. Tailor. Thur. Hunt. etc.
in deed made Priest at Rhemes by the Cardinal of Guise (of Blessed memory)
the last day ^^ March. 1584. (As also 30. other Englishmen received holy
Orders the same time with him of which diverse be now also Martyrs) Nevertheless
he confessed no more but that he was a Priest, before the said statute was
made: leaving it to his accusers to prove when he was made. For he being about
the age of thre^score years, might well (by dispensation) have been made Priest
in the reign of Q. Marie, or before the feast of the Nativity of S. John
Baptist, in the first year of this Queen, and so out of the danger of this new
statute. Many odious things were objected and amplified (as their custom is)
against the Pope, Cardinals, Archpriest of England, Jesuits and Seminary
Priests, charging them with Idolatry, Superstition, much false doctrine; with
Treason against the Queen and Realm, and with dissentions also between Jesuits
and Seminary Priests* al false and impious sclanders; as he plainly told them;
nothing at al pertaining to the Indictme^t (whereupon his liefe depended) about
the time when he was made Priest. Concerning which point after a few uncertain
conjectures were alleged which agreed il, and proved nothing against him: upon
the only testimony of M. Sauil, Baron of the exchequer (who was also his
Judge) affirming that he knew him in Oxford, some years after the time
mentioned in the new statute; and then not taken for a Priest: he was
denounced, Guilty, and condemned to death as for hiegh Treason. And a grave
Catholic Matron was also indicted of felony, and condemned to death, for
receiving him into her house. As if she also had known him in Oxford to have
been no Priest, and afterward made Priest, who knew him not at al, but a small
time before he was taken in her house. Finally after earnest perswation to go
to their Church, which she utterly refused, she received her Croune of
Martyrdom, according to the Gospel, whosoever receaueth a prophet, in the name
of a prophet, shall receive the reward of a prophet.

And albeit there seemed less probability to pervert the venerable Priest, yet
they omitted not to urge unto him the usual tentation; that if he would go to
their Church, he might enjoy both liefe and liberty; and be praeferred also
amongst them. Al which he constantly contemned in respect of Gods honor, his
ovvn^ salvation, and edification or destruction of many by his example. And so
in Easter vveke the 28. of March he also received his glorious croune. And to
their other impertinent talk (both before and after his sentence) he also
ansvvered briefly, that in the Catholic Roman Religion (which he professed,
and for which he was ready to dye) there is neither Idolatry,
nor-Superstition, nor falshoode, nor contrariety of doctrine. And though there
be dissentions sometimes amongst Catholics, either Priests or others, yet
those differences are not in Articles of their faith, but in other matters, of
some particular Jurisdiction, right or title, spiritual or temporal, and the
like. And that for his own part he had no such controversy with any
Catholic, nor breach of charity with any person living whosoever.

Which was for him, at that time, a very sufficient answer. And much has been
said, and written also these late years, of the purity and unity of the
Catholic doctrine. Nevertheless here it shall not be amiss (gentle reader) to
add somewhat more in explication of his answer, touching the differences rissen
amongst some English Catholics, which our Adversaries so reprochfully object
to al. For albeit, the perfect are never scandalized; yet the vveake often are;
and some do mistake Psalm. 118. v. 165.
the case; and some doubtless are guilty of great fault, in making or in
nourishing this debate.

Al which will be more clear; if first calling to mind the state of Catholics,
before this controversy begane; we then consider whence it proceeded; vvherin
it consists; and between vhom it is.

And to this purpose it seems necessary, that we begin from the last
general revolt, from the Catholic Religion in our Country; Which was in the
first year of this Queen's reign. For she coming to the Croune in the end of
the year 1558. within few months after a Parliament was called, vvherin
utterly aganst the vvilles of all the Lords spiritual (auouching that they did
not, nor would not consent to change the state of Religion) the Lords temporal
and Commons took upon them, and de facto pretended, to abolish al authority
or Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome in England: abandoned the holy Sacrifice
of Mass, and other Catholic Offices: and in place thereof restored the new
form of Service instituted in the second year of K. Edward the sixth, but
augmented, altered, and corrected (for so they speak) and further in most
peremptory and arrogant manner, did in Gods name (but without commission from
God) earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops Bishops and other
Ordinaries, that they should endeavor themselves, to the uttermost of their
knovvledges, to see the same put in execution; threatening them with Gods
wrath and punishinent, if this good and wholesome Law (for sooth) were
neglected. Al which holy Bishops obeying God, rather then men; were presently
deprived of their Bishopriques, and al other constant Clergimen of their
spiritual livings, and benefices; Heretics, or such as yielded to the parctise
of Heresy, put in their places. And diverse also of the Laity sharply
punished, for not conforming themselves to these new procedings. In which
state though the same Catholic Prelates still kept their titles and right, as
well of their dignities, as of their holy functions (which could by no means
be taken from them) yet did they not exercise any public Jurisdiction; but
expecting better times, all the Bishops, and most of the old clergy have ended
their lives in prison, banishment, or in other poor state, al more or less
restrained and persecuted. Whereby the Ecclesiastical Ierarchie of the Church of
England, for lack of succession of ordinary spiritual Pastors, did wholy
decay and cease; yet continually there remained some constant Catholics, and
some few Catholic Priests, which ministered the holy Sacraments, and supplied
in private and secret sort, other necessary Offices without any
subordination of one to an other within the Realm; the Sea Apostolic
granting (...)
faculty, to the worthy Confessor, the Bishop of Lincoln and others, to
subdelegate such as were found fit to hear Confessions, and to absolve, also
in Cases reserved, as need should require. And furthermore this good seed of
Catholic Religion conserved by Gods goodness, was also well watered, and
prospered much by sundry good books, written by diverse learned and zealous
men, in defense of the Catholic faith. whereby not only these Relics were
confirmed and stayed therein, but some also converted from schism and heresy.
But in the first tene years most men still hoping of a change, or toleration,
little industry was used, for making more Priests, to serve our country in
this great desolation: til the renowned Doctor Allen, (afterward Cardinal)
most prudently foreseing the great defect of a succession of Priests, without
whom no Sacrament could be duly administered, no Sacrifice offered, and
consequently no Religion long remain, but al turn to Heresy, Apostasy, and
Atheism, found means (by Gods special providence) in the year of our Lord
1568. to erect in the university of Doway with the approbation of Pius
Quintus, a College of English students; who by yelding themselves to Collegial
discipline, and to a set form and course of study, with public; exercise,
might attain more virtue, zeal and knowledge, and so be made Priests, and
return into their Country; as above four hundred have since done, to the
infinite good of many thousand souls, from this one Mother College, not only
the (...) of the English nation, but (as we take it) (...) first in
Christendom, instituted after (...) form of Seminary Colleges, appointed to
be erected, by the holy Council of Trent, in all Catholic Provinces, for the
better education, and perpetual succession of Clergiemen

The good report and evident proof of whose profitable endeavors easily
moved our holy father Pope Gregory the thirtenth, to indue the same College,
with a monethlie exhibition or pension, in the year 1575. For before that
time, it had no other Reuenevves but the stipend of Doctor Allen their
President and Founder, being one of the kings Professors of the University,
and what more he procured of other Benefactors. Which so continued, til the
tumults of the Lovvcountries, and power of the Rebels did grow so great, that
in the year 1578. by the working of the Queen and Counsel of England, with the
Prince of Orange, and his confederats, the said College was driven from
Doway, and so removed to Rhemes in France. Where still it prospered, much
contrary to the expectation of their persecutores. Yea moreover (mark ye here
the great mercy of God toward the afflicted of our Nation) the same year
our said holy father Pope Gregory founded an other English College in Rome;
that there might be two such nourceries of Clergimen for our Country,
committing the government thereof, to the most exquisite Order, that the
christian world now has, for education of youth (especially for such an
Apostolical purpose as this is) to the holy Society of JESUS. Which charge
so laid upon them, was to the singular satisfaction and consolation, not only
of many zealous and virtuous youngmen already assembled in Rome, to enjoy the
benefit of this College, hearing of his Holiness intention before, but also of
al other sincere Catholic Englishmen, which sought the good of their
country, before their own private. The first Rector of this College was
father Robert Parsons of the same Society, a man without many words,
commended abundantly by his works. And shortly again in the year 1580. at
the instance of M. D. Allen in the name of English Catholics, father General
of the same Society, agreed also to send English Jesuits into this harvest,
and presently sent the same F. Parsons and father Campion, both men of most
excellent good talents. And the next year very notable men also, F. Heyvvod
and F. Holt, and so continually the like missions are maintained still. Then the
Seminaries and the Society, with other Priests remaining of the old store,
labored jointly and merrily together, for the conversion of our country
vnamines in domo Dei. There were in England before this year, of the College
of Doway, about seventy Priests, (which were not for every shire two) and
as yet none of the College of Rome. But this year 1580. entered the Realm, of
both the Colleges, and of the Society, and other Priests, that had lived
before in Rome, and else where privately, nere forty. And the next year above
forty more. Which great increase of workmen, and especially the coming in
of lesuites (Whom the Heretics little expected, and less wished) wrought
diverse effects. Some stormed, others admired; some sought to entrap them in
snares; others to be instructed, and spiritually releued by them; some imagined
to dispatch al Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, out of the Realm again, by
public Proclamations and more severe parliament Satutes, and greater
persecution of al Catholics. But no malice being able to overthrow the work
of God, still Catholics increased in number, and in courage, and more were
willing to suffer and to die for their faith, then before; more and more were
incensed with desire to go to the Seminaries; and some immediately to the holy
Society, that so they might enter into the same work, and be participant of
the same glorious revvard. Of which sort some be already in heaven, others yet
laboring in the vinyard. By occasion of these new laws, and of more
preaching writing, and persecution follovving, many poor souls sleeping in
sin and ignorance, in diverse parts of the Realm, heard of these heroical
attempts, of men that had dedicated and consecrated their lives, to save the
souls of their dear contrimen. And that not only two great Colleges of
Englishmen did daily send Priests amongst them; but also the Society of JESUS,
which continually sends such men into the furthest parts of the world, to
convert Infidels, does also send into England, to convert their countrymen from
Schism and Heresy. Al these bruites did exceeding much good, and much more the
often preachings, svvete conversation, most exemplar liefe, continual prayers,
and daily offering of the dreadful Sacrifice, made many to open the doors of
their souls, and out of many hearts cogitations were reveled And no meruel,
that many merueled to see and hear these things, for so it happens
whensoever such men come into any country to preach Christ and the
Catholic doctrine. As Saint Augustine the Monk our Apostle, brought al
England into admiration when he came with his fellows, and taught us the vvav
to salvation. All the hil-countries of Jury merueled, hearing so admirable
things, at the Nativity of S. John Baptist (...)
the precursor of Christ. And al England merueled when they understood of
these men's Apostolical coming to restore (...) faith, which at the feast of
the same S. ^hon^ Nativity, just twenty one years before, was abandoned.
Many with great fury and malice, specially some Ministers cried treason,
sedition, conspiracy aganst the Queen and the Realm. And albeit the vviser
sort knevv well enough these men meant no treason, but salvation unto al; yet
treason it must be called for policies sake, and cruelty must be used, to
try if they might so suppress this zeal; which they could no more do, then
the Jews could quench the zeal kindled first in the holy Apostles upon
whitsunday. For why? Christ our Savior had said before that time, which he
performs to the worlds end, that he came not to send peace (...).
(to wit a blind peace in sin and error) but the svvorde, and separation. I
came to cast fire on the earth; and what will I else (says our meek Lord) but
that it be kindled, and burn? The smoke of which fire so trubled the eyes of
the Jewish counsel, that it made Gamaliel give no il advise, to let the
Apostles alone, and see what issue their attempts would have. Some of the
Queen's counsel shevved them selves of the same opinion, in this case. judging
it vain to kill Priests in England, so long as more come after them, from the
Seminaries, and from a Religious Society that dies not. And amongst others,
one M. Fletvvood a Justice of peace in his country, and a note protestant,
when sitting upon causes of Religion, he heard that there was one M. Laurence
Johnson a young man, and a Seminary Priest (afterward a Martyr) commen into
the same Province, Nay then (says he) we strive in vain, we hoped these old
Papistical Priests dying, al Papistrie should have died, and ended with them;
but this new brood will never be rooted out, it is impossible ever to be rid of
them, nor to extirpat this Papistical faith out of the land. And much more
many Heretics despaired of ever effectuating this their desire, to abolish
the Catholic Religion in England; when they savve this new fire of the
Society of JESUS seize upon English hearts. Whereupon many of al other sorts of
people, and some also of their Rabbis and greatest Doctors disvvaded, so much
as they could, from rigorous persecution of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and of
al other Catholics; for that the more they should blovv this fire, the more
it would burn. As namely Doctor Humfrey of Oxford, did so much dislike the
putting to death of father Campion, that he could not dissemble his counsel and
opinion (no not after the Martyrs death, when it was to late to recall him to
liefe again) but in his book entitled: De praxi Romanae Curiae bevvailed the
oversight of those that caused his death; affirming that in Campion the
proverb, Mortuus non mordet, was not true in Campian^ Campianus enim mortuus
adhuc mordet. For Campian (says he) being dead does yet bite. Whereby, and by
innumerable other examples and testimonies, all the world does see (though some
of mere malice vvil not confess it) that the Catholic cause is marvelous
well amended by the coming of zealous Seminary Priests, and of Jesuits. That
by their abode the same good is daily augmented and multiplied. And therefore
the parting a way of either sort (which God forbid) must needs be an
intolerable loss, and hindera^ce to the conversion of our country, how soever
some few catholics, these later years falling into faction, wish all the
Jesuits and many others to be removed from this work both within and without
the Realm.

But how much more necessary it is, that these fevv disturbers of the common
good, be corrected, or removed, shall be easy to judge if we examine from what
root, this stirring of theirs proceeds, and vvhither it tends. For evident
it is, by this little I have now said, that sometime al ran well, al sowed
good seed, al labored in peace, union and mutual love.

Whence then came this il seed, this dislike, this dissension, this debate,
which now appears? The enemy man has sowed it, and it is a massin of
many vvedes. Old Satan seeing ^at. ^.
infinite good fruit spring and prosper, in the fertile English filde, of mere
envy (for that is his property) so bewitched some by ambition, vain liking
of themselves, and desire to be esteemed, and preferred before others; that
seeing other men do more good, have more credit, and be more esteemed then
themselves, begane to repine and disdain at others more estimation; and not
being able otherwise to excel, nor yet match them; fell into that bad sinck of
emulation, and anger against those of better talents and virtues, that they
could not abide to hear others more commended then them selves. As shortly
appeared by their rustie Raca, and mutterings. For when they chaunched to
read, or hear other men's greater praises, straight auerting their countenance,
insinuated as in clovvdes, or in general terms, as if they knevv these men not
to be so good, nor so learned, nor wise, as they were reputed; and so proceeded
from degree to degree into open detraction, false sclandring, malicious
accusing, scandalous publishing, and into most absurd and impudent auouching
of faults, devised by them selves, or wrasted from other men's foul mouths,
and made worse and agrauated, against their brethren; for no other true cause,
but for that they are esteemed their betters, and to bring them selves thereby to
more equal balance, and so to be thought as good as they.

To these vices, other the like did also concur, as servants and copemates,
(...) still made the persons more and more different, and unlike in qualities.
VVherby also the emulation was more increased. As the more loose and idle life
of some, made them dislike the better discipline and greater diligence in
others. Also hastines of nature pronnes to anger, with little mortificacion o^
inordinat passions, much impatience and the like il behavior, made some
Priests less desired of other Catholics, and hereupon again did often grow
false suspicions, sinister surmisses, and rash judgments, that they were cast
out of favor, or disgraced by those whom they did emulate. Where as indeed
there was no other cause, but their own il carriage, and especialy their il
tongues against good and innocent persons whom for their more credit, they
could not brook. Upon these strings, and the lik^ the subtle serpent played
his part, and the diligence of Heretics took hold of the occasions, to
nourish and egg forvvard these humurous fantasies, and animosities of busy
heads, freight with ambition, and desire to rule others, who have neither
well learned to rule themselves, nor to be ruled; being void of that charity,
by which they ought to build, to the increase of the whole body, and not to
diminish the same body, nor to hinder, nor pull down that which others build.
and all this principally because they savve our ^ate good Cardinal in his time,
and others with ^im, especially the Jesuits, both then and after, ^o be more in
credit and favor with great Princes, and other great or rich persons: which
they often object for a great quarrelle; not mentioning that they ate more
esteemed with the meaner and poorer forte also. But I pray you (dear brethren
and friends) that would be more esteemed then you are, tell me what fault is in
the fathers, or in other men for this? Is not honor and estimation the revvard
of virtue? especially amongst good men: such as you can not deny these
Catholics to be, who ordinarily prefer Jesuits before you? vvil you blame
them for being more virtuous, and for deserving better then you? for if they
did not deserve better, so many good ^hen would not more esteem them. Or else
vvil you blame the whole Catholic world and al other countries, that
begin, or return to be Catholics, for embracing the Jesuits labors more
then yours? vvil you bar men's judgments in making their own choice, by
what spiritual men they vvil be chiefly directed? Or vvil you abridge their
liberties, and force them to leave the Fathers, whose conversation, and
discretion they like better then yours; and to be directed by you, of whom
they have not so great an opinion? Is this the liberty you talk of, and which
you promise, if you may have your will* that ghostly children shall first
forsake their glostly fathers whom they most desire, and then be bond to those
which you like best* Truly most men think, that new ones of your appointment,
vvil not be so good. You vvil say, they shall be better and fitter. you can say
no less. for why should they change but for the better? And yet we tell yoy
still, that most men think, they vvil not be so good. You say there is no just,
nor reasonable cause, Why Catholics should entertain Jesuits before you,
follow their counsels rather then yours, adventure al they have by receuing
them, then by receuing you, commit to their discretions, the distribution of
their almose and charitable beneuolence^ ^^ more then to yours. These be the
blocks y^^ stumble at. And you can no more condem^^ Jesuits, for condescending
to serve good Catholics in these and the like things, then you condemn your
selves for all that you do to the liking of your ghostly children.

Perhaps you would have them, when they are willed to do such good offices,
to refuse to do them, and to send them to you; as though al such affairs
depended upon your wills, who should manage them; and as though the request
of the party, were not sufficient vvarrant, for every one, to do the good he
can, in order and subordination to his Superior. Yet suppose the fathers should
^^rect such persons to you, as come to them; ^^inke you that the parties would
forthwith ^^paire to you? intertayne you? follow your ^ounsel? commit much to
your discretions? ^o surely, in this they would not follow the ^athers
counsel: For those that seek first and principally, to direct their lives and
actions, ^y advise of the Fathers of the Society, do secondly desire to be
directed by such other Priests, as most imitate the Fathers in manner of liefe,
such as love them best, and best agree with them. And the cause of this better
liking, which so many have to be assisted by Jesuits (besides the particular
virtues of every one) must needs be some important good and conspicuous
things, in the Order it self, which are not in our vocation. As particularly,
their Religious profession, their stricter discipline and set rules of life,
their renounciation to al dignities, and proprieties in this world, and the
resignation of their own wills, living alvvayes in obedience to a Superior;
who takes due account of their behauiors, of their labors of their fruits,
and of their talents, what they are able to do, where and wherein they may do
most good, and so the same Superior imploieth them. If they have imperfections,
they have special approved remedies to amend the same: and if they correct not
themselves the sooner; this Superior in the mean time has care to cure every
one, and is ready to answer for his subiec^, wheresoever he abides, which is
a good vvarrant; for their host, and whosoever deals with them. And special
care is always taken, to have them very fit for mission, before they be sent,
and at al seasons they are ready to be changed from their employments.
Whersoueuer they go, they are still in a strong castle, defended with joined
forces of expert soldiars, firm walls, good armor, and al necessary
furniture; which make not only themselves more safe, from the assaults of the
spiritual enemy, but also by how much they are better guarded and furnished,
so much more able are they, to assist, guide, and lead others safly. Whereas
we of the other vocation (though Ecclesiastical and Clergimen) are abroad in
the world, hold our interests, proprieties or possibilities, in the world.
we are more at our own liberties, and make not so often account of our
baylivvickes, nor yield so frequent reaconings, what profit we make of our
talents, nor what fruit any reap by our labors; we wander abroad as
single men in open filds, or vnfensed villages, so much more subject to
tentations, as we are more entangled in the world, and the less able to
resist, because we have not renounced the world, nor our own wills. And
why should we then meruel, that men are more afeard to be guided by us, then
by those they find more like to guide them aright. And what wrong is done to
us, by other men's seeking there own secucicie? Thus we see briefly whence
this controversy sprung, and how this il seed came into our filled, where
first none but good was sown.

Now we are to consider vvherin it consists. Which is not (as our
adversaries would have it, and falsely report) in any point or article of the
Catholic faith; for whosoever obstinately defends any such error is an
Heretic and no Catholic; but it consists in the variety of opinions,
desires and endeavors, about the persons, that are specially to direct others as
guides or heads, and about the manner of proceeding in our common work, for
the reducing of our country to the Catholic Religion. And thus far we al
agree, that some fevv, or rather some one, ought to be chief leader of all the
rest, because many heads having or arrogating equal authority, must needs
make confusion. And at the beginning, all that entered into this holy work
either gave themselves wholy to the direction of D. Allen (and that long
before he was Cardinal) or else concurred with him, in all their actions
tending to this purpose. not any one Catholic man of our nation opposing
against him, from the time of erecting of Doway College til that about the
year 82. three or four gentlemen in Paris began the first contradiction
against the said D. Allen and against F. Parsons. Sir Frances Inglefild. M.
Hugh Own, and al other agreing with them. For these men neither vouchsafing
to follow the high and straight way, already well found out and very well
proceeded in, nor to sit quiet and at rest, devised other byvvaies, cast new
plots, which never had good effect, but much hindered and ouerthrevv diverse
good things intended, as is well known. They thought it reason to exclude D.
Allen, by the title of a Breuiarie man, from dealing any further in helping of
our country, but only by his education of scholars to be Priests. For these
men would give them instructions, how to behave themselves toward the state
of England. And so they would bring D. Allen and al his, into their country:
as one of them was not ashamed to brag and that in D. Allens own presence.

In like sort they excluded F. Parsons, from their counsel, and from
knowledge of their devises, because he is a religious man: as though he were
not more fit, and no way less fit for that. For who is so meet to give
advise, in spiritual or in worldly affairs as those which have renounced al
private interest and propriety in the world? Does not our Savior say, that
those which have left (...).
al in this world, shall sit with him in judgment, and judge the world? Does
not S. Paul hervpon infer, that seeing he and other Apostles, and Religious
men shall judge the world, and the Apostata (...) 6.
Angels; much more it is convenient, that they shall judge secular affairs?

They excluded Sir Frances Inglefild, because he had been long forth of the
Realm, and now ignorant (as they supposed) of the state of things there; as
though he that had been of the privy Council to Q Marie, were not more able
both for his vvisdome, sincerity, and long experience, to be a Counselor,
then any of them? or that he had not as particular knowledge, as any of
them, how things stood in England? They excluded M. Hugh Own, M. Thomas
Fitzherbert, and afterward sir Charles Arundel, and al others, that agreed
with. D. Allen, because they would not leave him, and the whole nation, and
hang upon them. For the same cause they could not abide sir William Stanley,
finding him to agree so well with D. Allen, sir Frances, F. Parsons, F. Holt, M.
Own, and others; and also because he is a soldiar, and they better statesmen,
in their own conceits; as though he being so renowned a soldiar, were
therefore less fit, to give his advise how our country may be brought again
to the Catholic faith, being otherwise a man of as sound judgment, as any of
them, and (as all that know him and them can witness) as far more sincere,
more virtuous, more studious, more laborious to help his country, and al his
country men, as he is more valient in the wa^^ then they are, which is no
small difference.

They admitted the Earl of Westmerland to their Party, so far only as he
would concur with them, to oppose against, and to overthwart other men's
good labors: but by no means would they take him for their chief. Thomas
Morgan was the beginner of al; whereof it is called Morgans faction. but M.
Charles Paget was chief commander: the Lord Paget was content to be ruled by
them. whereupon they complained the more, that the Earl of westmerland would
not be ruled also; thus this contradiction began. And upon this ground they
have continued the same, entertaining and employing al malcontents they could
get, to yeald to their bend. So far forth that within two or three years,
they seduced two Seminary Priests to treat with them, and to be employed by
them, yea one of them at least to treat with Secretary Walsingham. And
afterward induced the same two, to write two books the one against F.
Parsons and al Jesuits; the other against the Cardinal. Especially against his
Epistle written in justification of Sir William Stanley his rendering the City
of Dauenter to the right Lord thereof, the king Catholic. Which fact was not
only just, lavvful, and necessary by the laws of God and Nations, in respect
both of the place, and of himself; but also he had a particular license for his
person, of the Earl of Lecester to depart from that service, and to repair
where he would, for his better contentment. which license has been seen by
some English Protestants: Agents sometimes in Flanders, and is to be shevved
whensoever occasion shall require. As yet this faction was but small and
green amongst Catholics in England; for the two foresaid Priests very
shortly retired thence, and very fevv durst break openly with their
brethren, nor with the Fathers, so long as the Cardinal lived. But presently
upon his death, some other unquiet spirits, though prisoners for their faith
(having long exercised their good fellow prisoners with much patience) more
openly joined themselves with the same trublesome, with whom they had secretly
dealt before. And so did also many of the scholars in Rome, against the
Protector himself, and their other Superiors. Sodeinly becoming great states
men, as then they thought themselves. For the better appeasing of which
dissentions, and preventing the like, al Catholics generally desired to have
some Superiors, and Subordination in the English Clergy.

But for so much as al former Subordination was wholy interrupted within the
Realm, it could not otherwise be restored but by the Sea Apostolic, or by
special commission given by his Holiness for this purpose. For now in our
country we had neither Primat; no^ other Bishop, nor Ordinary of any one
Diocese; nor any Archpriest; nor Vicargeneral; nor Archdeacon; nor Deane of
any Chapter; nor any Chapter; nor other Ecclesiastical community at al;
nor so much as an ordinary Pastor, nor Vicar of any parish; but only private
Priests, who had subdelegat faculties in court of conscience only, for
administration of Sacraments, and some other spiritual functions.

But these were no more a mystical body, then certain provision of stone,
lime, and timber, are a house or a church, before they be compact together, and
formed with vval^ and roof: for even so we were a certain provision of
Priests ordained, for restoration of our decayed Hierarchy, but were not
disposed of in any subordination under a head. And so had no possible means
in our own nation, to make any Prouincial Concel Synod, Convocation, or
Chapter, nor had any elective, or decisiue voices or suffrages, to choose
supperior or other officer, nor to determine any thing iuridically. And
therefore for the due joining of Clergy men to make a Hierarchy (none of them
having further authority) diverse of the chiefest and eldest sort as well in
England, as in banishment humbly proposed this our case and desire to his
Holiness, with such suggestions as to them seemed most mete. Many thought it
(...) ^^crated, for the better government of our Church, and most specially for
administering the holy Sacrament of Confirmation; though our Cardinal in his
time, was not of that mind; for if he had, it had been done. Finally, after
mature consultation, his Holiness resolved to make an Archpriest with twelve
Assistants, to govern the rest in England. And upon the particular information
of the same chief and eldest sort of English priests testifying the singular
good talents, virtue, learning, vvisdome, zeal, discretion, and other good
parts, and considerable circumstances, concurring praeeminently in the person
of M. George Blackvvel, this authority of Archpriest was laid upon him; to the
great joy and singular liking of al, except a very fevv, especially those that
aspired to have been promoted themselves. Who hearing by our Protectors
letters, that this Archpriest was constituted, and twelve Assistants
appointed, deferred to submit themselves, til they might see further
confirmation thereof from his Holiness. And shortly they sent two messengers to
Rome, not so much to learn his Holiness true meaning and intention (for they
knevv it already, but thought they were not bound to acknovvledge it) as to
try, if they could procure this authority to be recalled, or altered; and
specially to be removed to some other person; alleging against their appointed
Superior, nothing but mere fal^*hoods, and that he agrees too well with the
^esuits, and specially with F. Parsons.

So the controversy is now come to this special point; whether the R. R.
Archpriest be a sufficient and fit man for the place he is in, seeing he agrees
well with the Jesuits, and namely with F. Parsons; and concurreth with them
to gain souls; or that he shoud be removed, and some other put in his, or in
some higher place, that disliketh of F. Parsons, and other Jesuits; and that
the Jesuits should also depart out of England, and be removed from the
government of al English Seminaries, even from those which they have procured?
Al which is so absurd and barbarous an attempt that it needs no further
confutation. Every child, and simple man or woman does know, that it is a
good thing to build a Church or a College, and to gain souls: and that
pulling down, and hindering of such works is very naught and wicked. Again,
it is a most known thing (and none of the malcontenrs can possibly deny it)
that F. Parsons, for his part, has most painfully and frutfully labored to
help his country above twenty two years already, that is, since the
English College in Rome was founded. In procuring vvherof his part was not
least, with D. Allen, and D. Lewis, agreing in his intention with whosoever
was most sincere.

In England he did more good in two years, then I think any of his
emulators have done in twenty; or are like to do in all their life. For one
example; let his learned and vertous books testify written against Hanmer and
Charck, and in detection of John Nicols; and the reasons, vhy Catholics
refuse to go to the Protestants Church. And especially the Christian
Directorie, first set forth with the title, of Resolution, so often printed
since, and still desired. A work worthy to be in all languages, and in all men's
hands. By which innumerable Catholics, have been, and daily are much
confirmed, conforted, and edified; Schismatikes and Heretics continually
converted; as very many do daily report of themselves, that they were
converted by reading F. Parsons book of Resolution. After his going out of
England, which was doutles (as many good effects have shevved) by Gods
special providence (as was D. Allens going thence also, when he had done
much good) he first got two thousand ducats of gold (which do make six
hundredth pounds starling) every year to Doway College, then residing in
Rhemes. He procured also a College for English children in Evv. Afterward
two more notable Colleges for English scholars, and two other residences for
English Priests in Spain. An other College likewise in Flanders, when by
reason of the vvarres in France, that of Evv ceased. And (which may have place
with the greatest and most difficult work or a^) (...) College of Rome, to a
mirror or spectacle of right Collegial peace, mutual love, great virtue, and
of much increase in learning, which a few years ago, was fallen into extreme
danger of utter ruin, by dissolution of the members, and tumultous contempt of
superiors and good orders. I omit here his redeming of many English captives
from fire, gallovves, and galleys, with his charity in procuring them
relief, and many of them sufficient means to live; and many other good
deeds, both in general to his whole nation, and to innumerable particular
persons. By this that is already said, every one may sufficiently see,
whether it be good, that the chief of our Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in
England, and his friends and subjects should agree with this father, and all the Society; or that they should pick quarrels, and make wars against them,
contemn and abandon all the good we have, and may have by them. Which in deed
were to hinder the best means of increasing the Catholic faith in our
Country, and consequently to hold heresy there the longer; an so I end this
point, and come to the last.

In which I am to declare, between whom this controversy remains. And this
also is partly done already. For seeing the special drift of this contention
is, to have the Archpriest removed from his office, and the Jesuits out of
England, and from al Engli^h Seminaries; it is evident that the controversy is
between the Archpriest, with al as well Jesuits as other Priests, and
Catholics, that alovve or like of the Ecclesiastical subordination lately
restored in England; and the malcontents with their partners, that oppugn or
dislike the same: and not between the Jesuits, and the Seminary Priests. which
can in no other sense be justified, then one may say an Egyptian is white,
because his teeth are white. At least, it is as false as was the report made
to king David, that al his sons were slain: when only Amnon was slain,
and no more. As I 2. ^^ 13.
vvil now further demonstrate, that the truth may appear, and the Seminary
Priests (speaking absolutely of the chiefest best and far greatest part) from
the beginning of the first Seminary to this day, may be clered from this
injurious sclander.

First therefore when D. Allen began this holy work, he had a chief care to
have his College where there was also a College of Jesuits that thereby he
might the better have their continual consel and help, spiritualy and
temporally in all his affairs. And namely that the students might frequent the
holy Sacraments and some lessons in the fathers College. which they did
continually, til both they and the Jesuits were driven from Doway by the
procurement of heretics, for their more zealous profession of the Catholic
Religion, then the vulgar sort of Catholics commonly show. Which well
shows the good agreement, between the Jesuits and the Seminary at that
time. The same is also manifest by that D. Allen in his return from Rome,
before he had yet begun his College, so gladly joined himself in company,
with F. Maximilian de Capella of the same Society, Doctor and Reader of
Divinity in their College in Doway: whose good aduises, and special
commendations to diverse charitable men much furthered the same good beginings.

Afterward F. Antonius Possiuinus, and F. Oliuerius Manereus most
affectionatly concurring with their informations to their General, and he and
they commending the state of the English College to Pope Gergorie the
thirtenth, obtained his monthly pension for them. After this again, the
Catholic kings pension (which is greater then the Popes) was not only
procured, by F. Parsons commendations and travel (as is noted before) but also
by his industry most especially, or by F. Creswels, or some other of the
fathers, it is still paid. which with many other notorious examples of great
benefits, which D. Allen, and his Seminary have received of the Fathers, do
well declare the mutual liking, sincere love, entire affection, and confident
dealing between him and the Society, and between al his and al their true
folovvers and friends.

The same is well testified also on the Cardinal his part. for though he was
not able to requite them in other good turns, yet he ever gratfully
acknowleged the great good our country reapeth by the holy Society; as is to
be seen in most of his printed books. specially in his Apology of twelve
Martyrs; in his Answer to the pretensed Justice of England; and most
particularly in his Apology, written by him jointly in defense of the
charitable endeavors of the Society, and of the Seminaries. In which elegant
book, next to the worthiness of Gods cause, he most amply commends good Pope
Gregory the thirtenth, and the holy Society of JESUS. Moreover touching his
most gratful affection toward F. Parsons, omitting other innumerable proofs,
his letters written shortly after he was made Cardinal, to M. Thomas Bailey*
his substitute in the College at Rhemes, do sufficiently testify in these
words; you are al glad and rejoice (says he) for my promotion. God grant it
be, as I trust it is, to his more honor, and good of our Country, for else I
had rather have kept my black cappe still. But how much soeu^r you have cause to
rejoice in this behalf, so much more, al you, that love me so dearly, are bound
by a new obligation, to love, and be gratful to the whole Society, and namely
to our own special good Father, and chief cooperator. For next under Heaven F.
Parsons made me Cardinal. And more to the same effect in the same letter.

And that he continued the same affection, and sincere correspondence with the
fathers, his own good Nephew M. Thomas Allen, and sundry of his letters do
testify. amongst which one was written not long before his death, to one
that then began to be malcontented, (...). 1.
and since has joined with others. yea and (as is more then probable) drawn
others with him. This then being clear touching the Cardinal, the same must
also needs be true, in all that sincerly loved, and agreed with him. For
otherwise in breaking his express commandment, in that very point, vvherin
they pretend to agree with him, they err as far from the truth, as he that
says he (...).
loves God and breaks his commandments. In so much that during the
Cardinals time, not above four or five in England, besides flat Apostates,
durst show the contrary; though after his death more appeared: thereby
bevvraing their former dissimulations, their little regard of his svvete, and
fatherly admonitions, and their marvelous ingratitude both toward him their
late Superior, and the fathers, by whom they had received no small benefit in
their education and learning.

But God be thanked, yet al these are not nor ever were so many, neither in
England nor abroad, as they use to count themselves. For upon occasion of their
accusing the fathers some years ago, in the name of our nation, trial was
made amongst the English in the lovv countries by many several letters, and
subscriptions to a general attestation, remaning in record to be seen; where
so many of the eldest and chiefest clergy men of our nation, and some chief
of the laity also, and so many others of good account, testified the great
and charitable offices of the fathers toward our contrie, that of three or
four hundred, scarce fourteen refused to subscribe. Of which some were
opposites to the fathers, and some neutrals. And in England scarce ten, at
that time, did show themselves against the fathers.

Again at this day, though there be some more Seminary Priests latly seduced,
by the over diligence of the former ringleaders, yet they are still matched, and
over matched in number, with those only that be in office, and authority for
the service of our country; who for that they are officers ought and must by all reason, prevail against private men, if they were many more, as in deed
they are rather fewer. But if we do also compare (as why shall we not?) the
whole number as well of the ancient Catholic, as later Seminary Priests,
which reverence, love, and like well both the fathers and the Archpriest, and
al other superiors in our English clergy, they vvil be found twenty, or
thirty times so many, as the part or particle that opposes against the same
Fathers, and Superiors, and the rest of the body. And if we extend this
comparison, to al Seminary men designed for the same work, or yet go
forvvard to al English Catholics, or finally observe the judgments of al
Catho^^ques in the world, the further we proceed, the more odds we find.
nature and reason moving al men of consideration, as well to like and love so
holy, and so perfect an Order of Religious men, and to allow and approve what
so ever such a whole Order allows and approves: as also to prefer the
ordinances and procedings of lawful Superiors, before the disliking of others,
that complain or speak il thereof. And thus much may suffice for declaration,
that this controversy risen amongst. English Catholics, is not in matter of
faith, ^or between the Seminary Priests and the Jesuits, as is unjustly said,
but about the Subordination lately restored in our clergy; and the fathers of
the Society laboring in the same work, and so is between the body of English
Catholics, that is all the heads with most of the members, agreing wholly with
the fathers; and a small party of opposits disliking the same Subordination,
and the fathers of the Society.

To return therefore whence I am digressed, I most heartily wish, and in our L.
I. Chapter I instantly beseech al our discontented brethren, to live and dye in
peace, and perfect union, so much as in us lies, with all the world, but more
especially with all Catholics, and most of al with our Superiors, brethren,
and fellow soldiars. as this our blessed brother M. Wharton now a martyr, most
gladly and lovingly acknowledged his appointed Superior, the R. R. Archpriest;
and most sincerely always agreed with the reverend fathers of the Society of
Jesus. And yet was he as ancient, as grave, and as learned a Graduate of the
University of Oxford, as whosoever of the discontented most urges these
respects. For he was fellow and companion in Trinity College with the same M.
George Blackwel now Archpriest, with M. Thomas Ford and M. Edward Burden both
martyrs, and with M. William Sutton, after of the Society: neither did he
disdain that his equals, yea diverse otherwise his inferios, in degree, years,
and lerning, were put in office, himself remaining in his private state. As
were sundry of the twelve Assistants. Whom he also obeyed, and for his
humiltie fervent charity, and other great virtues, is now exalted to a
glorious croune of martyrdom. Which together with his Priesthode and holy
profession, the same F. Sutton (by way of probable conjecture) congratulated
with him long before, in a letter dated at Mussipont the 17. of November.
1584. which yet remains in the English College in Doway; by the same
providence of God (as I may interpret) by which it was written. The copy
whereof I have here adioined as it is in latin, supposing many vvil desire to
read it. Surely it is a letter vvorthie of a Jesuit to a Seminary Priest. The
Superscription only is in English, and is thus.

TO M. CHRISTOPHER WHARTON IN THE ENGLISH COLLEGE AT RHEMES.
MAgnum mihi attulerunt solatium (optime Christophore) tuae literae, quibus
intellexi te non solum deserta Anglicana nostra Aegypto, a qua iam pridem pedem
subtraxisti, Ecclesiae matris obsequentissimum esse filium, ac iam illius
foelicissimi Collegij alumnum; verum etiam ad sacros Ordines, hoc est (vt nunc
rem interpretor) ad ipsa martyrij auspicia aspirasse. Foelicem ego illum esse
praedico, qui nunc in Anglia existens, sacro Reconciliationis faedere, se Deo,
ac S. matri Ecclesiae astringit; Foeliciorem vero qui maiori perfectionis
desiderio inardescens, ad fontem illum (quem in hoc Martyrum Seminario Deus
mihi aperuisse visus est) accurrit, vt maiori postea cum fiducia animique
fortitudine certamen pro fide ineat. Foelicissimum denique qui sacratissimis
consecrandi Dominici Corpor is mysterijs initiatus, suum iam quasi sanguinem,
pro eiusdem pientissimi Domini honor, eiusque corpore mystico consecrasse
videtur. Hos tu sieve foelicitatis, sieve perfectionis gradus partim attigisse
videris, partim praesentis animi praeparatione conscendere conaris. Quamuis
enim non omnibus martyrij corona, etiam cum hoc cupiant, conceditur; ingentis
tamen meriti est illa gloriosa sanctae fidei confessio, quam tu tuique
consortes quotidie facitis, hoc praesertim tam infoelici nostrae
infaelicissimae Angliae statu ac tempore. Vbi tanta Sanctorum Mysteriorum
conculcatio; tantus diuini honoris contemptus; tamque horrenda rerum sacrarum,
ac personarum prophanatio and despectus; vt iam vere fidelis sit seruus, ac
dilectus Domini Saluatoris, eiusque immaculatae sponsae Ecclesiae Filius, qui
se contra istas ruinas vt murum opponere, qui Sancta, Sancta, inclamare ac vere
Sancta eaque augustissima Mysteria, caelestiaque sanctitatum iura, ab
atrocissimis hisce contumelijs vindicare contendit. Et hic quidem est tuus
status, haec conditio, hic ordo sacer. Nunquam mihi tam coniunctus fuisti,
quanqua^ and domestica, illius Collegij in quo olim vna ^iximus, and peculiari
ami* citia, olim charissimus, quam nunc es sub vexillo Crucis, huiusque sanctae
militiae communione.

At enim quid nos miseri vermiculi humi repentes, quibus tanta munia, tamque
excelsa concredita sunt? Nunquid tam eminentis dignitatis altissima mysteria,
vel semel a long aspicere, nedum attrectare, nedum consecrare digni sumus?
Nunquid coelestis Ianuae claues gestare, ac animabus praetioso coelestis Agni
sanguine redemptis, Paradisi aditum reserare digni? Vere qu^ in tremendis hisce
officijs versantur, identidem se animumque totum ac spiritum recolligere
habent, oculosque interiores ab exteriori rerum strepitu, visibilique specie
subtractos in diuiniora defigere, ibi se coram infinita and superbenedicta Dei
Maiestate prosternere, ac paululum animo reuoluere, quanta cum eius dignatione,
fauore, and gratia, iam coram illa immensa Diuinitate, quam tremunt Angeli,
eiusque Throno, ac mensa regali, versetur is, qui suo demerito, propter illius
summo honori irrogatam iniuriam, iam diu vt hostis and extorris in tenebras
exteriores amandandus fuerat, nihilque adhuc egit, quod ad tantas tamque
inueteratas contract as maculas eluendas satis esset. Tum in profundissimam
quandam humilitatem coram Deo suo descendere, imo in abyssum aliqua^ suae
miseriae, abiectionis, indignitatis and nihilei tatis se abscondere, ac
sacratissimis Christi vulneribus lauandum se humillime prebere, petere
suspicijs ac gemitibus puritatem cordis, diuinam sapientiam, gratias ac
virtutes, vt in domo Dei sui coram sanctissimo eius Throno, coram oculis tantae
Maiestatis, and splendoris, inspectante illo beatissimo ac lucidissimo
sanctorum choro, in suscepto munere digne, vel saltem non indigne, and sine
offensa versari queat. Sed quid ego haec, aliaue tibi propino, qui iam ad
fontem seeds, vnde vberrime diuinae disciplinae fluenta iam diu in multos
redundarunt? Hoc mihi concedet spero tua humanit as, vt dum te pro veteri
nostrae amicitia affari, adeoque salutare libuit, interim meipsum his verbis
co^monerem. Quaeso mi reverend ac dilecte domine Christophore, vt in tuis
sanctis sacrificijs met memoriam facere velis, meque reliquarum tuarum
deuotionum participem efficias. Saluta precor meo nomine D. Edouardu^ Burdenu^
and si quis sit alius Collegij S. Trinitatis: Item D. Edmundum Leukenorum, and
Arthurum Stratfordum, aliosque nostros familiares and in Christo dilectos.
Vale. Mussiponti. 17. Nouemb. 1584.

Vestri semper amantissimus GVILIELMVS SVTTONVS.

Else where this Epistle may be translated into English. For now after this
long digression, I make have to recite briefly, the other Martyrs of this holy
year.

IN (...) ^^^ovving ^^ happened, that (...) being made in the County and City
of Lincoln, for certain malefactors, that had committed a robbery; there
were found in a common Inn, at the sign of the Sarazens head, two strangers
close in their chamber (who were in deed Priests, their names M. Thomas
Sprot, and M. Thomas Hunt) whom the searchers vehemently suspecting to be the
men they sought for, arrested them upon suspicion of felony, examined them
straightly and severally, what were their names, where they were borne,
what condition or trade of life they were of, whence they came, vvhither
they went, and what business they had there, whom they knevv in the City or
therabout: so pressing them, that to clear themselves of the false suspicion of
robbery, they confessed, that they were Catholics, fled thither in hope to
live there more quietly, as strangers for a time, then they could do where they
were more known. The same officers searching their males, found therein holy
Oil, and two Breuiaries, which gave suspicion that they were Priests.
VVhervpo^ they were brought to the Mayor, and by him examined upon these four
Articles. First, whether they had been at the Church within these ten, or
twelve years? 2. If the Pope should invade the Realm, whether they would
take part with him, or with the Queen? 3. Whether they did take the Queen to
be Supreme gouernesse of the Church of England? 4. Whether they were Priests,
or no?

To these Interrogatories they ansvvered briefly, and conformably each to other,
with little difference of words, to this effect.

To the first, that they were brought up from their infancy, in the
Catholic faith, and were never at the Protestants Church. To the second,
that when such a case shall happen, which is not likely, they will answer it.
To the third, that the Pope is Supreme head of the Catholic Church,
throughout the world. To the fourth they ansvvered as before, that they were
Catholics: and further they thought themselves not bound to answer. For as
al Christians are bound to be Catholics: so al are bound to confess the same
Catholic faith. But no man being bound to be a Priest, neither is he bound to
confess, whether he be a Priest or no. Never the less upon this last
Article, they were presently araigned before Judge Glanduil, who contrary to
the usual custom, would needs handle this matter before al others, in the
general sessions, which chanced to be there the same vveke. An Indictement
therefore was framed, and publiquly read, charging them that they were
Seminary Priests; and therefore traitors; possessed with malice against their
Queen, and Country; with other horrible, odious, and wicked terms, most
fa^le and injurious. And then having no other proof, nor witness to produce,
the same Judge protested to the Jury, that he was assured that they were
Priests; and therefore with many sharp words admonished them so to find it.
The poor Jury making much difficulty to auerre so much, without either
confession of the parties, or any lavvful vvitnesses against them, yet for
very fear, upon the Judge his conscience, against their own consciences,
brought in for their verdict, that the said prisoners were guilty. By and by
M. Glanduil gave sentence of death against them, that they should return first
to the prison whence they came, thence be drawn on a hurdle to the place of
execution, there be hanged til they were half dead, then be dismembered,
vnbowled, quartered, and their heads and quarters disposed of, at the the
Queens pleasure. Which they joyfully heard, thanked God, and pardoned their
persecutors. But before, and partly also after this sentence, they had
disputation with certain absurd preachers, that avouched diverse strange
doctrines, too abominable to be here recited. Which nevertheless the glourious
Martyrs clerly confuting, so confounded the same heretics, and edified the
people, that the Magistrates commanded the Ministers to hold their peace. And in
steed of their babbling, prosecuted their own far stronger arguments, of
fetters, halters, and butchers knives. Al which the victorious Martyrs
answering with true christian courage, received their triumphant crounes, and
put al their persecutors to that non plus, which our blessed Savior speaks
of: when they have killed the body, they can do Luc. 1^
no more.

And not many days after M. Gla^duil their Judge, received also his own
Judgment, and due pay for his works. For riding abroad for his pleasure, nere
to his own house with one man, suddenly in the plain filde, he fell from his
horse to the ground, the horse not stumbling at al, but running away a great
pace, the servant stepped quickly to his master, and assaying to help him up,
found him dead, whereat being much astonished, he posted so fast as he could to
the next village, crying that his master was dead. The people in have running
to the place found it so. And not knowing who else could be charged therewith,
they presently apprehended the same servingman, upon suspicion that he had
murdered his master. But vewing the corpse, they saw evidently, that a spirit
and no man had done this act. For they found part of his brains straingely
coming forth, both at his nose and mouth, not having any other hurt in his
head, but toward the right side behind a great dimple (...), vvhe^^^ a (...)
^aue pu^ (...) fist; neither his skin, nor his hat broken at al, nor a hear
of his head vvanting to any man's judgment. They found likewise his right
shoulder sore scorched, like burnd leather, as black as pitch; and from thence
along upon his arm a great gash, as it had been made with a knife, but not
deep; and in the calfe of his leg on the same side, they found an other
hole, about an inch broad, and three inches deep, and (which is most strange)
not so much as a threde of his hose, nor of his other aparel could bo found to
be broken. In the mean while, the horse that ran away, with much ado was
taken, but could by no means be brought nere to the place, where his master
fell down.

Again the same month of Iulij, Jan other vertous learned Priest, called M.
N. Palaser, by like cruelty was judged and put to death at Durham; only for
that he was a Seminary Priest, and returned to his country, contrary to the
statute made in the 27. year of the Queen's reign. And other three Gentlemen
and a gentlewoman were also condemned to dye, by the same statute, for
conuersing with the same Priest, and not bewraying him to the Magistrate. Two
of the Gentlemen, called M. John Norton, and M. N. Talbot received their
reward, and glorious ^^oune with their gostlie father. Mistress Norton
((...)) being supposed to be vvithchild was repriued. The third Gentleman,
consenting of frailty, to go to their Church, yet lives. as the others might
have done, if they had also yielded thereunto.

LIkewise at Lancaster within the same month, other two Seminary Priests,
M. Robert Nutter, and M. Edward Thvving were condemned and put to death, for
their Priesthood. The elder of them M. Nutter, was one of those Priests and
prisoners, which being brought by their kepers from their several prisons, to
the tower wharfe, in the year of our Lord, 1585. and there commanded to enter
into a ship, ready provided to carry them into banishment, declared publikly
to the commissioners, that they did not accept of that banishment, as of any
grace or mercy at al, for they had not committed any fault, neither against
their Queen nor country, as this pretended mercy falsely presupposed; and
therefore in express terms requested rather to be tried, and to answer their
accusers at Westminster, and at Tiburne, then to be thus carried against their
wills, out of their native Country, from their friends, and neighbors whom
they were to serve, according to their Priestlie functions. Affirming
moreover, that though perforce they were carried away, yet they would
assuredly return to the same work, so soon as God, and their spiritual
Superiors, would permit them so to do. As this blessed Martyr for his part,
and diverse others have well and most happily performed. M. Thwing was no less
resolved in this glorious quarrel, as well appeared both by his life and death,
and particularly by his godly letters, to his brother, sister, and others,
which may be published in a larger relation. Only here for a taste of his sweet
and zealous good spirit, I shall recite part of two letters written by him in
prison, unto me that write this. In the former of which, he congratulateth with
his friends, his own imprisonment, in these words: My self am now prisoner
for Christ, in Lancaster Castle, expecting nothing but execution, at the next
Assizes. I desire you to commend me to the devout prayers of my friends with
you, that by their help, I may consummat my course to Gods glory, and the good
of my country. I pray God prosper you, and al yours, for ever. From my prison
and paradise. This last of Maij. 1600. Al yours in Christ. E. Th.

His other letter written but few days before his martyrdom with like
consolation of his expected good end, he concludes thus: This day the Judges
come to Lancaster, where I am in expectation of a happy death, if it so please
God almighty. I pray you commend me most derely to mine uncle, and my ^rother.
I pray God bless them both. and to al your good Priests and scholars, whose
good endeavors God alvvayes prosper, to his own more glory. Ego autem iam
delibor, and te^pus resolutionis meae instat. before this come unto you, I
shall, if God make me vvorthie, conclude an unhappy life, with a most happy
death. Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. From Lancaster Castle, the 21. of
Iulij, this holy year 1600.

Al yours in Christ. EDWARD THVVEING.

SIX OTHER MARTYRS
Again this last spring (before the same year was ended, by our English
account) it has pleased God, to glorify s^^ more Martyrs in our country.
Whose names I have also thought necessary to add hereunto, hoping herafter
to make more ample relation of them and the rest. The first of these was M.
John Pibush. Who being condemned about six years before, only for that he
was a Seminary Priest; and all that time most cruelly used, at last received
his happy crown, at London the eleventh of February. And the 27. of the
same month, M. Roger Filcock, and M. Marck Barckvvorth, also Seminary
Priests, in the same place, and for the same cause, and maistris Line a widow
gentlewoman, for receiving prists in her house, received the like revvard in
erernal glory.

About the same time also, other two Seminary Priests, M. Thurstan Hunt, and
M. Robert Midleton, being taken in Lancashire, and from thence sent to London,
were presently returned thither again, and so condemned and executed at
Lancaster merely for their Priesthood.

Thus we have sixtene glorious and conspicous Martyrs (besides those that are
starued in prisons, and by other afflictions, for the same faith) within the
space of twelve months, that is, in this one holy year, for every hundredth
year since Christ one. A most happy Iubiley to them; a singu^^r consolation
to al Catholics; and a hap^ie example also of Gods mercy, toward ^l of
other Religions, that vvil consider their own estates, vvherin they live; and
the true cause, for which al these, and some hundreths more these late years,
have bestovved their lives. For so they shall clerly see, that they were al
accused and condemned, for the old, true Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
faith; as offenders against certain new Statutes made of late (the like never
heard of before in a Christian Country, nor as yet approved for good,
elsvvhere in the world) and most specially urged to go to the Protestants
Churches. Which alone would have saved their temporal lives longer.

For the same cause also many other ancient, and most constant Catholic
prisoners in the City of York, by the commandment of the L. Burley,
President of the North parts, and his assistants, have been this year
violently, and often drawn and haled, by mere force to heretical Sermons.
And afterward, because they reproved the prechers for diverse blasphemies,
and other false and absurd doctrines, have been shut up in streicter prisons,
laden with irons, and pinched with famine; neither did they forbear, nor
fear, to reprehend blasphemies, when they were brought to the same place
again. But certain of them being learned, openly reproved the blasphemous
prechers, and afterward before the same President, and others, clerly
confuted their errors. Others of less learning, yet also of great zeal,
stopped their own ears, in fight of the persecutors. who therefore appointed
to each of them, two men to hold down their hands, all the sermon time. and yet
would they not for all that, harken to the sermons, but partly by struggling and
chiding with their tormenters, partly (...) whispering and talking among
themselu^^ they made such a black Sanctus, that neit^^^ one nor other could
much mark, what the preacher said. So impossible it is, either for
Catholics to be inrest, or for persecuters to have their vvole vvilles,
where the fury of heresy rages. And much less is it possible to extinguish
the Catholic faith by force and violence. for the more it is sowed with
tears, and watered with blood, the more it increases and prospers, As we
see not only in the primitue Church, but also now in England, where through
Gods special grace, and by the prayers and blood of so many Martyrs, there be
far more Catholics at this day, then were forty years ago.

DEO GRATIAS. Yours al and ever: T. W. a Seminary Priest.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER, touching the contents, order, and title of this
book.
INtending at first (gentle reader) to make a brief relation of ten Martyrs,
in the holy year; and by the manner of proceeding against them, to declare that
they suffered merely for Religion; I put M. John Rigbie his process first
(though he was not the first of these Martyrs) because I meant to set the same
down more at large, as being most notorious, and most amply handled in
public place of Justice. But when I had done so much, and (by reason of a
journey that I made) leift it with a friend to publish, for the common good;
upon certain considerations, it was not pe^f^^^ed as I expected. And in the
mean (...) understanding that it was opprobriously objected to M. Wharton (as
also to some others, to the offense of many, and scandal of the weak) that
the Seminary Priests were at dissension, and debate against Jesuits, I
thought good, to explicat more fully his answer, to that false and absurd
sclander. And hearing also, that it has pleased God, to glorify six more
Martyrs, I would in nowise omit to add their names herunto. By which occasions
I was forced also to change the former title, to make it conformable to the
whole contents.

T. W.

FINIS.
Hunc libellum, cui titulus est, Narratio de sexdecim martyribus etc. cum
declaratione quod Catholici Angli persecutionem sustineant pro fide orthodoxa;
and quod inter Seminaristas sacerdotes Anglos ac Patres Societ. Jesus been
conueniat; a viris Anglicae linguae peritis, (...) and eruditionis Theologicae
nomine (...) perlectum, nec quicquam depr^he^sum habere quod editionem
impediat; excudi permisimus. Actum Duaci, mense Septembri. 1601.

Bartholomaeus Petrus, S. Th. Doct. and Profess.

^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...) p^oue this ^a
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...) dubios ^^^tus aff^^uo fals^^
^
^
^
(...) depos^^^ (...) d^ more sequ^^
(...) mod^ (...)
(...) locus (...)
^
^

