THE MERCHANT ROYAL. A SERMON PREACHED AT White Hall before the Kings
Majesty, at the Nuptials of the Right Honorable the Lord HAY and his Lady,
upon the Twelfe day last being lanuar. 6. 1607.

sailing ship and two devices or crests above it described in McKerrow, pp.
137-38, at device no. 356: at left, "a garb, or wheatsheaf, on a wreath"
(perhaps the crest of the Lord Hay?); at right, the crest of the Denny family
(Honora Denny being the Lady referred to in the book title)

AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON for John Flasket, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the black Bear. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD HAY, AND TO HIS late espoused the Lady
HONORIA; the Author hereof wishes all consolation in Christ, continual
comfort in marriage, together with a conscionable observance of the contents of
this Sermon.
LO here (Right Honorable) presented into your hands what lately sounded in
your ears. A ship first built in Paradise and for the pleasure of the land,
but since repaired for the Merchants use against the troubles of the sea: which
since I am enjoined to launch out into the maine, and to make public both
beyond the merit of the thing, and also beyond mine own meaning, I could find
none more fit Unto whom to dedicate it now in the print, than your Honorable
selves, for whose sake it was first preached. I hope I shall never make it the
last end of my Labors, to please man; yet I find in this, that I have pleased
some and displeased other: but why should I look to please all, whereas God
himself has so seldom done it? Therefore they which think me too bitter,
must yet remember that I bite nothing but sin; and what reason is there to
favor sin, through occasion where of the world was drowned to punish it, the
Law was ordained to prevent it, the Son of the highest died to satisfy for
it, and the world again must be destroyed to finish it? Yea what reason is
there to favor any sin, whereas there is no one which favors Us, but all
imperilling Us in the hope of salvation, as Eve by her eating Undermined Adam.
They again which think that sin should not be derided or corrected in this
kind, must also consider that every sin is to be taxed in his proper kind; as
in the Scripture sins sauouring of error are refelled with arguments, and such
as be foul and heinous are beaten do wne with judgments, but those which
were ridiculous were indeed derided, as Elias the Prophet sported at the
Priests of Baal, and Job at his foolish comforters. Yea and how plays Esaias
with the wanton gestures of women, stretching out their necks, minsing and
tinckling with their feet, etc. Chap. 3. 16. But Moses more with the nicenes
of women, Too dainty to venture (not their knees in devotion) but the soles of
their feet upon the ground, Deuteronomy. 28. 56. no doubt a sore adventure. But
nothing so taunting as that in Solomon, where the whore is mocked for a votarie,
and she that offered her self to other men's lust, yet is set our for a Saint
with offerings of peace to God, Prou. 7. 14. I hope therefore all good people
will privilege me by these holy presidents; yea I am sure of this that none
will find fault with me, but such as first find a fault in themselves, and to
such I profess my self indeed a Preacher, and to have preached all this for
them, as Christ in the Gospel professed of himself, that he came to call
sinners. And thus in my most true and sincerest love I commend you in the midst
of your marriage joys to that joy and peace which is in God.

Your Honors in all Christian devotion, Robert Wilkinson.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL, UPON THE SIXTH of January 1607. being Twelfe
day: At the Nuptials of the Right Honorable the Lord HAY and his Lady.
PROVE. 31. 14. She is like a Merchants ship, she brings her food from a
far.
THis Scripture, and in effect this whole chapter is a Scripture written for
women; and more peculiarly a Scripture written in praise of women; yet not
glosingly to make them better than they be, but soberly and truly to show the
what they should be; A scripture Wherein as in a glass are set out to our view
all the perfections and ornaments, all the dignity, beauty, duty of a
virtuous wife and holy woman. The devil at the first began his temptation by
praising of the woman, by telling her, that if she knew her self, she wanted
but one thing to make her like God; And from the devil (I think) it comes, that
so many men since, in every age, have so wantonly bestowed their time, their
wits, their pens, and sometime their pensils too, either vainly to magnify,
or vily to embase the dignity of women; the causes of which folly I take to
be these, either for that generally they did not know them, and then they wrote
foolishly, or for that sometime they doted on them, and then they praised
immoderatly, or else for that sometime they hated them, and then they railed
furiously: But there are, to ratify the present discourse and praise of
women, three things, first God, by whose sprit it was conceived: secondly
Bathsheba a woman, by whose mouth it was taught: thirdly, Solomon a man, yea
the wisest of men, by whose pen it was endited, that is to say, God in spired
it into the mother, the mother taught it to Solomon her son, and then Solomon
her son published it to the world: therefore if we speak of the knowledge of a
good woman, who knows her better than she her self? who knows her better
than man that lives with her? yea who knows her so well as God that made
her? Again, if in this description any thing might seem too much in praise,
it was not a woman, but a man that wrote it; if any thing might seem too
grievous or burdensome in precept, it was not a man, but a woman that imposed
it; or if any thing might seem either too much, or too little, or other wise
than it should be, it was neither man nor woman, but God that first directed
it: and thus in one description of a virtuous wife and holy woman (which is not
any other author, nor yet elsewhere in any part of Scripture) we have a man, a
woman, yea God himself, and al out of one mouth speaking and conspiring; She
that has cares to hearelet her hear.

In the tenth verse of this Chapter, Solomon makes proclamation, Who shall
find a virtuous woman? which yet imports not (as S. Augustine notes)
Inueniendi impossibilitatem, sed difficultatem, Not as if to find a virtuous
woman were a matter of impossibility, but yet for all that, a thing of some
difficulty; and therefore he cries her with her marks; She will do her
husband good, and not evil; She rises while it is yet night; She puts her
hands to the wheel; She stretches out her hands to the poor; She opens her
mouth with wisdom, etc. Thus showing sometime what she does, sometime what
she is, sometime what she is worth, and sometime what she is like, as here; She
is like a ship, etc.

She is indeed, and yet she scarce is, and therefore because she is so searse,
it was needful to show, not only what she is, but also what she is like too;
for how shall he find her, that never saw her, that never had her, that scarce
heard of her, how shall he find her, but by some sensible resemblance of her?
and therefore as Cantic. s. when the Church cried her husband, ( I charge you,
O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my well-beloved, etc.) she described him
by resemblance: My well-beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten
thousand, his head is like a gold, his eyes like doves, his cheeks like a bed
of spices, his lips like lilies, his legs like pillars of marble, every
thing was like something; so of the virtuous woman it is said here, that she
is like a ship; and Prou. 12. she is like a crown, and in the Canticles
sometime like a Rose, sometime like a Lilie, sometime like a garden of flowers,
sometime like a spring of waters: In a word, she is like to many things, but as
it is said verse. 10. Pearls and precious stones are not like to her.

She is like a ship (says Solomon) and it may well be, for the world is like
the Sea: for so says S. John, Before the throne there was a sea of glass,
Revel. 4. and that was the world, transitory and brittle as glass, tumultuous
and troublesome like the sea, wherein as the wind raises up the waves, and one
wave wallowes in the neck of another, so this troublesome life of ours begins
in weeping, goes on in sorrow, and the end of one woe is but the entrance of
another. O what time might a man ask to set down all the miseries of this
life! the fear, the care, the anguish that daily accompanies the body and
soul of man; the labors and sorrows certain, the causualties uncertain, the
contentions and unquietness of them that live among us, sharp assaults and
oppositions of them that hate us, but chiefly the unfaithfulness and treachery
of them that seem to love us: against these storms to save men from drowning
did God ordain the woman, as a ship upon the sea, that as Noah made an Arc,
and by that Arc escaped the flood; so man by marrying with the woman might
pass thorough all the labors of this life, unto which doubtless God had
respect when he said, It is not good for man to be alone, let Us make him a
help meet for him; as much as to say, a ship to save him, therefore he which
has no wife may seem to be like Jonas in the sea, left in the midst of a
miserable world to sink or swim, or shift for himself; but then comes a wife
like a ship and wastes him home: but ye must still remember that Solomon
speaks here of a good wife, as verse. 10. Who shall find a Virtuous woman?
For otherwise if she which was made to comfort in every storm be stormy and
troublesome her self, then is she not like a Ship, but like the sea, and then
to be so shipped, it were better with Jonas to be cast into the sea.

But if she be good, she is like a Ship indeed, and to nothing so like as to a
Ship; for she sits at the stern, and by discretion as by Card and Compass
shapes her course; her countenance and conversation are ballased with sobernes
and gravity; her sails are full of wind, as if some wisdom from above had
inspired or blown upon her; she stands in the shrowdes, and casts out her
lead, and when she has sounded, she tells (as Michol did to David) of depth
and danger. 1. Sam. 19. 11.
If by default she be grounded, she casts out her ankers (as Rahab did) and
by winding Joshua 2. 21.
of her self, she gets afloate again. If she spy within her kenning, any
trouble to be nigh, either she makes forward, if she find her self able, or
else with Pilats Matthew. 27. 19.
wife she sets sail away; She commands, and countermaunds each man to his
charge, some to their tackling, some to the mast, some to the maine top, as if
she, and none but she were Captain, Owner, Master of the ship; and yet she is
not Master, but the Masters mate; a royal Ship she is, for the King himself
takes pleasure in her beauty, Psalm. 4s. and if she be a Merchantstoo, then
is she the Merchant royal.

Again, as she is like a ship, considered in her self, and in her proper
virtues, so is she likewife, being compared with her owner too: She is like a
Ship indeed, for first who soever marries, ventures; he ventures his estate,
he ventures his peace, he ventures his liberty, yea many men by marriage
adventure their souls too: for which cause the Israelites were forbidden to
match their daughters with the Cananites, lest they should turn them from God,
to serve other gods, Deuteronomy. 7. which Solomon notwithstanding did, and therefore
made (as some men thought) a shrewd adventure of his soul. And therefore (even
to prevent too much adventure likewise) is marriage compared to a ship, which
of all artificial creatures, is the most deliberatiue, for she sails not, but
by sounding, lest by her vnheedines she run her self aground: In like manner,
neither man nor woman will at any time (if they be wise) resolve either of
marriage, or of any thing in marriage, but upon the weightiest deliberation. He
is set out for the image of a fool that said, Villam emi, etc. I have bought a
farm, and I Luke 14. 18.
must needs go out to see it, for he should have seen it first and bought
it after; as it is said of the virtuous woman here, She considers a field and
gets it, verse. 16. that is, she thinks of it first, and makes her purchase
after; and when either man or woman forget this in marriage, they purchase joy
enough for the day of their marriage, and repentance enough for all the time
after. It is said of Jepthaes daughter, Judge. 11. that she went out to bewail
the days of her virginity; but in truth many men's daughters may go out to
bewail the days of their marriage, yea and many men too look back to the
single life, as the Egyptians in the red sea looked back to the land; Exodus 14.
and so they are punished with late repentance, like those foolish mariners Act.
27. who, because they took not counsel in the haven, were forced to advise
upon a wrack: and what is the cause of this? lack of forecast, because they
sound not first whether it be fit to marry, or yet to marry, or whether he
be fit, or she be fit, fit in degree, in disposition, in religion: and
therefore as Solomon says of vowing, so say we of marrying, Be not rash with
thy mouth; but sound first and sail after, that is, deliberate first, and
marry after.

Again, she is like a ship for her universal use: A house is indeed to dwell
in, but not to travail in, but a ship is both to travail in, and as it were
to dwell in too, to eat, and drink, and sleep, and labor, and meditate, and
pray too; as if to be in a ship were to be in another earth, the water-world:
In like manner a man has a friend for pleasure, a servant for profit, and sor
uses to Godward a spiritual instructor too, but a wife serves for all these,
that is, for pleasure, for profit, and (if she be good) to bring her husband to
good too.

Again, of all these same Vtensilia, (I mean of moveable instruments) a ship
is the hugest and the greatest, and yet commanded (as ye see) by the helm or
stern, a small piece of wood; so ought the wife (though a great comma^der in
the house) yet to be turned and ruled by a word of her husband. Solomon says
not, she is like a house (as many women be, as good remove a house as to
dissuade or weane them from their wills) but like a ship; not like Vashti the
wife of Assuerus, who^ all the power of the kingdom could not move to come to
her husband, no not to the King himself, Ester 1. but she must follow her
husband, as the Israelites followed the clowdie pillar in the wilderness, which
Numb. 9.
when it stood, they stayed, and when it went they followed, and so must she.

Lastly, lest any man doat too much upon this heavenly ship of earthly joys,
we must remember, that as a ship is not a place of continual habitation, but
only for passage, so is the society of the wife, though comfortable and
joyful for the time, yet lasting only for a time, a help to hold him up and
comfort him, during this transitory, short, and troublesome pilgrimage; but
the^ there is another, a happier, a more lasting marriage with the Lamb, which
neither departure, divorce, nor death can separate, and for this we must
forsake father, mother, wife, children, goods, lands, etc. for this the living
must renounce his life, the King must leave his crown, the Bridegroom must
leave his Bride, and the Bride must leave her bed, because for this the Saints
do cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

But as the saying is in the schools, Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus:
Many things may be like, yet nothing like in all things. Therefore though a
woman in many things be like a ship, yet in some things she must be unlike, and
some qualities of a ship she must not have: As for example, one ship may belong
to many Mercha^ts, and one Merchant may be owner in many ships; yet neither may
one woman divide her love to many men, nor one man divide himself to many
women, therefore Lamech spoke with great incongruitie, yea it was like false
Latin when he said, Hear ye wives of Lamech, Genes 4. 23. for wives admitno
plurality when they be construed with one husband, because (as the Prophet
says) though God at the first had abundance of spirit, yet he made but one;
Mal. 2. but one woman of one rib, for the help and comfort of one man.

Secondly, of all the goods which men possess, only a ship cannot be housed:
a man has a shop for his wares, a barn for his corn, a chest for his money,
and a house wherein to hide his head, but no case to cover a ship; but so must
not a virtuous woman be, for it is a note of the unchaste woman, that her feet
cannot abide in her house, but now she is without, now in the street, and lies
in wait at every corner, Prou. 7. 11. 12. So as who so sees her sees her
always gadding, that he may salute her, as men salute at sea, Whither are ye
bound? But Rachel and Leach are noted to be in the house while Jacob was
abroad in the field, Genes. 31. only Dinah was a stragler, and set up sail to
Shichem, but she came home with shame, and made an ill voyage.

Thirdly, a ship of all things is moveable, and carried with the wind; but so
must not a good woman be, for of the ill woman it is said, Proverbs 5. Herpaths
are moveable, thou can not know them: She is inconstant, light headed, and
vain, now she loves, anon she hates, now she obeies, anon she rebels; gentle
and Kind to day, crooked and unkind to morrow; for she sails but by gusts,
that all her goodness takes her by fits, like the good days of an ague: and
whereas Ruth showed more Ruth 3.
goodness at her latter end than at her beginning, an ill wise she weth more
goodness in one day of her beginning, than in seven years of her latter end:
therefore such must remember what Solomon says of the good woman here, she
girdeth her loins with slrength, that is, her mind with staiednes and
constancy, ver. 17. and verse. 12. more plainly, She Will do her husband
good, and not evil, all the days of her life, that is, she is as obedient and
tractable after twenty years trial, as at the day of her marriage.

But of all qualities a woman must not have one quality of a ship, and that is,
too much rigging. Oh what a wonder it is to see a ship under sail, with her
tacklings, and her masts, and her tops, and top gallants, with her upper
deckes, and her nether deckes, and so bedeckt; with her streams, flagges, and
ensigns, and I know not what; yea but a world of wonders it is to see a woman
created in Gods image so miscreate often times and deformed, with her French, her
Spanish, and her foolish fashions, that he that made her when he looks upon
her shall hardly Know her, with her plumes, her fannes, and a silken vizard,
with a ruff like a sail, yea a ruff like a rainebow, with a feather in her
cap like a flag in her top, to tell (I think) which way the wind will blow.
Esaias made a proffer in the third of his prophecy to set out by enumeration the
shop of these vanities, Their bonnets, and their bracelets, and their tablets,
their slippers, and their mufflers, their vailes, their wimples, and their
crisping pinnes; of some where of if one should say to me as Philip sometime
said to the Eunuch, Understand thou What thou read? Act. 8. I might
answer with the Eunuch again, How can I without a guide? that is, vnlessc
some Gentlewoman would comment on the text. But Esaias was then, and we are now;
now that fancy has multiplied the text of fashions with the time; so as what
was then but a shop, is now increased to a ship of vanities. But what says the
Scripture? The Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. and as ships
which are the fairest in show, yet are not always the fittest for use; so
neither are women the more to be esteemed, but the more to be suspected for
their fair trappings. Yet we condemn not in greater personages the use of
ornaments; yea we teach that silver, silks, and gold were created not only
for the necessity, but also for the ornament of the Saints, in the practice
where of Rebeccah a holy woman is noted to have received from Jsaac a holy man
even earings, abilments, and bracelets of gold, Genes. 24. Therefore this it is
we teach for rules of Christian sobriety, that if a woman exceed neither
decency in fashion, nor the limits of her state and degree, and that she be
proud of nothing, we see no reason, but she may wear any thing.

It follows: She is like a ship. But what ship? a ship of Merchants; no
doubt a great commendation. For the kingdom of heaven is like a Merchant, Mat.
13. and Merchants have bin Princes, Esaias 23. and Princes are Gods, Psalm. 82.
The Merchant is of all men the most laborious for his life, the most aduentrous
in his labor, the most peaceable upon the sea, the most profitable to the
land, yea the Merchant is the combination and union of lands and countries. She
is like a ship of Merchants; there fore first to be reckoned (as ye see) among
the Laity; not like a fishermans boat, not like S. Peter's ship, for Christ
did call no she Apostles. Indeed it is commendable in a woman when she is able
by her wisdom to instruct her children, and to give at opportunities good
counsel to her husband: but when women shall take upon them (as many do) to
build Churches, and to chalk out discipline for the Church, this is neither
comme^dable nor tolerable, for her hands (says Solomon) must handle the
spindle, verse. 19. the spindle or the cradle, but neither the Altar nor the
Temple: for S. John commends even to the elect Lady not so much her talking,
as her walking in the commandments, 2. loh. 5. 6. Therefore to such preaching
women it may be answered, as S. Bernard sometime answered the Image of the
blessed Virgin at the great Church at Spire in Germany; Bernard was no sooner
come into the Church, but the Image straight saluted him, and bad him, God
morrow Bernard. Whereat Bernard, well knowing the iugling of the Friars, made
answer again out of S. Paul, Oh (says he) your Ladyship has forgot your
self, It is not lawful for women to speak in the Church.

Again, the Merchant is a profitable ship, to teach a wife in all things to
endeavor her husbands profit: but many women are like water-pageants, made
only for show, like pictures in a table, good for nothing but to please the
eye, no longer to be liked than they be looked on, yea so vnprositable and
dissolute in the house, as no man would think them to be wives, but that at
meals he finds them sitting at the upper end of the table: whereas of the
good wife it is said here, that she will do her husband good, and not evil,
verse. 12.

Again, the Merchant is a painful ship, and she must be a painful wife; not
like a running pinnace to skoure from coast to coast, from house to house, as
many Athenian women do, who give themselves to nothing, but idly and wantonly
to hear and tell news; for he that has such a wife may think himself
married to an Intelligencer; whereas S. Paul advises such busy bodies to
govern their own houses, 1. Tim. 5. as if intermedling with other men's did
make them idle in their own.

Again, being like a Merchants ship, that is, he being the Merchant and she
the ship, she must needs conclude she was made for him, and therefore a ship of
traffic to enrich him, but not a pirate to spoil and rob him. To spoil and
rob? as if a woman could rob her husband? Indeed it has ost been held a
question disputable, though I in truth have little mind to dispute it; yet I
hear what is said to that purpose from the mouth of Eve, We eat of the
fruit of the trees of the garden, genes. 3. We, therefore she puts in her
self; and she eats of the trees indefinitely, therefore of all the trees in
the garden, and therefore all was hers as well as Adams, and the woman's in
right as well as the man's. To which I answer, that all is hers in
participation to use, but Adams only in discretion to dispose, which appears
by two reasons, first, because the beasts were named by Adam and not by Eve,
and to name is a note of dominion and authority: as when Joseph became
Pharaohs servant, and Daniel a captive to the Chaldeans, they received from
them other names; and we in our baptism receive our names to acknowledge that
we belong in right to Christ. Secondly, the whole world was given to Adam
before Eve was made, so as hers was but an afterright, and if she have any
tenure at all, she holds in Capite, and she has no title but by her husband:
she therefore that usurps absolute authority in the house, is no Merchant,
but a pirate to the Merchant.

Lastly, she is like a Merchants ship, that is, a friendly fellow and peaceable
companion to him, but not a man of war to contend with him. For he that made
her never built her for battle sure; she was built for peace, and not for
war, for Merchants weep to think of war: therefore she must not for every
angry word of her husband betake her self into the gunne-roome ftraight and
there to thunder, to charge and discharge upon him with broad words, or as
mariners say at sea, to turn the broad side; like Zipporah the wife of Moses,
to rail upon him, Thou art indeed a bloody husband, Exodus 4. this is no
ship of Merchants, this is the Spite, I think: and therefore no marucile, if
many men thus shipped do wish themselves a shore, and that untimely death might
take such a wife for a prize. When Eliezer went a wooing for Isaac his masters
son, the trial by which he proposed to prove a fit wife for Jsaac was this,
that if (says he) when I say to a maid, Give me drink, she say again,
Drink, and I will give thy Camels also, she without more ado should be a
wife for Isaac, Genes. 24. that is, as Theodoret expounds it, If she were
gentle; not like that woman Ioh. 4. Christ asked her water and she called him
Jew: How is it that thou a Jew ask water of me a Samaritane? For though
there be many sins incident to women (as there be (to speak vnpartiallie)
as many to men) yet no vice in a woman so unwomanly as this; yet if Adam had
been furious the matter had been less, for he was made of earth, the mother of
iron and steel, the murdering metals; but the woman she that was made of so
tender metal to become so terrible, the weaker vessel so strong in passion,
yea to look so fair and speak so foul, what a contrariety is this? There
was great reason sure to compare a good woman to a snaile, not only for her
silence and continual keeping of her house, but also for a certain
commendable timorousnes of her nature, which at the least shaking of the air
shrinks back into her shell; and so ought the wife to do, if her husband but
speak to play all hid and under hatches, and to put out a flag of truce as
Abigail did to David, and to say to her husband, as Rachel to her father, Let
not my Lord be angry, Genesis 31. Like a lilie among thorns (says Solomon) so
is my love among the daughters, Cantic. 2. Like a lilie first, not like a
nettle: again, like a lilie among thorns, as showing patience in the sorest
pouocation. Sara indeed was peaceable, and so were many more, yet their praise
was less, in as much as they had meek husbands, for she is a monster that
lives not meekly with a meek husband, but she that is yoakt with a Nabal, a
churl, a fool, as Abigail was, and bears that patiently, she may say with
Deborah, in the fifth of the Judges, O my soul thou have marched Valiantly:
And there shall more true honor grow to you by such patience, than if
souldierlike ye did prevail by fury and violence; and the worse your
husbands be, the more shall your virtue shine, which in affliction shines
most, like stars twinkling in the night; and if it be grievous to find
matter of patience there where ye looked for comfort and protection, yet it
shall have in tho end a reward, and in the Interim a singular admiration, and,
as Mary says of her self, All generations shall call such blessed.

It follows in the text: She brings her sood from a far. As ye have heard
what she is like, so now likewise what she does too; for being is known by
doing, as the tree is known by the fruit. Alas it is a small thing, yea it is
nothing to be like, for copper often times is like good coin, and the devil is
like an angel of light, and if evil women were not like to many things, which
indeed they are not, they could not deceive so many as they do: therefore the
next thing is to consider what she does; She brings her food from a far.
she brings, first, therefore described pacie aduer sa non auersa, with her
face, not with her back toward: for when a ship goes forth, every man
murmureth for that it carries, the Merchant himself fears lest it
miscarrie; but when it returns, there is joy for that it brings. And where
Solomon says she brings, he means not that she brings in with her, as
if a wife were to be chosen by her dowry; for the worst wives have many times
the best portions, and the best wives (such as Ester was) have often times none
at all. Indeed the manner of the world is now to seek wives, as Judas
betrayed Christ, with Quantum dabis, What will ye give? and if the father
chance to say with Peter, Aurum and argentum non est mihi; let her the^ be as
obedient as Sarah, as devout as Anna, as virtuous as the Virgin Mary, yetal
this is nothing, Quaerenda pecunia primum est, other things may mend it, but
money makes the match. Therefore this was not it which Solomon meant by
bringing: for a good wife though she bring in nothing with her, yet through her
wisdom and diligence great things come in by her; she brings in with her
hands, for she puts her hands to the wheel (says Solomon) verse. 19. and
indeed if her work do not counteruaile her meat, then is every finger of her
hand like a these in the house. Again, if she be too high to stain her hands
with bodily labor, yet she brings in with her eye, for she ouerseeth the
ways of her household (says Solomon) and eats not the bread of idleness,
verse. 27. Again she brings in by her frugalitie, for she holds it a point
of conscience, neither to fare more daintily, nor to attire her self more
trimly, than may stand with her husbands state: for if she waste more than she
bring in, and her victualling amount to more than her whole voyage, that
Merchant was ill advised that manned her forth, and it had been good for him
to be alone. But as the saying is, that many men marry their executors; so is
it true likewise, that many men marry their executioners: and as the sin of
Adam began at Eve, so the ruin and confusion, the extortion, oppression,
griping of tenants, yea and sacrilege of many men begins at the pride of
the woman; for now every Lady of the latest edition if her husband have
bribed out but an end of an office, yet she revels and plays Rex, and she must
have her Coach, though but to cross from the Church-stile to the Church Porch:
and whereas those Israelitish women, Exodus 38. when the Instruments of the
Tabernacle were to be made, gave in their devotion their very Looking-glasses
toward it; yet now the forbidden apple is pulled, the Church is robbed and
spoiled, a Patron will scarce pass away a poor Parsonage, but with a
reservation of his own tithes, and all to maintain French Hoods, Ruffes,
Lawnes and Looking glasses: whereas of the virtuous wife it is said verse. 11.
of the Chapter, that her husband shall have no need of spoil.

But what brings she in? She brings in food; in which word Solomon points
her out a houseworke, as she is a housewife, and the work assigned is the
feeding of the household: for we read that Abraham fetched a calfe from the
field, but Sarah had her charge to dress it in the Tent, Genef. 18. and Samuel
tells the people, that their King when they had him, would take not their
sons, but their daughters, and make them Cooks and Bakers, 1. Sam. 8. and in
the fifteenth verse of this Chapter it is said directly, that she gives the
portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids. But that which we
read food, some translate it bread, she brings her bread; and it may well
be, for bread is the staff of life, and when like Merchants we have run
round about the world to fetch in the riches of every country, yet all is but
to clothe the back and feed the belly: therefore having food and raiment,
(says S. Paul) let us there with be content: 1. Tim. 6.

Again, as he is not the best Merchant to the Commonwealth which brings in
toys and trifles, but he which brings in such things as best may serve
necessity; so neither is she always the best wife which is most adorned with
tricks and qualities, but she that endeavors most to that which is most
necessary. And I think surely that bread is expresselie named here, as to
frame her whole conversation, so chiefly her mouth with sobriety: for many
women are of the mind of the Israelites in Egypt, Manna is no meat with them,
but they must have Quatles, and all must be dainty, (though to the undoing of
all) like Eve the wife of Adam, whom of all the trees in Paradise none might
serve, but that which was the bane of her husband, and the less they want, the
more wanton and dainty mouthed they be. Now sure if Cyrus had had such a wife
he must needs have worshipped her, for he had no other reason to worship the
Idol Bell, but only because it spent him so many sheep, so many measures of
flower, and so many pots of wine every day: but every meat was not made for
every mouth; only bread was made for all; and neither man nor woman have
warrant to ask for more than for their daily bread.

But what means Solomon by that, From a far, she brings her soode from a
far? Surely not to answer that which is Prouerbially said, That far fetched
and dear bought is fittest for Ladies, as now adays what grows at home is
base and homely, and what every one eats is meat for dogs, and we must have
bread from one country, and drink from another, and we must have meat from
Spain, and sauce out of Italy: and if we wear any thing, it must be pure
Venetian, Roman, or Barbarian; but the fashion of all must be French: and as
Seneca says in another case, Victi Victoribus leges dederunt, we give them the
soil, and yet they must give us the fashion. Therefore this was not Salomons
meaning, but from a far either has respect to the time, A longinquo tempore,
as it seems to be expounded in the very next words, She rises while it is
yet night, and gives the portion to her household, etc. He does not say, she
meets it at the door, as she that rises to dinner, and then thinks her
days work half done, and for every sit of an idle fever betakes her straight
to her cabin again, and if her finger but ache, she must have one stand by to
feed her with a spoone: This is no ship of Merchants, this is the Mary Slug;
but she brings it from a far, that is, she takes care of it, and
disposes of it from the first, yea and before the first hand that touches it.

Or else I take this from a far to be farther yet, even ab vltimis naturae,
from the first and furthest principles of nature. As for example, If she will
have bread, she must not always buy it, but she must sow it, and reap it,
and grind it, and as Sarah did, Genesis 18. she must Kneade it and make it into
bread. Or if she will have cloth, she must not always run to the shop or to
the skore, but she begins at the seed, she carries her seed to the ground,
of the ground she gathers flax, of her flax she spinneth a thread, of her
thread she weaueth cloth, and so she comes by her coat: The very words of
Solomon verse. 13. of the chapter, She seeks wool and flax, and labors
cheerfully with her hands.

Or else I take this from a far to be farther yet, even from the gates of
heaven, from whence by her devotion and godly conversation she draws down
the blessings of God upon her house. The barren Rachel prayed, and so did Anna
too, and by their prayers obtained children of the Lord. Now sure if the prayer
of a virtuous woman were so powerful, as against the course of nature to
derive and fetch children from a barren womb, how much more shall it command
the meaner blessings on the house? And therefore as a wicked woman is a sea of
evils, so a virtuous woman is a heaven of beauty, and there is none so fair
as she that fears God: nay what speak we of beauty? for favor is
deceitful, and beauty is Vanity, verse. 30. of the Chapter: and as the
painting of a ship by weather and by water is washed away, so shall all carnal
beauty by sorrow, age and sickness even wither and waste into wrinkles; but she
that fears the Lord (says Solomon) she shall be praised. Praised? yea
honored and admired; The stars in the night, the Sun at noone day shall
not shine so bright as she: for he that goes by her door shall point at her,
and he that dwells by her shall envy him that has her; and cuery man shall
say, Blessed be he the that made her, happy is he that begat her, renowned is
she that bare her, but most happy, renowned, and rich is he that has her:
and as even now, so I say again, All generations shall call such blessed.

Well, to make use of this in several Application to the King.
kinds; I most humbly beseech your Majesty first to admit of a particular
application to your self. It is said Matthew. 12. that the Queen of the South
came to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but we may say conuersiuely and truly,
that the wisdom of Solomon is come to the King of the North: for your Majesty
is to us indeed a royal Merchant, not only for the union of holy marriage,
which yokes and couples one sex with another, but as Merchants do by
intercourse of traffic, for knitting and combining one kingdom with another.
And I will not say it is kingly, but divine and heavenly to unite into one
things of divided nature: for thus did God create the world, first he made
things, and then he matched them; first he created, and then he coupled them;
of man and woman he made one in marriage, of body and soul he made one man, of
sea and land he made one earth, of heaven and earth he made one world; but
then came the devil upon the stage, and his part was again to divide what God
had united, first man from God, then man from man, and that diversely, first in
the very bond of blood and kindred, Cain from Abel the brother from the brother;
then distinguished by religions, the sons of God and the daughters of men;
then dispersed by their several habitations, the Isles of the Gentiles, and the
Tents of Sem, and then distracted and torn into diverse kingdoms, the kingdom
of Judah, and the kingdom of Israel; therefore doubtless a glorious work it
were of Judah and Israel again to make one kingdom: for if it be so gracious
in Gods eyes to do right and justice to a stranger, how much more to love a
stranger, but most of all to take away the name of a stranger? The King of
Kings be Pilot of your ship, yea thrice blessed and happy be your Majesty's
endeavor therein.

Ladies and Gentlewomen, I beseech Application to Ladies and Gentlewomen.
you mistake me not, and impute no partiality to me. If I have said anything
sharply, yet know that I have said nothing against the good, but all
againsteeuill women, yea nothing against the sex, but all against the sins of
women. To which if any reply: And why not (I pray) as well against the sins
of men? I answer, that he which imposes so much upon the weaker vessel,
imports much more to the stronger. There is a duty required of the parents
to the child, as well as of the child to the parents; yet the speaks
expressly to the child, Honor thy father and mother, but nothing to the
pa^rets, that they being in order of nature and in wisdom superior, might
suspect their duty to be written in themselves.

Again (Right Honorable in both Application to the married.
sexes) The cause of this meeting, the joy of this day, yea the mystery and
little image of this great intended Union, Let me be bold (I beseech you) in
terms of modesty to make application to you. You are here met to be matched,
that is, to be married, and marriage (as the Apostle faith) is honorable in
all, but thrice honorable in you, first honorable in the institution as in
all other: secondly in your personages being honorable above other, but
thirdly in your countries the most honorable of all other: for simply to
marry ioynes sex and sex, to marry at home ioynes house and house, but your
marriage joins land and land, earth and earth, only Christ goes beyond it,
who ioynes heaven and earth.

Therefore first to you, the honorable Application to the Bridegroom.
Merchant of this honorable ship; you have heard what is said, that marriage is
a sore adventure, and therefore as mariners upon the sea in the day time look
up to the Sun, and in the night to the Pole star, so look you up day and
night to God, and God shall give you good shipping therein. A married man (they
say) has the charge of three co^monwealths, for he is a husband of a wife, a
father of children, and a master of servants, and he has daily need of God who
should guide all these. Therefore first love God, and to prove that love, love
also her whom God has given you: for if (as S. John says) He that loves not
his brother, etc. how much more, he that loves not his wife whom he daily
sees, how shall he love GOD whom he never saw? and indeed there is no
religion nor goodness in that man that loves not a faithful and loyal wife.
And say not you love, unless you love to the end; for much water cannot quench
love, Cantic. 8. for love endures all things, believes all things, and
suffers all things: therefore if there grow by the wife any cause of grief,
yet you must remember she is the weaker vessel; God therein exercises your
wisdom in reforming, and your patience in bearing it; and with whom will a
man bear, if not with his own wife? If at any time you have occasion to
exercise your authority yet you must remember, it is authority tempered with
equality; the wife is therefore to be governed with love, not ouerruled by
tyranny. And let all husbands know this for a rule all things, that the wife
shall much better do her duty to her husband, when the husband does his own
duty in example before.

And let me speak one word to you Application to the Bride.
this honorable Ship; you are turned by Gods providence to the right of a
Merchant stranger, yet herein happy, that you need not as Pharaohs daughter to
sorget either your own people, or your fathers house. All the time of your
life you have bin gathering for this day, therefore learn to practice now, what
you have learned before, that is, to honor, to love, and to obey, and then at
last you shall come to rule: for a good wife by obeying of her husband rules
him; but she that obeys not is like the conspiracy of Corah against Moses and
Aaron. Besides, remember your badge is not as of that ship Act. 28. not Castor
and Pollux, for I find neither superstition nor idolatry in any part of your
family, but I find among other things a sheafe of wheat and a handful of
wheat adunanced upon your stern, therefore doubtless it will be expected
that Plenty, peace and prosperity come in with you I might refer you for
paternes of true virtue, as S. Paul sometime referred Timotly, to Lois and
Eunica, a grandmother and a mother; and indeed this chapter of Solomon is
entitled, The prophecy or lesson which his mother taught him: and if you
remember the many good lessons your mother has taught you, then shall I need
to say no more, then shall you be like Rachel and Leah, which twain did build
up the house of Israel: then shall you be a ship indeed, for you shall bring
your self and your husband to the haven, even to that which Seamen call
Promontorium bonae spet, The hill or haven of good hope, that is, to heaven;
and when this marriage is dislolued, you shall marry at last with the Lamb. In
the mean time do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Brittanie, live to a
hundred, grow into thousands, and your seed possess the gate of his enemy.

And God almighty who brought us all hither by the institution and help of
holy marriage, he bring us at last to that happy and endless society with
his Son, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be ascribed al praise,
power and dominion now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

