THE PSALMS Of KING DAVID: Translated by KING JAMES.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. 1636.

Psalm. II.
Sing this as the first Psalm.
HOw comes it that the heathen thus do not their rage restrain?
and why imagine people now a thing that is but vain?

even to consult against the Lord, and his anointed one.

and let us quickly far from us, cast their strong cords away.

the Lord (who mighty is) shall them have in derision all.

and in his sore displeasure shall them vex exceedingly.

upon fair Sion, which is of my holiness the hill.

thou art my only Son, this day I have begotten thee.

and shall the utmost parts of earth, for thy possession have.

thou shall them dash in pieces, like a potters vessel frail.

be ye instructed judges all, that on the earth do live.

and in a moderate way rejoice, with trembling reverently.

lest if his wrath but sparkle once, you perish from the way.

who come with confidence to him, as sure to have relief.
Psalm. III.
^ LOrd, how are they encreasd that me continually annoy!
they many are who do rise up, that they may me destroy.

there is no help for him in God to save him any way.

thou art my glory, and my head is lifted up by thee.

and he most graciously me heard, out of his holy hill.

then cheerfully awaked again, for me the Lord did keep.

encompassing me round about, I not afraid will be.

on the cheeke-bone, thou brok'st the teeth of the ungodly quite.

and on the people that are thine, thy blessing ever is.
Psalm. IV.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
THou of my righteousness the God, when as I call give ear,
thou have enlarged me from distress, my suit in mercy hear.

how long will ye seek after lies, and vanity embrace?

and when to him I humbly call, he never me neglects.

at night examine first your heart, and then securely rest.

and let your trust what ever come, be fired in the Lord.

but of thy face lift up the light, that it may shine on us.

than they (even then) when corn and wine did most with them abound.

for Lord, thou only make to me secure my dwelling place.
Psalm V.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
LOrd, let thine ears receive my words, my meditation weigh,


I, Lord, my prayer to thee will send, and will look up on high.

and never any evil at all shall lodged be by thee.

thou do them altogether hate, that work iniquity.

the Lord abhors the bloody man, and him that fraud does use.

thy temple toward, in thy fear, I thee will worship still.

because of foes, and make thou straight before my face, thy way.

their throat is like a gaping tomb, their tongues do flatter still.

cast them in their numerous sins, since rebels to thee all.

since them thou guard'st, let them be glad that love thy holy name.

with favor he as with a shield, shall compassed be by thee.
Psalm VI.
^ LEt me not in thy wrath, O Lord, by thee rebuked be:
and when thou highly art displeased, then spare to punish me.

heal me, O Lord, for now with pain my bones all vexed be.

but Lord, how long will thou delay in working my relief?

and for thy boundless mercies sake, make haste in saving me.

and who shall give due thanks to thee, whilst in the grave confined?

and I do water all my Touch with tears that I have shed.

(all vigor lost) it does wax old, because of all my foes.

the Lord has heard the voice, that from my weeping did proceed.

the Lord the prayer that I make, will graciously receive.

let them return, and be ashamed, and that even suddenly.
Psalm. VII.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
O Lord, that only art my God, I put my trust in thee:
save me from them that persecute, and straight deliver me.

and it asunder fiercely tear, whilst none can him control.

or if at all within my hands, iniquity there be.

yea I even him delivered have, who causeless is my foe.

let him tread down my life on the earth in dust mine honor lay.

and to the judgment watch for me that did the same command.

return thou therefore for their sakes, exalted high over all.

according to my righteousness, and my integrity.
The second part.

but fix the just, for hearts and reyns the righteous God does found.

who does them all in mercy save, that upright are in heart.

and God is likewise angry with the wicked every day.

he bended has his threatening bow, and has it fitted right.

he against the persecutors all, ordaines his shafts in wrath.

he basely mischief has conceived, and falsehood has brought forth.

but whilst he went about his work, there be himself was caught.

his violence on his own pate, shall suddenly descend.

and of the Lord that is most high, my song shall found the name.
Psalm. VIII.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
O Lord, my God, how does thy name in all the earth excel?
who have thy glory set above the heavens where light does dwell!

because of foes, that so thou might th'auenging foe restrain.

the lightning Moon, the sparkling stars, which were ordaind by thee.

or yet the Son of dying man, that thou to him art kind?

with glory and with honor too, he crowned is by thee.

and underneath the feet of him, did all things else submit.

and as depending on his will, the beasts of every field.

O Lord, our Lord how does thy name in all the earth excel?
Psalm. IX.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
THou still, O Lord with all my heart, shall celebrated be:
and all thy works which wondrous are, shall be shown forth by me.

O thou that art most high, my song thy praises shall proclaim.

they suddenly shall fall with shame, and perish at thy sight.

and si^ting on thy Throne with state, thy justice made appear.

thou have put out their names, that they may never more be known,

thou Cities have entombed in dust, razed from remembrance so.

he has prepared his glorious throne for judgment unto all.

and to the people uprightly, he judgment shall afford.

a refuge still even in due time, when troubles most abound.

for them, O Lord, that feeke to thee, thou never did disclaim.

and to the people all his deeds with admiration tell.

the cries of them that humble are, he never does forget.
The second part.

thou that do freely lift me up from deaths most horrid gate.

and I in thy salvation will my my most firmly found.

and in the net that they did hide, their own foot is surprisde.

and even by his own hands works s^ar'd, the wicked is overthrown.

and all the Nations blindely led, of God that never think.

the expectation of the poor, shall not for ever dye.

and let the heathen people all be judged in thy sight.

that to themselves to be but men, the nations all may know.
Psalm. X.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
WHy do thou, Lord, a far off stand, not daigning to come near?
why do thou hide thy self, in times when trouble does appear?

O, let these sleights them take, that have by them imagined been.

and he does bless the covetous, though loathed by the Lord.

and even amidst his many thoughts, God has no place at all.

are far above out of his sight, he puffes at all his foes.

I prosper now, and no distress can ever trouble me.

and mischief matched with vanity, is underneath his tongue.

his eyes still privily are set, against the poor for ill.

to catch the poor, he does him catch, when drawn into his net.

that (circumvented so) the poor may by his strong ones fall.

he does of purpose hide his face, he will it never see.

lift up thy hand, and do not now the humble ones neglect.

he in his heart has fond^y said, thou will it not require.

from high beholdest, that thou may it with thy hand requite.
The poor distressed commits himself for safety unto thee:
and thou the helper ever art of them that or phanes be.

and seek thou out his wickedness, till none at all thou find.

the heathen too out of his land, are perished every one.

thou will to them encl^ne thine ear, and wilt prepare their heart.

that in his pride the man of the earth may so oppress no more.
Psalm. XI.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
I In the Lord do trust, how then say you my soul to fright:
straight to your mountain like a bird take (winged with fears) your flight.

that they unseen may shoot at them, who upright are in heart.

be utterly themselves destroyed, what can the righteous do?

his eyes behold, and his eyelids the Sons of men do try.

but wicked men and violent, his very soul does hate.

and a fierce tempest: of their cup, this prove the portion shall.

his heavenly countenance does behold all them that are upright.
Psalm. XII.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
Help now, O Lord, for godly men extremely do decay:
and from amongst the Sons of men, the faithful pass away.

with flattering lips they use to speak, and with a double heart.

and that vain tongue of things too proud, to speak that does not spare.

our lips do to our selves belong, and who over us is Lord?

and I will him in safety set, whom wicked men despise.

which in a furnace made of earth, seven trials does endure.

and from this generation shall for ever them preserve.

when as the vilest men on earth most high exalted are.
Psalm. XIII.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
HOw long will thou forget me, Lord, shall it thus ever be?
and, O, how long will thou in wrath thus hide thy face from me?

how long above me shall my foe exalted make me smart?

and lest I sleep the sleep of death, light to mine eyes impart.

and enemies grow insolent, when my designs have failed.

my heart in thy salvation too, shall much rejoiced be.

because his bounty has to me abundantly been shown.
Psalm. XIV.
^ THe fool has said within his heart, there is no God, they are
corrupt, and wickedly have done, none to do good takes care

understood, that would to God a suter be.

and none of them does any good, no not so much as one.

who eat my people up as bread, and on the Lord not call.

God in the congregation is of them that righteous be.

because the Lord his refuge is, by whom he still is saved.

that great salvation long looked for, which might their comfort breed.
When by the Lord from bondage brought, his people free are made:
then Jacob highly shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Psalm. XV.
Sing this as the 3. Psalm.
WHo in thy house, O Lord, to dwell, shall ever happy be?
and in thy holy mountain placed, who are to live with thee?

and in his heart does speak the truth, that he may none abuse.

nor yet against him does take up a scandalous report.

but they that truly fear the Lord, by him are highly prisde.
He, though his oath (when rashly made) has to his harm been found:
whom no advantage makes to change, when so solemnly bound.

nor yet against the innocent, will for a bribe contend.

what ever happen here below, shall in no sort be moved.
Psalm. XVI.
Sing this as the 14. Psalm.
SAve me, O God, I trust in thee, thou to the Lord did say


and to them that are excellent, who do delight my mind.

their drink-bloud-offerings I Will not use, their names my lips detest.

and of my cup; and all my lot maintained is by thee.

and that which is my heritage, for beauty does excel.

and even in the nights seasons too, my reins do me instruct.

because he is at my right hand, I shall be moved no more.

yea, and my flesh, though faint, shall too true rest in hope enjoy.

nor suffer wilt thy holy one corruption so to see.

all pleasures do at thy right hand perpetually abound.
Psalm. XVII.
Sing this as the 14. Psalm.
LOrd, hear the right, attend the cry of my most just complaint:
my prayer hear, which does not flow from lips which fraud does taint.

and let thine eyes behold all things that equal are indeed.

and visited my secret thoughts that I revolve by night.

and that my mouth may not transgress, it always is my mind.

from all the fierce destroyers paths, I by thy word kept me.

lest otherwise my wandering feet be brought to stagger still.

and unto me, I thee entreat, incline thy listening ear.

who trust in thee, by thy right hand, from rage of rising foes.
The second part.

and with the shadow of thy wings, from danger cover me.

and from my deadly enemies, that round about me press.

and proudly in a braving form, all what they think dare tell.

and to the ground bow down their eyes whilst puffed up in heart.

and as a Lions lurking whelpe, in secret parts does stay.

and by thy sword redeem my soul from wicked men below.

who place their whole felicity in pleasures of this life.
Whose belly with thy treasure hid, thou fil'st in every place:
they full of children, of their wealth the rest leave to their race.

and with thy likeness when awaked, I satisfied shall be.
Psalm. XVIII.
^ O Lord, that only art my strength, thee dearly love I will.

My God, my strength, in whom I trust, the buckler I embrace,
the horn of my salvation still, and my most high strong place.

so shall I from mine enemies be sure to be preserved.

the torrents of ungodly men, did me with fear confound.

and horrid death before the time prevented me with snares.

he from his Temple heard my voice, my cries did pierce his ears.

the hills foundations shaken were, because Gods wrath did burn.

and from his mouth, fire, did devour, coals kindled were thereby.

and darkness did in threatening clouds below his feet attend.

yea, on the wings of all the winds, his flight was raised high.
The second part.

dark waters were, and clouds most thick from skies in state stretched out.

thick clouds did pass with hailstones joined, and coals of fire in store.

his voice, fierce hailstones, and of fire coals burning all about.

he dreadfully shot lightnings out, and they confounded were.

because, O Lord, of thy rebuke, and of thy powerful breath.

and did me draw from many floods that threatened me to drown.

and (for they were more strong than I) from all that hated me.

but yet the Lord was still the stay, on whom I did rely.

he my delivery wrought, because he did delight in me.

and as my hands have still been pure, my recompense I see.
The third part.

and did not wickedly from God in any sort depart.

and that which he commanded has, I never put from me.

and have from mine iniquity, my self with care preserved.

and as my hands before his eyes appeared to be clean.

and thou will upright be with him that upright is with thee.

and thou with them that froward are, wilt likewise froward prove.

but wilt bring down the haughty looks that are raised up with pride.

thou Lord that art my God, wilt make my darkness shine most bright

and being strengthened by my God, have leaped over a wall.

and he to all that trust in him, a buckler does abide.
The fourth part.

or (save our God,) who is the rock where we may rest exspect?

and by the grace that he affords, does rectify my ways.

and on my places that are high, he makes me stand secure.

that by the vigor of mine arm, a bow of steel I break.

thy right hand held me up, and great thy gentleness made me.

so that my feet by thee secured, did not so much as slide.

nor did I back again return, till they were quite destroyed.

whom grovelling falling at my feet, as abject I despise.

and thou have laid them under me, that did against me go.

that so all they that me do hate, might be by me destroyed.
The fifth part.

even to the Lord they cryde aloud, but he no answer gave.

and I did cast them out despisde, as dirt upon the streets.

a people whom I have not known, shall servants be to me.

the strangers too to me themselves submit with reverence shall.

and them even where they secret live, a terror shall dismay.

exalted be the God that gives salvation unto me.

and does so many people bring, that I may them command.

do lift me up, and thou me from the violent did free.

and to thy name the praises due, shall ever be my song.

to this anointed evermore, to David and his seed.
Psalm. XIX.
Sing this as the 14. Psalm.
THe glory of Almighty God, the heavens do make us know:
the firmament his handy work to all the world does show.

and (though in darkness) knowledge clear even night to night does teach.

and yet their voice without these helps, is current every where.

a tabernacle, he in them has set up for the Sun.

rejoicing as a strong man does, with speed to run a race.

then goes his circuit to the West, and heat to all imparts.

his testimony is most sure, and makes the simple wise.

and his commandment most pure, to the eyes does light impart.

the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous every way.

then honey, or the honey comb, more sweet unto the mind.

and on observing of the same, great profit does depend.

these sins of mine that are concealed, in mercy, Lord, remit.

then from the great transgression free, I upright shall remain.

great God, that art my only strength, and have redeemed me.
Psalm. XX.
Sing this as the 14. Psalm.
STill may the Lord give ear to thee, when troubles would deiect:
and let the name of Jacobs God thee from all harm protect.

and from fair Sion his delight, still may thou strengthened be.

and let thy sacrifice when burnt, a good acceptance find.

until thy counsel (prospering well,) all crowned with success shine.

our banners boldly rear: the Lord all thy desires fulfill.

he hears him from his holy heaven, with strength of his right hand.

but we the name of our great God, will ever keep in mind.

but we again are risen up, and now do stand upright.

and let the King give ear to us in time when as we call.
Psalm XXI.
^ THe King, O Lord, in thy great strength shall much contentment take,
and him how greatly to rejoice, shall thy salvation make.

and what his lips requested had, was not kept back by thee.

thou of pure gold upon his head, a Crown do freely set.

even length of days for evermore, that he might always live.

thou have him graced with majesty, and honor at the height.

and by thy countenance have made him to be exceeding glad.

in safety through his mercy kept, he never shall be moved.

and thy right hand shall find out these that malice bear to thee.

the Lord in wrath shall swallow them, they shall be food for fire.

and from amongst the sons of men, thou shall destroy their seed.

a wicked plot they did devise, but cannot work their end.

upon thy strings, made ready all to fly against their face.

so then with cheerful voices sing, and praise thy power we will.
Psalm. XXII.
Sing this as the 11. Psalm.
MY God, my God, why have thou me forsaken, why art thou
so far from helping me, and from my words of roaring now?

and all the night when others rest, I cannot silent be.

inhabitest as due to thee, the praises that excel.

and them (when as they were distressed) thou did from danger free.

they only placed their trust in thee, and nothing them could grieve.

the object of men's obloquie, whom people do despise.

with lip turned out, do shake their heads, and in derision say:

let him deliver him, since he delights in him so much.

when I was on my mothers breasts, thou me to hope did make.

and since my mother brought me forth, thou art a God to me.
The second part.

since there is none to give me help, unless that thou appear.



my heart within my bowels faint, does melt like wax away.

unto my jaws: into the dust of death, thou brought me have.

of wicked men, have me enclosed they pierced my hands and feet.

so that amazed exceedingly, they staring me behold.

and for my Coat they do cast lots to whom it may befall.

O God, that only art my strength, make haste to give me aid.

and from the dogs devouring power, set thou my darling free.

for from the horns of unicornes, thou Lord have heard me pray.

and where thy Saints assembled are, thy praises will proclaim.

come honor him all Jacobs seed, and Isreal's, fear him still.
The third part.

nor hid his face from him, but heard when he to him did cry.

My vows before them who him fear, shall all be paid by me.

who seek sincerely to the Lord, your hearts shall ever live.

all sorts of nations unto thee, due honor shall impart.

and he is only governor, the nations all among.

shall how to him, and his own soul, none can from death defend.

even for a generation still, accounted be by all.

that shall be born, who clearly then that he did this shall know.
Psalm. XXIII.
Sing this as the 21. Psalm.
THe Lord of all, my Shepherd is, I shall from want be free:


into the paths of righteousness, even for his own names sake.

thou art with me, thy rod and staff afford me comfort still.

and do with oil annoint my head, and make my cup overflow.

and in the Lords own house, I will a dweller ever be.
Psalm. XXIV.
Sing this as the 21. Psalm.
THe earth belongs unto the Lord, and all that it contains:
the world that is inhabited, and all that there remains.

and also has established it, upon the floods to stay.

and who within his holy place, shall standing him attend?

to lift his soul to vanity, and has not falsely sworn.

and from the God that saves his soul, shall righteousness attain.

even of all them that truly seek, (O Jacobs God) thy sight.

doors everlasting, and come in the King of glory shall.

and mighty, even the Lord, whose might in battle is renowned.

doors everlasting, and come in the King of glory shall.

the hoasts of heaven and earth, their Lord, the King of glory is.
Psalm. XXV.
^ TO thee I lift my soul O Lord, I trust in thee.


but who without a cause transgress, let shame on them attend.


Thou only art that God, who me deliver must:
and all the day what ever comes, in thee I only trust.

and all thy loving kindnesses, for they were still of old.

according to thy mercy, Lord, and goodness, think on me.

he therefore sinners in the way, will teach, lest they should fall.

and to the meek, lest they go wrong, will bring his way in sight.

to those that keep his covenant, and not transgress his will.

although it be exceeding great, yet pardon thou my sin.

the knowledge how to choose his way, he shall to him impart.

his seed inherit shall the earth, and there in safety dwell.

to them, that so they may grow wise, his Covenant gives light.

for he my feet when they are snared, shall pluck out of the net.

for I am very desolate, and with distress brought low.

oh! bring me out from all those evils, with which my heart is charged.

the sins that I committed have, in mercy all forgive.

and with a cruel hatred, they do me extremely hate.

and let me never be ashamed, because I trust in thee.

because on thee I only wait, that I may comfort have.

thy Israel from trouble free, that he in peace may live.
Psalm. XXVI.
Sing this as the 14. Psalm.
IVdge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity:
I shall not slide, for on the Lord I ever did rely.

search out the secrets of my reins, and dive within my heart.

and in the way of thy pure truth, I still have walked right.

and with dissembling hypocrites, I will abhor to haunt.

and will not with the wicked sit in show, to seem their mate.

and so thine altar, I, O Lord, with comfort compass will.

and all thy works which wondrous are, with admiration show.

and of thy honor too, the place where it does use to dwell.

nor yet my life with cruel men, from blood that are not free.

and their right hand abundantly, still tempting bribes do snare.

redeem thou me, and of thy grace, be merciful to me.

the Lord whereas his Saints do meet, shall still by me be blessed.
Psalm. XXVII.
Sing this as the 21. Psalm.
THe Lord my light and safety is, how can I frighted be?
the Lord is of my life the strength, what fear can trouble me?

they straight did stumble, and fell down, a prey for me to take.

though raging war against me rise, in this secure I rest.

that in the Lords house all my days, I may a dwelling have.

and in his Temple earnestly, at all times to enquire.

in his Tents secret, me shall hide, and on a rock set me.

then in his Tabernacle, I will offerings make of joy.

hear, Lord, when with my voice I cry, in mercy answer me.

my heart, Lord, I will seek thy face, did answer straight to thee.

thou have me helped (my safeties God) do not from me retire.

the Lord that never fails to his, will kindly me up take.

a straight plain path: because of foes, that all my steps do trace.

against me risen are, and such as breath out cruelty.

the Lords great goodness in the land of them that living be.

and he will fortify thy heart, I say, wait on the Lord.
Psalm. XXVIII.
Sing this as the 21. Psalm.
O Lord my rock, to thee I cry, then be not silent so
to me, lest else I grow like them down to the pit that go.

whilst toward thy most sacred place, my hands up lifted be.

who to their neighbors speak in peace, their hearts whilst mischiefs fill.

and as their hands have been imployd, so let them reap their gains.

he shall them utterly destroy, and not build them again.

because the voice of my desires he graciously did hear.

my heard did firmly trust in him, and help from him I have.
My heart therefore it self with joy, exceedingly does raise:
and therefore him I with my song, continually will praise.

a strength to his anointed one, that saves him to the end.

give also food to them, and them for evermore advance.
Psalm. XXIX.
Sing this as the 33. Psalm.
GIve freely to the Lord, all ye that do excel in might:
give glory to the Lord, and strength, as due to him of right.

in beauty of true holiness, due honor to the Lord.

does thunder, and the Lord does too, on many waters rest.



even Lebanon and Schirton too, like Unicorns young brood.



and in his Temple every one, his glory does declare.


Psalm. XXX.
^ O Lord, thou have me lifted up, I therefore will praise thee:
and have not them that are my foes, made to rejoice over me.

and when my hopes exhausted were, I healed was by thee.

lest to the pit I should go down, thou me alive do save.

whilst thinking on his holiness, with a delighted heart.

though cloudy night with mourning set, the morning comfort brings.

and did with confidence affirm, I never shall be moved.

but when thou once did hide thy face, it straight did trouble me.

and I my supplication made unto the Lord on high.

shall senseless dust give praise to thee? shall it thy truth declare?

with tender pity look on me, and, Lord, my helper prove.

thou have put off my sackcloth, and with gladness girded me.

O Lord my God, I will give thanks for ever unto thee.
Pssal. XXXI.
Sing this as the 18. Psalm.
LOrd, let me never be ashamed, I put my trust in thee:
and in thy righteousness, with speed come and deliver me.

be thou my rock and house of strength, to save me when I need.

Lord, therefore lead, and guide me still, even for thy own names sake.

because thou art the only strength whereon I do rely.

O Lord, that art the God of truth, thou have redeemed me.

do lying vanities regard: but, Lord, in thee I trust.

and in adversity my soul by thee well known has been.

thou freely did enlarge my feet, at liberty to go.

mine eye consumed is with grief, my belly, soul, and all.

my sin extinguish does my strength, my very bones decay.

by mine acquaintance feared, they fled that looked on me without.

and I am like a vessel crushed, that left with scorn does lie.

whilst they consulting by all means, to take my life devised.

I ever confidently said, thou art a God to me.

and from all them that spend their power in persecuting me.

and for thy boundless mercies sake, save me as one of thine.

but let the wicked be ashamed, and silent in the grave.

and grievous things speak with contempt and p^ide, against the just.

and done for them who trust in thee, even herein mortals sight.

they in thy Tent from strife of tongues in secret shall abide.

has wondrous kindness shown to me, within a City strong.

yet thou my supplications voice did hear, and all my cries.

and them that proudly are disposed, abundantly rewards.

that comfort may your hearts, all ye whose hope is in the Lord.
Psalm. XXXII.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
THat man most blessed is, unto whom what he has done amiss
is pardoned freely, and whose sin in mercy covered is.

and whose pure sprite, still well disposed, there is no guile within.

whilst I through roaring all day long, a stranger was to rest.

my moisture turned to Summers drought, with parching heat is dry.

I said I will confess my faults, and thou did them forgive.

to thee; the floods of waters great, shall trouble him no way.

with songs that do deliverance sound, thou shall encompasse me.

and I will guide thee by mine eye, that thou may prosper so.

whose mouth, lest they come near to thee, a bridle must command.

but him that in the Lord does trust, his mercy compass shall.

and ye that upright are in heart, shout with a cheerful voice.
Psalm. XXXIII.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
O All ye righteous in the Lord, your selves with joy delight:
for praise is a most comely thing for them that are upright.

songs with a ten string'd instrument, and Psaltery afford.

and strive to play most skilfully, with a loud sounding noise.

and his great works which wondrous are, even all in truth are done.

the goodness likewise of the Lord, the earth over all does fill.

and by the breath came from his mouth, even all the hoasts are there.

and does engrosse the tumbling gulphs, as treasures in his store.

and all the worlds inhabitants, let them be filled with fear.

he as he pleased did command, and it stood stablish'd soon.

and makes the peoples fond designs, to no effect be brought.

and every thought that he conceives, from age to age does last.

the people in inheritance, whom he has chus'd for his.

and all the sons of mortal men, such as they are does spy.

exactly does observe them all, that on the earth remain.

and all their works as they deserve, by him considered are.

and by much strength, a mighty man can no delivery have.

nor shall he any one to save, by his great strength attain.

and upon them, who place their hope in his great mercy still.

and that he may keep them alive, when famine others kills.

he only is our help, he is the shield does us protect.

because we in his holy name, our confidence did place.

according as with confidence, our hope is still in thee.
Psalm. XXXIV.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
TO bless the Lord, I at all times my souls chief powers will strain:
his praise shall always in my mouth, continually remain.

the humble ones shall hear thereof, and shall great pleasure take.

and let us altogether joined, exalt his holy name.

and freely did deliver me, from all that I did fear.

their faces so made confident, no shame could them appall.

and straight from all his miseries, in mercy him relieved.

who him do fear; and when distressed, from danger leads them out.

blessed is the man that does on him with confidence rely.

for they that him do rightly fear, no kind of want shall find.

but they that seek the Lord, shall want nothing at all that is good.
The second part.

I will you teach to understand, how ye the Lord should fear.

and loves to have many days, that so he good may see?

and set a watch upon thy lips, that them no fraud may stain.

seek earnestly to purchase peace, yea, and pursue it still.

yea, and his ears when they complain, are open to their cry.

so their remembrance to cut off from the earth in every place.

and they out of their troubles all, by him delivered are.

and safety does afford to them, whose souls in anguish smart.

but yet at last out of them all, the Lord does set him free.

that not so much as one of them can broken be at all.

who hate the righteous, they shall be vast desolations prey.

and they shall not be desolate, in him their trust that have.
Psalm. XXXV.
^ PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that do contend with me:
and fight against them that to fight, against me bended be.

and when that I in danger am, to give me succor stand.

and say for comfort to my soul, thou shall be saved by me.

let them rurn'd back confounded be, who do my hurt contrive.

and let the Angel of the Lord chase all are so inclined.

and let the angel of the Lord afflict them from above.

which they without a cause have dig'd, therein my soul to catch.

let it him catch, and let him in that same destruction fall.

from him, and all my bones shall say, who (Lord, is like to thee?

yea, even the poor and indigent, from him that does him wrong.
The second part.

and laid those things unto my charge, which I did never know.

even to the spoiling of my soul, in place of a good turn.

my soul with fasting humbled was, my prayer to me returned.

I bowed down sad, as one that wailes his mother in the grave.

the abiects gathered, wounding me, and I the same not knew.

they breaking jests on my distress, did gnash their teeth for spite.

my soul relief; from Lions young, my only one defend.

and solemnly proclaim thy praise, where people most repair.

nor let them wink with scornful eyes, that without cause hate me.

deceitful things, against them that are quiet in the land.
The third part.

and scorning said, aha, aha, our eye has now it seen.

O thou that art my only Lord, be now not far from me.

O thou that art my God and Lord, come where I must contend.

and let me not when they rejoice, their scorned object be.

nor let them say with vaunting words, he swallowed is by us.

and cloth them with disgrace and shame, who do insult over me.

and say, the Lord be praised, who loves his servants good to see.

and of thy glorious praise to speak, shall be all day my care.
Psalm. XXXVI.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
OF wicked ones within my heart, the great transgression says:
there is no fear before his eyes, of God in all his ways.

til his abhorred iniquity, most hateful does appear.

he to be wise, and to do good, has quite left off all care.

he walks a way that is not good, and not abhors ill.

and Lord, thy faithfulness it self unto the clouds extends.

thy judgments are, both man and beast O Lord, thou safe do keep.

men's sons to put their trust beneath the shadow of thy wings.

and of thy pleasures streams to drink, they shall be made by thee.

and in thy light, the height of light we shall for ever see.

and unto them thy righteousness, that upright are in heart.

let not their hand who wicked are, have power me to remote.

they are cast down, and by no means shall able be to rise.
Psalm. XXXVII.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
FRet not thy self because of them that doers are of ill:
nor envy those that happy seem, whilst working mischief still.

like herbs arrayed with fading green, they wither shall away.

so thou inhabit shall the land, and be assured of food.

and he with all thy hearts desires, shall freely thee requite.

repose on him, and he will cause thy purpose take effect.

and make thy judgment like the Sun, when mounted at the height.

in all his way, or that his plots though wicked, never fail.

and no way fret thy self with thoughts that do provoke to ill.

but they that wait upon the Lord inherit shall the land:

mark but the place where he did haunt, it vanish shall away.
The second part.

and with abundance of true peace, shall be delighted all.

and he upon him frowardly does gnash his teeth for spite.

for he beholds the hastening day, that his confusion brings.

the poor and needy to cast down, them that are just to kill.

and all their bows shall broken be, not fit for service more.

than to the wicked multitude, the worlds abundance gives.

but to uphold the righteous still, the Lord will have a care.

and their inheritance secured, times power cannot overthrow.

and in the days of famine too, they satisfied shall be.

they like the fat of lambs shall melt, and vanish all in smoke.
The third part.

the righteous man does mercy show, and freely gives away.

and they that cursed are, by him shall wholly be destroyed.

yea, and in every way of his, he highly does delight.

because the Lord whom he adores, does with his hand him stay.

the just man left; nor that his seed for bread have beggars been



he will cut off the wicked seed, and still his own will save.

and in the same eternally, inhabitants remain.

yea, and his tongue of judgment too, is ever talking right.

by which directing all his ways, his steps shall never slide.
The fourth part.

and seeks continually the means that straight he kill him may.

nor yet will him condemn, when as he to be judged does stand.

to enjoy the land, when wicked men are razed, thou see it shall.

and spreading forth himself at large, like to a green Bay tree.

no monument was left behind, from records he was razed.

for of that man most certainly, the end is ever peace.

and of the wicked, still the end is to be rooted out.

and in the time of their distress, he still their strength does prove.

and them from danger shall secure, because in him they trust.
Psalm. XXXVIII.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
LEt me not in thy wrath, O Lord, rebuked be by thee:
and whilst thine indignation burns, refrain from chastning me.

and from above to press me down, I feel thy heavy hand.

and in my bones there is no rest, through horror of my sin.

and like a heavy burden now, too heavy are for me.

because of my great foolishness, they quite corrupted are.

that all the day long desolate, I ever mourning go.

so that in all my body now, there is no parcel sound:

that of my heart disquieted, the anguish makes me roar.

and how my soul dissolves in sighs, it is not hid from thee.

as for mine eyes, their wonted light is gone from me away.

my frighted kinsmen stand afar, no more with me entire.

who seek my hurt, of mischief speak, and fraud all day devise.
The second part.

and as a man that was quite dumb, from speaking did abstain.

and in whose mouth, as sealed up, there no reproves appear.

I do not doubt, O Lord my God, but thou will answer me.

they magnify themselves against me, when as my foot does slide.

and my great sorrow growing still, is ever me before.

and for the sin I did commit, I sorrowful will be.

and they that hate me wrongfully, in number do exceed.

of disposition opposite, because I goodness love.

make haste, O Lord, to give me help, who my salvation art.
Psalm. XXXIX.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
I Said I will look to my ways, lest that my tongue should stray;
before me whilst the wicked is, a bit my mouth shall sway.

till smothered sorrow swelled more high, by being thus restrained.

and having deeply mused a space, thus did my tongue begin.

that I may know how frail I am, and wretched many ways.

and all mine age (as but a dream) is nothing before thee.
And verily (lo) every man though seeming to be great,
is altogether vanity, even at his best estate.

and though not knowing for whose use, heaps riches up with pain.

my expectation does on thee continually depend.
The second part.

and make me not a prey to fools, that they may scoff at me.

because I knew that it did flow from thee whom I adore.

I by the blow of thy strong hand, consumed am away.

like to a moath, and every man is surely vanity.

and (as displeased) hold not thy peace, whilst floods of tears I spend.
For to my grief I now with thee a stranger am become:
yea, and as all my fathers were, a soiourner from home.

before I go away from hence, and so no more must be.
Psalm. XL.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
I Patiently expecting long, did on the Lord depend:
and bowing down unto my cry, he straight his ear did lend.

then set my feet upon a rock, and did direct my way.

it many shall behold, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.

and who does not respect the proud, nor them that follow lies.

and these things toward us, of which thou for our good have thought?
They cannot well in order all be reckoned up to thee:
if I should show, or speak of them, they cannot numbered be.

mine ears thou openedst, and for sin no offering did require.

and in the volume of thy book, it written is of me.

yea, and thy law to be observed, is still within my heart.

thou know, Lord, I did not refrain my lips from speaking right.

I thy salvation did to all, and faithfulness impart.

thy loving kindness and thy truth, to show have never spared.
The second part.

thy loving kindness and thy truth, for ever me to save.

have taken hold upon me so, I cannot raise mine eyes.

But, Lord, be pleased to set me free, Lord, to my help make haste.

and drive them backward with disgrace, that wish me to annoy.

that say to me, aha, aha, of purpose to deride.

let thy salvations lovers say, the Lord exalted be.

thou my deliverer art, and help, my God, no tarrying make.
Psalm. XLI.
^ He blessed is, that still the poor consider does with care:
for him the Lord will then preserve, when times most dangerous are.

blessed on the earth, thou from the will of foes wilt keep him free.

thou all his bed wilt make, to it when sickness does him tie.

and heal my wounded soul, for I have sinned against thee.

then talk they thus, when shall he dye? when perish shall his name?

his heart heaps sin up, which abroad he tells, whereas he haunts

against me they devise, all what they think can hurtful be.

and he is now so far pressed down, that he shall never rise.

who of my bread did eat, his heel has lift against me too.

and raise me up again, that I may them requite in the end.

because that my proud enemy does not triumph over me.

thou do me set before thy face, where I shall still remain.

from everlasting as has been, to everlasting still.
Psalm XLII.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
EVen as the Heart whilst hot, does pant, at water brooks to be,
so does my soul transported pant, that longs, O God, for thee.

when shall I come, that so my God I may appear before?

whilst they at all times say to me, where is this God of thine?

for with the multitude of late, I many times have gone.

and with a multitude that then did holy day enjoy.

hope thou in God, I Will yet him praise for his regard to me.
The second part.

from Jordan and from Hermons bounds, and from the little hill.

thy swelling billows and thy waves are passed over me all.

his song shall be all night with me, to my life's God I Will pray.

and why should I by foes oppressed, an abject mourner be?

and daily do upbraid me thus, where is this God of thine?

hope thou in God, I Will yet him praise, my God, and good to me.
Psalm. XLIII.
Sing this as the 21. Psalm.
IVdge me, O God, my cause against the ungodly nation plead,
from the deceitful and unjust, me still in safety lead.

and whilst insulting foes oppress, why mourn I still in vain?

let them show me thy holy hill, and Tabernacles right.

yea, and to praise thee, O my God, I will my Harp employ.

hope thou in God, him yet I Will praise, my God and good to me.
Psalm. XLIV.
^ O God, our ears have often heard, when by our fathers told,
thy wondrous works wrought in their days, and in the times of old.

and thou the people did afflict, and cast out of the land.

but thy right hand, thy arm the light, thy gracious countenance gave.
Because in mercy thou to them, thy favor did impart:


we through thy name will tread them down, that dare against us rise.

and well I know that mine own sword shall no way me defend.

and thou have put them all to shame, that hatred had to us.



and they that hate us (as their prey) our scattered spoils do take.

and have amongst the heathen us (as quite despised) dispersed.

and thou do not increase thy wealth, by what their price has brought

the object of contempt and scorn, to all are round about.
The second part.

and all the people shake their heads, when ever they us see.

and of my face the very shame does hide me from the light.

and for the self avenging foe, that of his power does vaunt.

and with thy covenant we are from dealing falsely free.

nor have our steps declined at all, abandoning thy way.

and with the shadow of pale death, have covered us a space.

or if our hands outstretched, ought from a strange God did crave:

by whom the deeps of every heart (all maskes removed) are seen?

as sheep for slaughter singled out, we are reputed still.

arise in mercy, do not us for evermore forsake.

and our affliction do forget, and our oppression thus?

yea, and unto the very earth, our belly cleaves now.

and for thy tender mercies sake, redeem thou us with speed.
Psalm. XLV.
Sing this as the 26. Psalm.
MY heart with matter richly stored, for subject has the King:
as does a ready writers pen, my tongue makes haste to sing.

into thy lips, God therefore thee has blessed for evermore.

with all thy glory that is great, and with thy majesty.

and thy right hand shall teach to thee, things terrible and great.

by means whereof, the people are brought under thee to fall.

the scepter that thy kingdom swayes, it is a scepter right.

anointed thee above thy mates, with oil of joy in store.

out of thy ivory rooms, by which they made thee to be glad.

the stately Queen in Ophir's gold was placed at thy right hand.

thy people, and thy fathers house, call never more to mind.
The second part.

for certainly he is thy Lord, and humbly him adore.

even of the people the most rich, shall seek for grace to thee.

her clothing all of gold most pure, is exquisitely rare.

the dainty Virgins of her train, shall blushing come to thee.

and in the palace of the King, all enter freely shall.

whom thou as Princes may prefer to govern in all lands.

the people therefore ever shall give praises unto thee.
Psalm. XLVI.
^ THe mighty God, our refuge is and strength on which we ground:
a help when trouble does afflict, still ready to be found.

nor though amidst the tumbling deeps, the mountains high should fall.

though even the mountains all to shake, the swelling thereof move.

the Tabernacles holy place, which the most high does love.

and even right early, when she needs, God always help her shall.

he utter did his thundering voice, the earth did melt away.

and Jacobs God our refuge is, who will his own maintain.

what desolations on the earth he has most justly brought.

he breaks the bow, he cuts the spear, and makes the Chariots burn.

among the heathen be, and in the earth exalted still.

and Jacobs God our refuge is, who will his own maintain.
Psalm. XLVII.
Sing this as the 45. Psalm.
O All ye people let your joys, applauding hands express,
and with the voice of triumph too, your shouts to God address.

a mighty King, over all the earth his Throne in state is reared.

and prostituted at our feet, shall lay the nations low.

of Jacob the excellency, whom he did dearly love.

the Lord most solemnly the sound of trumpet did attend.

sing praises unto our great King, sing praise with one accord.

his heavenly praise in holy hymns, with understanding sing.

and in his throne of holiness, does sit enstall'd with state.

the shields of the earth belong to God, exalted high is he.
Psalm. XLVIII.
Sing this as the 46. Psalm.
THe Lord is great, and greatly he is to be praised still,
both in the City of our God, and in his holy hill.

on whose north part the City stands, where the great King does dwell.

even for a refuge most secure, acknowledged by his own.

and by a league all strictly bound, together did go forth.

straight troubled were exceedingly, and took a speedy flight.



even in the City of our God, God will it still maintain.

amidst that Temples holy bounds, which sacred is to thee.

over all the earth: and thy right hand in righteousness abounds.

because of these thy judgments all, which they so clearly see.

and count exactly with your self, her stately swelling rounds.

that unto your posterity, it may by you be told.

and even till death dissolve us quite, he will be still our guide.
Psalm. XLIX.
Sing this as the 45. Psalm.
YE people all attentive be to this that I proclaim:
all ye the worlds inhabitants, give ear unto the same.

you that are rich, you that are poor, all here come take a place.

the very meditation shall, of understanding be.

a mystery upon my Harp, to utter I intend.

when of my heels th'iniquity shall compass me about.

and of their riches which abounds, do vainly love to vaunt:

nor can they unto God at all, for him a ransom pay.



the fool likewise, and brutish gone, their wealth to others leave.

unto all ages, and they call by their own names their land.

but like the beasts that judgment want, in silence slips away.

yet do their heirs approve their words, as Oracles of wit.
The second part.

and they that upright are, of them shall the dominion have.
In the bright morning time, and who did most of power presume,
borne from their dwelling, in the grave their beauty shall consume.

for when by all abandoned else, he then shall me receive.

and that his house with glory graced, in reputation mounts.

nor shall that pomp attend him more, at most than to the Tomb.

and men thee praise, as being wise, that seek'st contentment here.

but they shall never see the light, to be made happy so.

is but like to the very beasts that altogether dye.
Psalm. L.
^ THe mighty God has spoke, yea, even the Lord,
and called all the earth to hear his word,
from where the rising sun does first give light,
to where it going down gives place to night.

beauties perfection, God has shined clearly.

a fire shall waste before him, tempests roar

and the earth, that he may judge his people all.

with me who did by offering Covenant strictly.

for God himself is judge, my people hear.

against thee, I am God, even thy God still.

which I should still have seen, I Will not reprove thee.

nor yet out of thy folds the He Goats crave.

and cattle that on thousand hills repair.

the fields wild beasts are mine, that taste the fountains.

the world is mine, and what therein does dwell.

or yet of Goats, as thirsty, drink the blood?

unto the Lord most high, thy vows all paying.

thou shall me praise, whilst I deliver thee.

my statutes show, or take my Covenant now

and casts my words away to thy destruction?

and with adulterers, to take part wast bent.

most cunningly thy tongue deceit does frame:

thou slanderest the Son even of thy mother.

whilst I (as careless) did keep silence long,
And thou thereby did fondly think of me,
that I was altogether like to thee:
But I at last most sharply will reprove thee,
and order them before thine eyes to move thee.

lest I you suddenly in pieces tear.
Whilst there is none that can deliverer be:
who offers praise, does glory give to me.

I will to him of God show the salvation.
Another of the same.
THe mighty God, the Lord has said, the earth must all attend,
from whence the Sun at first does rise, till where it does descend.

that beauty can attain unto, our God has shined most bright.

a fire before him shall consume, great storms about him roar.

and to the earth below, that he may judge his people all.

those that have made by sacrifice, a Covenant with me.

for God himself does sit as judge, to punish or to spare.

against thee testify, I am thy God, even thy God still.

nor for burnt offerings, not discharged continually to me.
The second part.

nor will I daigne to take the Goats which all thy folds afford.

and all the cattle that do graze upon a thousand hills.

and all wild beasts abroad are mine, which stray along'st the fields.

since that the world, and her great wealth, does all belong to me.

or yet that I to quench my thirst, should drink of Goats the blood?

and pay thy vows to the most high, as thou thy self did bind.

for I thee then deliver will, and thou shall honor me.

why should thy mouth, so much profaned, my Covenant proclaim?
The third part.

and that my words as of no worth, rejected are by thee.

and with adulterers dissolute, have freely taken part.

thy treacherous tongue to frame deceit, is naturally inclined.

and even of thine own mothers son, do deeply wound the fame.

but I Will reprove thee, and them set in order before thee.

lest else, whilst none deliver can, I you in pieces tear.

who rightly does direct his way, shall Gods salvation see.
Psalm. LI.
^ HAve mercy (God) as I have found thy loving kindness many times,
as thy compassions do abound, raze from my remembrance all my crimes.



that so thou justified might be when speaking clear, when judging still.

yea, even my mother me in sin did at the very first conceive.

and in the hidden parts within, thou shall make wisdom known to me.

if thou will wash me, then I shall even then the snow be found more white.

that so the bones that were by thee in pieces broken, may rejoice.

and let all mine iniquities be wholly blotted out by thee.

and let a spirit within me be renu'd by grace no more to stray.

and thy most holy sprite and light, take never thou away from me.

and with thy spirit that is free, uphold thou me from falling more.

and those that now do walk astray, by mine example shall convert.

and how that thou art just and good, my tongue aloud shall always sing.



are broken sprits: a heart contrite, O God thou never wilt despise.

and of Jerusalem again, build thou the walls as first they stood.

burnt offerings whole for gratefulness, with Bullocks shall thine altars
charge.
Psalm. LII.
^ O Mighty man, why do thou boast of mischief, as secure?
the boundless goodness of God does continually endure.

and working like a razour sharp, does give a dangerous wound.

and more then righteousness to speak, thou lying do approve.

O thou vile tongue, that to deceive can still so subtle prove.

plucked from thy place, and rooted out where they who live do stay,

and with due reverence they shall fear, and laugh at him they shall.

in his great wealth, and made himself in his ill courses strong.

my trust still in Gods mercy is, and shall for ever be.

and on thy name will wait, for good before thy Saints it is.
Psalm. LIII.
Sing this as the 46. Psalm.
THe fool has said within his heart, there is no God; they are
corrupt, and wickedly have done, none to do good takes care:

if any understood, that would to God a suter be.

and none of them does any good, no not so much as one.

who eat my people up as bread? on God they did not call.


Himself against thee does encampe, that thee he may surprise,
thou have put them to shame, because that God did them despise.

that great salvation, long looked for, which might their comfort breed.

then ravished Israel shall be glad, and Jacob shall rejoice.
Psalm. LIVE.
Sing this as the 46. Psalm.
ALmighty God by thy great name, from danger me defend,
and by the greatness of thy strength, to judge my cause attend.

and to the words that flow from me, vouchsafe to lend thine ear.

oppressors seek: they them before have God at all not set.

the Lord is always joined with them, who do my soul sustain.

and in thy truth which never fails, let them be quite destroyed,

and I will praise thy holy name, for it is good, O Lord.

and on my foes mine eye has seen all that my heart did crave.
Psalm. LV.
Sing this as the 35. Psalm.
O God incline thine ear to me, whilst earnestly I pray,
and from my supplication now, turn not thy self away.

I sadly mourn in my complaint, and make a heavy noise.

they cast sin on me, and in wrath their hate to me express.

and all the terrors death can give, are fallen on me at once.

and melancholy horror now, has quite o'rewhelmed me.

for then I straight would fly away, and so would be at rest.

and lodged amidst a wilderness, from all the world retire.

that I might from the tempest escape, and from the stormy wind.
The second part.

for I have violence and strife within the City seen.

and in the midst of it remains much mischief, and much woe.

deceit and guile from out her streets, do not at all depart.

nor was I by my hater braved, from him I could me hide.

my self-thought friend, who did me lead by long acquaintance proved.

and that we to Gods house might go in company did meet.

for wickedness whereas they lodge, and them among does dwell.

and me the Lord shall save, that I shall have no harm at all.
The third part.

will cry, and fervently will pray, and he shall hear my voice.

from battle that against me was; for many were with me.

for since no change does toss their state, no fear of God them guides.

and he the covenant he made, has broken with disgrace.

which though they gentle seemed like oil, were sharp like threatening swords.

and shall not suffer that the just be moved in any sort.

to vaste destructions fearful pit, whence they cannot return.
The bloody and deceitful men, not half their days shall live,
but I, O Lord, to trust in thee, my self will wholly give.
Psalm. LVI.
Sing this as the Lamentation.
BE merciful, O God, to me, whom man would swallow quite,
he daily does against me fight, oppressing me with spite.

for many do against me fight, O thou that art most high.

then I retire me to my strength, and I will trust in thee.

and I will never fear at all, what flesh can do to me.

and they by bending all their thoughts, have aimed to do me ill.

they do observe each step of mine, when for my soul they wait.

O God cast thou the people down in thy consuming ire.

my tears into thy bottle put, are they not in thy book?

this most assuredly I know; for God is still for me.



my praise to thee, (a grateful gift) shall from affection flow.

from falls: that in their light who live, I walk may before thee.
Psalm. LVII.
Sing this as the 44. Psalm.
BE merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me,
for still my soul in all estates does firmly trust in thee:
Yea, to the shadow of thy wings, I always will retire,
of these my great calamities, until the time expire.

even unto God that does perform what needful is for me.

from heaven: yea, God his mercy shall and truth abroad extend.

even men whose teeth are spears and darts, and like sharp swords their tongue.

and let thy glory all the earth, be still above most bright.

they dig'd a pit for me, but in the midst of it did fall.

I will lift up my voice to praise, and I will sing with art.

I will my self awake, ere day enlighten can the sky.

I cheerfully will sing to thee, the nations all among.

thy spotless truth unto the clouds, for ever does ascend.

and let thy glory all the earth be still above most bright.
Psalm. LVIII.
Sing this as the 48. Psalm.
O Congregation, do ye now speak righteousness indeed?
O sons of men, do ye to judge all uprightly proceed?

and of your hands herein the earth, the violence you weigh.

they speaking lies, do go astray as soon as borne they be.

and they are like the Adder deaf, that stops up her ear.

though learned enchanters all their charms most wisely do contrive.

break thou, O Lord, the cruel teeth of Lions that are young.

when as he bends his bow to shoot, as cut in pieces fall.

like women's birth mistym'd, that they may never see the Sun.

both yet alive, and in his wrath as with a whirlewinde, all.

and in the blood of wicked men, his feet then wash shall he.

and verily he is a God does judge in the earth each where.
Psalm. LIX.
^ DEliver me, my God, from them that are mine enemies,
defend me by thy power from them that up against me rise.

and save me from the violence of them that bloody be.

against me, Lord, not for my sin, nor any fault of mine.

themselves prepare: awake in time to help me, and behold.

awake: and do not pardon them, who wickedly transgress.

as does a dog, and so they go about the City round.

and swords most sharp are in their lips, for who say they) does hear?



and with my wish upon my foes, God shall my mind content.

disperse, and bring them (Lord our shield) down from their wonted height.

let them be taken in their pride, because they curse and lie.

that God in Jacob rules, make them over all the earth to see.

as does a Dog: and let them go about the City round.

and if they be not satisfied, still fret within their mind.

for thou my refuge wast, and guard, when troubles did abound.

for God is my defense, a God of mercy unto me.
Psalm. LX.
Sing this as the 50. Psalm.
THou have cast off, and scattered us O God in thy disdain;
thou have most highly been displeased, O turn to us again.

the breaches heal thereof, for it does shake as like to fall.

and of astonishment, thou have made us the wine to drink.

that it, by reason of the truth, may boldly be displayed.

save me O Lord, by thy right hand, and hear me when I call.

I Succoths valley will mete out, and Sichem will divide.

the chief strength is, and Judah still my law giver is made.

but Palestina be thou glad, and that because of me.

and that I may to Edom go, who will me lead along?

and thou, O God, who with our hoasts did not go in time past.

for otherwise all help is vain that can from man proceed.

for he it is that in his wrath shall all our foes tread down.
Psalm. LXI.
^ O God, unto my earnest cry, thine ear in mercy lend,
and to the prayer that I make, with pity moov'd attend.

when grieved in heart: then lead me to a rock more high than I.

and a strong Tower, the which me from the enemy did free.

and in the covert of thy wings, my whole trust place I will.

thou have given me the heritage of those thy name that fear.

as many generations do, so shall his years last long.

thy truth and mercy, O prepare, that they may him preserve.

that daily I, the vows I made, may faithfully perform.
Psalm. LXII.
Sing this as the 61. Psalm.
MY soul still truly upon God with reverence does attend:
and my salvation comes from him, on whom I do depend.

he is for me a sure defense, I shall not much be moved.

you shall be slain like tottering forts, or like a bowing wall.

lies please them, with their mouth they bless, but they curse inwardly.

for, as for any hope at all, I save from him have none.

he is to me a sure defense, I no way shall be moved.

my refuge, and my rock of strength, in God is only found.

pour out your hearts: God is for us a refuge evermore.

in balance laid, they wholly are more light than vanity.

and if that riches do increase, set not on them your heart.

That all th'excellency of power belongs to God on high.

for thou according to his work, do render to each one.
Psalm. LXIII.
Sing this as the 44. Psalm.
O God, thou art my God, and shall be early sought by me;
my soul does thirst, my flesh does long in dry parched lands for thee.

as in thy Sanctuary erst thou have been seen by me.

my lips shall always be employed, to sound thy praises forth.

in thy most holy name I will lift up my hands with joy.

and then my mouth with joyful lips, shall give due praise to thee.

and meditate on thee, even in the watches of the night.

still in the shadow of thy wings, I will rejoice therefore.

for thy right hand (a pillar strong) upholdeth always me.

into the very lower parts of all the earth shall go.

and unto subtle foxes they shall be a portion all.

shall glory, and their mouths be stopped, that lying not forbear.
Psalm. LXIV.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
Hear thou, O God, while as I pray, the voice that goes from me,
and let my life from fear of foes, preserved be by thee.

and from their insurrections all, that work iniquity.

and like an arrow from a bow, discharge their bitter words.

they suddenly do shoot at him, and have no fear at all.

and commune how to hide their snares, they say, who shall them see?

the thoughts and hearts of them are deep, who mischief do intend.

and at an instant suddenly, they shall receive the wound.

and whosoever does them see, away fly quickly shall.

for wisely they consider shall of that which he has wrought.

and seeing this, they glory shall, who in their heart are just.
Psalm LXV.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
O God in Sion thy choice place, praise waiting is for thee;
and unto thee the vow that is made, shall well performed be.

all flesh that on the earth does live, shall unto thee repair.

and as for our transgressions all, thou shall purge them away.

that he within thy holy Courts, a dweller still may be.
We with the goodness of thy house well satisfied shall be,
even of that holy Temple still, which sacred is to thee.

we shall, O our salvations God, straight answered be by thee.
Who art the confidence of the earth, from end to end over all,
and of all them that are afar to roaring billows thrall.

whilst girded all about with power, as center of the same.

and of the people when they storm, the tumult does assuage.

the mornings and the evenings walks, thou to rejoice do make.

do make it rich, and corn for them thou still in store do keep.

of it, thou thereof (soft with showers) do make the springing blessed.

they drop upon the deserts grass, this chears each little hill.

they all do shout aloud for joy, and they do likewise sing.
Psalm. LXVI.
Sing this as the 68. Psalm.
ALl lands with loud and joyful noise, to God your voices raise:


by thy great power, thy foes to thee shall all be brought to bow.

with songs thy praise, they all shall sing unto thy holy name.

in doing to the Sons of men, most terrible is he.

went through the flood on foot, and we did there in him rejoice.

O, let not them exalt themselves that to rebel are bold.

and make the voice still of his praise aloud over all to sound.

and does not suffer that our feet should any way be moved.

as silver is most strictly tried, we have been tried by thee.

and thou afflictions heavy load, upon our loins did lay.

and water went, but thou us brought into a wealthy place.



Of Rams the incense, Bullocks, Goats, shall offered be by me.

and what he for my soul has done, I purpose to declare.

and with my tongue, he likewise was extolled continually.



who not from me as I deserved, his mercy did restrain.
Psalm. LXVII.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
LEt God be merciful to us, and us with blessings fill,
and make the brightness of his face to shine upon us still.

and that thy saving health may be amongst all nations shown.

O, let the nations glad for joy with songs their voices raise.

and all the nations on the earth shall governed be by thee.



even to the borders of the earth, shall reverence him with fear.
Psalm LXVIII.
^ LEt God arise, and let his foes be scattered every way;
let them likewise who him do hate, before him fly away.

so let the wicked at Gods sight, all perish in his ire.

yea, let the righteous all have joy, extended to the height.

who rides on the heavens by his great name, and him before rejoice.

God is in his most holy place, where he delights to lodge.

he brings them out whom chains do bind, gives rebels barren ground.

when thou did through the deserts march, where danger threatened most.

yea, at Gods presence, Isreal's God, even Sinay then did quake.
The second part.

thine own inheritance, when it was weary and infirm.

and of thy goodness thou, O God, did for the poor prepare.

of them who did the same divulge, the company was great.

and she who parted not from home, in end did part the spoils.

with silver wings, or feathers all of gold, so shall ye prove.



in which God loves to dwell, yea there the Lord dwell ever will.

as in Sinay his holy place, the Lord is them among.
The third part.

had gifts from men, for rebels too to dwell with them at last.

even he of our salvation still, who only is the God.

and unto God the Lord, from death the issues do belong.

yea, and his hairy scalpe, that on in his trespasses goes.

I will from deeps of raging Seas, my people bring again.

and of thy dogs the tongues likewise whilst licking it for food.

even where my God and King does go in the most holy place.

and them amongst the Damsels, that did on Timbrels play.
The fourth part.

yea, even from Isreal's fountain all, give praise unto the Lord.

the Princes too of Zabulon, and Naphtalim appear.

O God, what thou for us have wrought, let it still strengthened be.

Kings shall to thee rare presents bring in honor of the place.

till all with silver do submit; disperse them war that love.

and Ethiopia shall with haste to God stretch forth her hands.

O with a hearty gratefulness, sing praises to the Lord.

lo, he his voice, a mighty voice sends out on every side.

over Israel is, and his great strength is in the clouds most high.

and Isreal's God gives strength and power, let him still blessed be.
Psalm. LXIX.
^ DEliver me, O God, to whom for safety I repair,
sor now into my very soul the waters entered are.

I am into deep waters come, where floods do me overflow.

mine eyes exhausted now do fail, whilst I my God attend.

even then the hairs upon my head, far more in number are.
Who me (though wrongfully my foes) would ruin, mighty be,
then what I never took away, was straight restored by me.

and all the sins that I have done, are unto thee revealed.

nor them that seek thee, for my sake O God confounded be.

and made the object of reproach, shame covered has my face.
The second part.

and even my mothers children do an aliant make of me.

and their rebukes that thee reproached, did all upon me fall.

they scorned me as but a fool, who thus did weakness show.

and then they in derision straight, a Proverb made of me.

and I to every drunkard was the subject of his song.

in thy salvations truth, O God, and mercies great, hear me.
The third part.

deliver me from foes, and from the waters that are deep.

and to shut up her mouth on me, let not the pit have power.

according to the multitude that of thy mercies be.

for I extremely troubled am, with speed to me give ear.

because of them that are my foes, in time deliver me.

and who mine adversaries are, are all before thy face.
The fourth part.

I pity did expect in vain, and could no comfort find.

they gave me vinegar to drink, when drought enflamed my breast.

let it become a trap, which should have for their welfare been.

and make their loins for lack of strength, to tremble like a Reed.

and let the torrent of thy wrath them suddenly devour.

and in the Tents where they have lived, let none to dwell be seen.
The fifth part.

and they by talk increase their grief, who wounded were by thee.

and let them in thy righteousness come never thee before.

and where the righteous are enrol'd, let them not written be.

by thy salvation, O my God, let me be set on high.

and him to magnify with thanks, my souls chief powers will raise.

or any beast with horns or hoofs, whose blood does Altars stain.
The sixth part.

and all your hearts who seek for God, shall with contentment live.

and them that are his prisoners, he no way does despise.

the Seas, and every kind of thing that in the same does move.

that there inhabiting they may it in possession have.

and they therein shall safely dwell, who love his holy name.
Psalm. LXX.
Sing this as the 30. Psalm.
O Thou my God, make haste, that I may saved be,
and now, O Lord, as in times past, make haste in helping me.

let them turn back, confusions prey, all that my hurt do crave.

who with derision scornefully, aha, aha, do say.

let them that thy salvation love, say still, let God be praised.

thou my deliverer art, and aid, O Lord make no delay.
Psalm. LXXI.
Sing this as the 69. Psalm.
IN thee alone, O mighty Lord, I all my trust do place,
O grant that I may never be confounded with disgrace.

incline thine ear to hearken me, and save me I thee pray.

my safety thou commanded have, thou art my rock and fort.

and from the hands of the unjust, to cruelty inclined.

and from my youth, in whom to trust, I, Lord, save thee, had none.

did from my mothers bowels take, and I will still praise thee.

but thou art always unto me a refuge strong at need.

and let it still be filled with thy honor all the day.
The second part.

and when my strength begins to fail, do not abandon me.

and they that wait to take my soul, together do consult.

pursue and take him, for there is none that can him save from us.

O thou that only art my God, make haste to give me aid.

let them be covered with disgrace, that seek my hurt in ought.

and I even yet will more and more to thee due praises give.

even all the day, for I thereof the numbers do not know.

thy righteousness, even only thine I freely will record.
The third part.

and hitherto I have declared the wonders wrought by thee.

till to this age I show thy strength, thy power to all to come.

who have done many mighty things, and who is like to thee?

and from the deeps of earth below, shall me again restore.

and thou shall comfort too afford to me on every side.

I with the Harp to thee will sing, O Isreal's Holy one.

yea, and my soul which thou redeem'dst, they greatly shall rejoice.

for they confounded are, and shamed, that do my hurt intend.
Psalm LXXII.
^ O God, to guide him, let the King be with thy judgment stored,
and to the Kings beloved son, thy righteousness afford.



he shall the needies children save, in pieces tyrants tear.

the Sun and Moon by mutual turns, from age to age give light.

or like soft pearls of quickening show^s on earth that numerous fall.

and peace while as the Moon endures, shall them with plenty please.

and from the river every way of the earth unto the ends.

his enemies shall kiss the dust, and homage humbly vow.

from S^eba, and from Seba Kings, by gifts shall court his love.

and all the nations him to serve, shall their obedience show.
The second part.

the poor also, and him that has no helper else at all.

and o^ a^l them that needy are, he shall the souls preserve.

the blood of them before his eyes, shall precious be esteemed.

he shall be prayed for at all times, and daily shall be praised.

upon the very barren tops of mountains that are high:
Whose fruit shall shake like Lebanon, and who in Cities stay,
they like the grass upon the earth, shall flourish every way.

all nations shall him blessed call, man blessed in him shall be.

who only does true wonders work, which are renowned abroad.

the spacious earth in every part: so be, so be it still.
The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended.
Psalm. LXXIII.
Sing this as the 44. Psalm.
GOd truly unto Israel is ever good and kind,
even unto such as inwardly he clean in heart does find.

and little wanted but my steps did altogether fail.

when I perceived their prosperous course, who wickedly did live.

and their full strength abiding flame, does in no sort decay.

and with the rest of men below, no plague at all endure.

and violence to cover them, they as a garment wear.

the success does transcend their thoughts, what ever they design.

in what oppression does concern, they loftily do speak.

their tongues do walk through all the earth, with liberty at large.

and from a cup that is full, to them the waters are wrung out.
The second part.

and is there any knowledge left in him that is most high?

who in the world with wealth increased, live prosperously at ease.

and I in innocence too have washed my hands in vain.

and every morning some new cross has come to chasten me.

thy childrens generation much I thereby should offend.



and in destructions pit cast down their just reward to get.

they in a moment leave to be, and melt with fear away.

so thou awaking, no account shall of their image make.

and I was pricked within my reins, exceedingly displeased.
The third part.

that I was as a very beast, when coming before thee.

and thou by my right hand always, have firmly holden me.

and in thy glory afterward for ever me receive.

and on the earth, whom I desire besides thee, there is none.

God is the strength, and portion still, that shall not from me part.

and thou them wholly have destroyed, that whoring go from thee.

I trust in thee (Lord God) that I may all thy works declare.
Psalm. LXXIV.
Sing this as the 72. Psalm.
O Why our God, for evermore have thou rejected us?
why smoaks thy wrath against the sheep of thine own pasture thus?

which thou in mercy for thy self have purchased of old.
The rod of thine inheritance, which thou redeemed have,
even this mount Sion, where thou had thy dwelling in time past.

even in thy Sanctuary, all that the enemy has done.

and there for signs their ensigns fix, as in a conquered place.

whilst sharpest Axes lifted up, the thickest trees destroyed.

with Axes and with Hammers crushed, most rudely they overthrow.

and cast the dwelling of thy name down headlong to the ground.
The second part.

they all the Synagogues of God have burnt up in the land.

and there is not so much as one that can discern how long.

and shall our adversary still blaspheme thy sacred name?

out of thy bosom for our good, pluck out the same again.

even in the midst of all the earth, salvation working still.

and in the waters, Dragons heads were broken all by thee.

thou him for meat to people gav'st, that did in deserts dwell.

thou dry'dst the mighty rivers up, even to the very ground.
The third part.

thou with the comfortable Sun prepared have the light.

thou made the Summer smile with flowrs, the winter frown with storms.

and that the foolish people all, blasphemed have thy name.

the Congregation of the poor do not for ever leave.

the places dark for cruelty, with dwellings stored are.

but let the poor and needy ones still praise thy sacred name.

remember how the foolish man each day reproacheth thee.

that rise against thee, continually increases to do ill.
Psalm. LXXV.
Sing this as the 44. Psalm.
TO thee O God, we give due thanks, we give due thanks to thee,
for that thy wondrous works declare thy name most near to be.

then uprightly in every thing I will be judge over all.

are quite dissolved, but I thereof the pillars do sustain.

and to the wicked, lift not up the horn as often before.

and with stiff necks too stubbornely, from speaking more refrain.

it neither from the East nor West, nor from the South does come.

and he (when pleased) does press one down, and raise another high.

it full of mixture forth he poures, by indignation led.

but I will still declare, and praise to Jacobs God will sing.

but of the righteous ones, the horns shall all exalted be.
Psalm. LXXVI.
Sing this as the 66. Psalm.
IN Judah God is known, his name in Israel is great,


the Target, sword, and battle too, by him all broken were.

then are the mountains most renowned, and eminent for prey.

the men of strength amaz'dly dull, have now not found their hands.

both Horse and Chariots charmed by sleep, were of all sense deprived,

and when thine anger kindled is, who can abide thy sight?

the earth (as wondering) silent stood, and stupefied with fear.

of all the earth, those that were meek, that he might them preserve.

and the remainder of his wrath, thou quickly shall restrain.

to him that justly should be feared, to bring your gifts agree.

and to the Kings of all the earth, most terrible is he.
Psalm. LXXVII.
^ I Unto God whilst sorely grieved, my voice with cries did send;
yea, with my voice to God I cried, and he his ear did lend.

while it was night, and ceased not, my soul did comfort shun.

my sprite within me was overwhelmed, and grief made me complain.

and I so strangely troubled am, I have no power to speak.

and all the ages that are past, presented are to me.

I commune with my heart, my sprite searched carefully withal.

will he not favorable be, as he has been before?

and is the promise that he made, no more to be believed?

and have his tender mercies all to anger now given place?

of his right hand that is most high, with care remember will.
The second part.

I certainly remember will thy wonders wrought of old.

and I will freely talk of that which thou to pass have brought.

who is so great a God, as is the God whom we obey?

among the people many times thou have thy strength declared.

of Jacob, and of Joseph's Sons, who were by thee beloved.

they were afraid, and even the deepes all troubled came to be.

thine arrows too did go abroad, the skies sent out a sound.

by lightnings lightened was the world, and trembling earth did shake.

have in the waters great, and yet thy footsteps are not known.

by Moses, and by Aarons hand, who had of them the charge.
Psalm. LXXVIII.
^ GIve, O my people, straight your ear, unto my law divine,
and to the words flow from my mouth, your earnest ears incline.

and I dark sayings utter will, which times of old gave forth.

which by our fathers unto us have been exactly shown.

but will express Gods praise, and strength, and what great works he did.

which he our fathers willed to tell to their succeeding race.

even the unborne who should arise, and to their heirs them show.

but his Commandments to keep, their whole affections set.

that set not right their heart: who God not firmly did embrace.

did in the day of battle turn most basely back afraid.

and wickedly refused to walk according to his law.
The second part.

and all those wondrous works of his, which he to them had shown.

even in the field of Zoan erst, in Egypts fertile land.

and he the liquid waters made as in a heap to stand.

and all the night when it was dark, by fire did give them light.

and gave them thence, as from great deeps, abundantly to drink.

and waters poured in plenty down, did straight like rivers grow.

even by provoking the most high amidst the wilderness.

by seeking curiously for food, their appetite to please.

can God amid'st the wilderness a table furnish us?

can he give also bread, or flesh unto his people yield?
The third part.

against Jacob, and against Israel incensed was his ire.

nor did in his salvation trust, that them so often releev'd.

and o^ened had the doors of heaven, to pour forth plenty still.

and had a harvest from the heaven, of corn given them for meat.

he for their voyage furnished them abundantly with food.

and by his power he did constrain the Southern wind to serve.

and winged fowls as thick as sands, which seas do bed and bound.

the very Tents where they did lodge, it compassed round about.

for he to them, what they desired, afforded freely there.

but whilst the meat within their mouths did yet their pallats touch,

and made even Isreal's chosen men, give forth their dying groans.

for all the wonders that he wrought, could not make them believe.
The fourth part.

and did with trouble waste their years, that wandered from his ways.

and early after God inquired, while as his wrath thus burned.

and their redeemer the high God that only could them free.

and with their tongues perfidiously, they lies to him contrived.

not constant to his Covenant, they did the same forget.

yea, often his anger turned away, his wrath not all employed.

like to a wind that blows away and will not come again.

and whilst they in the desert were, grieved at their wickedness.

and Isreal's most holy one, to limit did attempt.

nor yet the day when freed from foes, he made them safe to stand.
The fifth part.

and wonders that in Zoans field, by him to paste were brought.

so that they wholly did abhor to drink of any flood.

and crawling swarms of loathsome frogs, which brought the^ to their end.

their labor to the Locust too, by which they hoped to live.

and their eye-pleasing Sicamores, were spoiled by the frost.

and to destroying thunderbolts, he made their flocks a prey.

by sending angels that were ill, amongst them at the last.

but over unto the Pestilence, their very life did give.

even of their strength the very chief, amidst the Tents of Ham.

and them amidst the wilderness, like to a flock did guide.
The sixth part.

but roaring Seas overwhelmed their foes, a mirror of his might.

even to the mountain most esteemed, which his right hand did gain.

and did by line divide the land, which Isreal's Tribes enjoyed.

and to his sacred Covenants, did not themselves apply.

like to a Bow that does deceive, and no true aim can hold.

and by their graven Images, him to be jealous made.

and Israel greatly did abhor, that him so often had proved.

the Tent which for himself he had established among men.

his glory to the hand of foes, a prey to prosp'ring pride.

and with his own inheritance, was most extremely grieved.
The seventh part.

their dainty Virgins vilified, were not for marriage sought.

their widows stupefied with grief, did not bemoane at all.

or like a strong man, who does shout by reason of his wine.

and upon them perpetually, he did impose disgrace.

and even of Ephraim, though thought strong, the Tribe he would not choose.

and Sions Mount that sacred place which he did dearly love.

like the earth, which he established has, for ever by his might.

from folds of flocks, where keeping sheep, he called him to a Crown.

that Israel his inheritance, and Jacob he might feed.

and he his hands that skillful were, to guide them did apply.
Psalm. LXXIX.
Sing this as the 77. Psalm.
NOw thine inheritance, O God, to heathens is betrayed,
thy house defiled, Jerusalem they all on heaps have laid.

and of thy Saints the precious flesh to beasts in every field.

and there was not so much as one that would give them a grave.

we are a Butte for bitter scorn, to all that are about.

and shall thy jealousy still burn like to a fire against us?

and on those Kingdoms, on thy name that have not daign'd to call.

but made the place where he did dwell, all desolate to be.

let mercies us with speed prevent, for we most low are brought.

deliver us for thy names sake, and purge our sins away.

whilst in our sight thou do revenge the bloodshed of thine own.

according to thy power, that are appointed for the grave.

that vile reproach, by which, O Lord they have reproached thee.

and to all generations too, shall show thy praise forth still.
Psalm. LXXX.
Sing this as the 68. Psalm.
Hear Isreal's Shepherd, like a flock that leadest Joseph out,
thou that 'twixt Cherubins do dwell, in brightness shine about.

stir up thy strength, and quickly come and save us by thy might.

cause thou thy face to shine on us, and so we saved shall be.

against thy peoples prayer, thus in indignation smoke?

and unto them that they may drink, thou store of tears do give.

our enemies amongst themselves do laugh at us of late.

cause thou thy face to shine on us, and so we saved shall be.

and thou did plant it, casting out the heathen from their grounds.

and made it take so deep a root, the land was filled with it.

and all the boughs thereof for state, like goodly Cedars were.

and to the river, it to grace, she did her branches send.

so that each passenger makes bold to pluck some part away.
The second part.

and savage beasts that range the fields, it boldly do devour.

look down from heaven, and so behold and visit this thy Vine.

and even the branch which for thy self thou did make strong to stand.

when by thy countenance once rebuked, they straight do perish quite.

the son of man who was made strong, even for thy self by thee.

and we upon thy holy name, continually will call.

cause thou thy face to shine on us, and so we saved shall be.
Psalm LXXXI.
^ SIng forth aloud unto the God from whom our strength we take,
and unto Jacobs mighty God, a noise most joyful make.

and with the Harp that pleasant is, accord the Psaltery.

even in the time appointed, on our solemn festuall day.

and is of Jacobs God a law, the which he did command.

whereas the language that I heard, I could not understand.

and from the pots and servile works, I did his hands enlarge.

even in my Thunders secret place, and Meribah thee proved.

O Israel, if now thou will thine ears to me apply.

nor shall a strange God any way be worshipped by thee.

make wide thy mouth, and it by me with plenty shall be fed.
The second part.

and Israel perverted still, would not repose on me.

and they in their own Counsels then, all walked as they pleased.

and that all Israel in my ways had walked sincerely still!

and I against their adversar's had turned my heavy hand.

but then their time should surely have endured for evermore.

and I should thee have satisfied with honey of the rock.
Psalm. LXXXII.
Sing this as the 77. Psalm.
GOd in the Congregation stands of them we mighty call,
and sentence gives amongst the Gods, as sovereign Judge of all.

the persons partially accept of them that wicked are?

do justice to the needy ones, and them that are distressed.

and rid them all out of the hand of them that wicked be.

all the foundations of the earth, quite out of course are gone.

and even of him that is most high, you all the children be.

and like to other Princes past, you low in dust shall lie.

for thou the Nations every where inherit shall as thine.
Psalm. LXXXIII.
Sing this as the 77. Psalm.
KEep not thy silence thus, O thou the God whom we adore,
hold not thy peace, O thou our God, and be thou still no more.

and they that haters are of thee, have lifted up the head.

and have even thy most hidden ones consulted to destroy.

that Isreal's name from records razed, may be abolished quite.

and even against thee made a league, by Covenant combined.

the Moabites and Hagars brood, for doing mischief bent.



and like to Iabins scattered troops, that Kishons streams did stayn.

their Carcasses became like dung, for fatning of the ground.

like Zeba, and like Zalmunna make all their Princes fall.
The second part.

let us possess Gods houses all, as due to us of right.





yea, let them all be put to shame, and wholly ruined be.

art the most high, the like of whom over all the earth is none.
Psalm. LXXXIV.
Sing this as the 67. Psalm.
O How the Tabernacles are, that unto thee belong,
most amiable, thou that art the Lord of hoasts most strong!

my heart and flesh cry out aloud, the living God to see.

the Swallow also for her self, has purchased a nest;
Even at thine Altars, where she safe her young ones forth may bring,
O thou Almighty Lord of hoasts, that art my God and King.

with grateful hearts continually they will be praising thee.

and in the secret of whose heart, the ways of them are traced.

yea, all the Pooles are likewise filled abundantly with rain.

before our God at last appears in Sion at his Throne.

thou that of Jacob art the God, incline to me thine ear.

of him whom thou anointed have, look now upon the face.

gives more content, than thousands do, spent any other way.
I rather in the house of God, to keep the door would live,
then have in Tents of wicked men, what greatest States can give.

he will from them no good thing hold, who righteousness embrace.

who fearing nothing can befall, does ever trust in thee.
Psalm. LXXXV.
Sing this as the 69. Psalm.
THou, Lord, in favor of thy land, have many wonders wrought,
and Jacob from captivity, thou back again have brought.

and all the sin they did commit, has covered been by thee.

thou from the fierceness of thine ire, thy self again have turned.

and cause thine anger toward us, at last an end to have.

and will thou still from race to race, thine anger thus extend?

that so thy people may in thee for ever joyful live.

and thy salvation freely grant to us that are thine own.

and Saints speak peace, but let them not again to folly fall.

who fear him right, that glory may dwell ever in our land.

and righteousness embracing peace, each one has kissed the other.

and righteousness shall from the heaven look down on every thing.

and righteousness shall usher him, and set us in his way.
Psalm. LXXXVI.
Sing this as the 81. Psalm.
BOw down thine ear, Lord, hear my suit, that thou may grant the same,
for now (reduced to great distress) I poor and needy am.

and since he puts his trust in thee, save him who thee does serve.



and art in mercy plentiful, to them that on thee call.

and to the voice of my requests, vouchsafe a ready ear.

I earnestly will call on thee, for thou will answer still.

nor is there any work, O Lord, that like thy works can be.

shall come, and worship thee before, and glorify thy name.

as are most wondrous to the world, yea, thou art God alone.

unite my heart, that it thy name may fear with reverence still.

and with due honor evermore, will glorify thy name.

my soul has from the lowest hell, delivered been by thee.

in troops, and sought my soul, and thee have not before them set.

in mercy thou, and in pure truth, (long suffering) do abound.

thy strength unto thy servant give, thy handmaids son now save.

and be ashamed, because thou, Lord, did help and comfort me.
Psalm LXXXVII.
Sing this as the 81. Psalm.
THe Lord amongst the holy hills, his firm foundation grounds,



O thou Philistia, and thou Tire, behold this thing aright,
with scorched Ethiopia's bounds, there, first this man saw light.

in her was borne: and the most high himself shall fix her fast.

he, that even this man there was borne, shall certainly record.

the springs wherein I pleasure take, are only all in thee.
Psalm. LXXXVIII.
^ LOrd, that of my salvation art the God to whom I pray,
I have cried out most earnestly, before thee night and day.

and let the heavy moan I make, be listened to by thee.

and my spent life approaches near the borders of the grave.

and I am like a man that has no kind of strength at all.

whom thou no more do call to mind, thy hand does quite the^ leave.

where all in darkness is entombed, even in the very deeps.

and thou with all thy raging waves have drowned me in distress.

to be abhorred: I am shut up, now to come forth not free.

I daily called, and with stretched hands, my self to thee did turn.

shall they again arise from death, to sound thy praise revived?

or yet thy faithfulness, whereas destruction none has spared?

or yet amidst oblivions land, that righteousness of thine?

each morning by my prayer still, thou shall prevented be.

and thy most comfortable face, why do thou hide from me?

extremely I distracted am, whilst me thy terrors wound.

thy terrors which astonish me, have cut me quite away.

and they (whilst all together joined) did compass me about.

and those who my familiars were, I now no more can see.
Psalm. LXXXIX.
Sing this as the 67. Psalm.
I Will the mercies of the Lord for ever sing, and will
to generations all make known, how thou art faithful still.

thy faithfulness thou in the heavens shall firmly make endure.

I have to David sworn, whom I did for my servant take.

and I will build a throne for thee, from race to race to stand.

thy faithfulness likewise, whereas thy Saints assembled be.

who can be likened to the Lord, of them that mighty are?

and to be reverenced of all them that near about him are.

or to that faithfulness, each where that does about thee shine.
The second part.

and when her waves to roar arise, thou make them calm again.

thine enemies by thy strong arm, dispersed all remain.

it and the fullness of the same, by thee both founded were.

the stately Tabor, Hermon fair, shall in thy name be glad.

thy hand exceedingly is strong, and high is thy right hand.

and with kind mercy, spotless truth shall go before thy face.

they of thy countenance, O Lord, shall walk into the light.

and in that righteousness of thine, shall all exalted be.
The third part.

and means to raise our horn on high, thy favor shall impart.

the holy one of Israel, he does above us reign.

I did one from the people raise, help on one mighty lay.

I have anointed him for King, of my beloved soil.

mine arm shall likewise strengthen him, that he may strongly stand.

nor shall the son of wickedness him harm by any act.

and them by whom he hated is, I with strange plagues will wound.

and in my name his horn of power shall still exalted be.
The fourth part.

and on the rivers his right hand, shall as he likes dispose.

my God, and my salvations rock, on whom I do rely.

more high than all the Kings on earth, that ever scepter swaid.

my Covenant shall still with him be faithfully observed.

and like the days of lasting heaven, his throne to stand secure.



and with a multitude of stripes, their great iniquity.

nor will I falsify my truth, though punishing his crime.
The fifth part.

nor will I alter any thing, that mine own lips did speak.

that unto David, whom I chusde, I in no sort will lie.

his throne still glorious in my sight (as does the Sun) shall shine.

and as a faithful witness still inhabiting the heaven.

thou have been wroth with him whom thou annoyntedst in time past.

thou have profaned his sacred Crown, it casting to the ground.

and in their ruins have entombed his fortresses of late.

he to his neighbor is become the object of reproach.
The sixth part.

and unto all his enemies, thou have given cause of joy.

and when he in the battle was, thou did not make him stand.

and to the very ground, his throne is now cast down by thee.

and him that once so glorious was, have covered with disgrace.

and shall thine indignation thus like to a fire still burn?

and wherefore is it thus that thou have made all men in vain?

and from the graves destroying hand, shall he his soul set free?

did to thy servant David swear, in thine untainted truth?

how all the mighty peoples scorn, I in my bosom bear.


Psalm. XC.
Sing this as the 78. Psalm.
THou mercifully have, O Lord, been unto us a place
in which we did securely dwell, even still from race to race.

the earth, and world, thou art our God, from everlasting still.

and say thus, O ye that are the sons of men, return.

as yesterday, and as a watch that passes in the night.

they in the morning are like grass, which growing up we see.

but in the evening is cut down, and quickly withers.

and by thine indignations height, extremely are annoyd,

and of thy countenance all our sins, (though secret) in the light.

and like a tale, scarce marked, when told, we soon away do wast.

if constitutions vigorous prove, in ten years more it ends.

for it is soon cut off, and we do fly away again.

and even so is thy heavy wrath, according to thy fear.

that we our hearts, while as we live, to wisdom may apply.

concerning those thy servants are, let it thee now repent.

that we may joyful be, and glad, for all the days we live.

and pay with pleasure all these years, in which we ill have seen.

and even unto their Children, Lord, thy glory at the height.

establish on us our hands work, let it be fixed by thee.
Psalm XCI.
Sing this as the 99. Psalm.
HE that does in the secret place of the most high reside,
in the Almighties shadow still, securely shall abide.

my only fortress, and my God, and in him trust I will.

and from the noisome Pestilence, that does infect the air.

beneath his wings: a shield and targe, his truth shall be to thee.

nor of the arrow that does fly, while as the day gives light.

nor for destruction that does waste, even at the height of day.

and thousands ten at thy right hand, yet thou art sure to escape.

and so shall see the wicked ones, how they receive their due.

yea, even the Lord that is most high, to be thy dwelling place.

and from the Plague that ruin brings, thy dwelling shall be free.

and that where ever thou do walk, they all thy ways attend.

lest thou should dash at unawares, thy foot against a stone.

the Lion young, and Dragon thou shall trample under feet.

because that he has known my name, I will exalt him still.

in trouble, and will honor him, and I will set him free.

and my salvation unto him, I freely will impart.
Psalm. XCII.
Sing this as the 88. Psalm.
Unto the Lord to render thanks, it is a comely thing,
and to thy name, O thou most high, the praises due to sing.

and to proclaim thy faithfulness, even in the clouds of night.

on the melodious Harp likewise, all sounding solemnly.

I triumph will in the great works, that by thy hands were wrought.

and all thy thoughts are every way exceedingly profound.

the fool (as wholly void of wit,) can no way this conceive.

when all that work iniquity, are fairly flourishing;
It is that they shall be destroyed for ever utterly:


shall perish: they shall scattered be, who work iniquities.

I shall with oil that is most fresh, anointed be by thee.

mine ears shall hear what I desired, on them that me pursue.

he shall like to the Cedar grow, that Lebanon arrayes.

shall in the Courts of our great God, for ever flourish fair.

and with abundance shall be fat, and ever flourishing.

and he from all unrighteousness, is altogether free.
Psalm. XCIII.
Sing this as the 77. Psalm.
THe Lord does reign, with Majesty he clothed is throughout,
he clothed is with strength, with which he girds himself about.
The world likewise well stablish'd is, and firm in every part:


have lifted up, the floods lift up their waves that make a noise.

and the large Sea with all her waves, the Lord on high excels.

and holiness for ever, Lord, becomes thy house most pure.
Psalm. XCIV.
Sing this as the 78. Psalm.
O Mighty God, to whom as due, all vengeance still belongs;
O mighty God, who vengeance ow'st, be seen in venging wrongs.

and unto all them that are proud, a due reward impart.

how long shall they who wicked are, be seen to triumph still?

and all that work iniquity, to boast themselves be bold?

and to afflict thine heritage, it is their chief delight.

of Orphans whom they should defend, the guiltless blood they spill.

and this by Jacobs mighty God, shall not regarded be.

and when will ye be wise, that are the foolish of the land?

and he that formed has the eye, shall he himself not see?

who teaches knowledge unto man, what can he not detect?
The second part.

how that even every one of them is but mere vanity.

and whom thou, Lord, do teach to live according to thy law.

till for the wicked, pits be dig'd, to punish all their crimes.

nor will he his inheritance, quite to forsake be moved.

and all shall follow after it, whose hearts no fraud does stain.

against them that work iniquity, who stand up for me will?

my soul almost in silence had a dweller come to be.

thy mercies Lord, did hold me up, and made me firm abide.

thy consolations then most sweet, with pleasure ravish me.

which mischief cunningly contrived, does by a law decree?

and wickedly condemn the blood that is most innocent.

and of my refuge, my great God, the rock shall ever be.

and in their sins shall cut them off, our God shall them destroy.
Psalm. XCV.
^ O Come, let us unto the Lord, sing with a cheerful voice,
let us to our salvations rock, all make a joyful noise.

and unto him with holy Psalms, to make a joyful sound.

and is a King exceeding great, all other Gods above.

and all the strength of swelling hills, he likewise does command.

yea, and the dry land from his hands, a form at first did take.

and on our knees before the Lord our maker let us fall.

and of his hand the sheep: to day if you his voice will hear;

and in temptations hateful day, in deserts did offend.

they proved me then, and what I wrought, did evidently see.

it is a people erres in heart, and have not known my way.

that they should never suffered be to enter in my rest.
Psalm. XCVI.
Sing this as the 77. Psalm.
O Come and sing unto the Lord, a song not heard before:
sing all the earth unto the Lord, whom only we adore.

and his salvation constantly, from day to day proclaim.

and his great works that wondrous are, let all the people know.

and to be feared above all Gods, whom any nation serves.

O but, the Lord whom we adore, the glorious heavens did make.

and strength with beauty always matched, are in his holy place.

give absolutely to the Lord, all strength and glories height.

an offering bring, and to his Courts, resort his Saints among.
The second part.

and let the earth with reverent fear, all tremble at his sight.

not to be moved, and righteously the people judge shall he.

the sea, and fullness of the same, let all to roar be made.

then all the trees into the wood, shall to rejoice be found.

judge all the world with righteousness, with truth his people all.
Psalm XCVII.
Sing this as the 95. Psalm.
THe Lord does reign, then to rejoice, let all the earth be made,
and let the multitude of Isles, all for the same be glad.

with righteousness, the dwelling place of that dread throne of his.

which makes his foes fall round about, to raging flames a prey.

the spacious world, the earth did see, and trembled all for fear.

even at the presence of the Lord, who all the earth does owe.

and all the people clearly see his glory every where.

that boast themselves of Idols vain; ye Gods him worship all.

to Iudaes daughters all, because, of thy great judgments, Lord.

and thou above all other Gods, art raised exceedingly.

and them delivers from the hand of him that wicked is.

and ioyfulnesse unto all them that are in heart upright.

and of his holiness with thanks, the memory record.
Psalm. XCVIII.
SIng to the Lord, a song new made, he wondrous things has done:
his right hand, and his holy arm, the victory has won.

his righteousness in heathens sights, he openly has shown.

all the earth, our Gods salvation, did most clearly see each where.

yea, make a noise most loud, sing praise, and heartily rejoice.

and of a Psalm the pleasant voice, unto the Harp accord.

make ye before the Lord the King, a noise expressing joy.

the world that is inhabited, with all the guests it feeds.

and let the mountains mount aloft, as swelling all with joy.

to judge the world with righteousness, and all with equity.
Psalm. XCIX.
Sing this as the 95. Psalm.
THe Lord does reign, therefore for fear, let all the people quake,
he 'twixt the Cherubims does sit, then let the earth all shake.

and he above all people is most eminently high.

because that it most holy is, let them it praise aright.

thou truth and judgment execut'st, in Jacob constantly.

with humble reverence worship ye, for he most holy is.

upon his name, mild Samuel was, they called, he answered all.

his testimonies, and to them the Ord'nance that he gave.

though their inventions did not escape from thee, due punishment.

with reverence worship, for, the Lord our God is holy still.
Psalm. C.
^ MAke all ye lands a joyful noise, to him that is the Lord of might,


we are his people, and the sheep that he as his own flock did take.

be always thankful unto him, and ever bless his holy name.

and unto generations all, his truth does constantly persever.
Psalm. CI.
Sing this as the 81. Psalm.
I Mercy will, and judgment sing, to thee, Lord, sing I will,
and wisely in a perfect way, my self will carry still.

I with a perfect heart will walk, within my house at home.

I hate their work that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.

a person given to wickedness, I will not know at all.

a haughty look, a heart that is proud, I no way suffer will.

who walks in a perfect way, he shall my servant be.

he shall not tarry in my sight, who lies does love to tell.

that from the City of the Lord, ill doers razed may be.
Psalm. CII.
Sing this as the 67. Psalm.
O Lord, the fervent prayer hear, that is poured forth by me,
the cry that earnestly I make, let it come up to thee.

incline thine ear, and answer me with speed when as I call.

and like a parched hearth, my bones are all burnt up in me.

so that I do forget to eat the bread should me sustain.

my bones so cleave unto my skin, that it amazement breeds.

and like the solitary Owl, in deserts loathing light.

does rest upon the houses top, approached to by none.

and they that are against me mad, all sworn against me are.

and of my drink, I with my tears a mixture often have made.

for it was thou did lift me up, and thou me down did cast.

and I am withered quite away, like to the very grass.

for ever (duly reverenced) last to generations all.
The second part.

the time to favor her is come, the time that thou had set,

yea, they (the very dust thereof) do favor for her sake.

yea, and thy glory all the kings that rule on earth do bear.

then in his glory shining bright, he shall with state appear.

and he the prayer that they make, will in no sort despise.

the people not created yet, even they shall praise the Lord.

and from the heaven that is above, the Lord the earth did spy

and that he may deliver them that are designed for death.

and likewise his most glorious praise, amid'st Jerusalem.



throughout all generations still, thy years for ever stay.

the glorious heavens, of thine own hands, the work most wondrous be.

thou as a vesture shall them change, they shall be changed all.


Psalm. CIII.
^ O Let the Lord by thee my soul, for ever blessed be;
and bless his name that holy is, even all that is in me.

that all his benefits by thee should ever be forgot.

and unto thy diseases all, a remedy applies.

who does with loving kindness thee, and tender mercies crown.

so that (even as the Eagles is) renewed is thy youth.

does execute, that he may ease them that oppressed are.

and unto Isreal's children too, his glorious deeds were shown.

to anger he is very slow, in mercy does abound.

nor will he angry with his own for evermore abide.

as our iniquities deserved, he did not us reward.

so toward them that him do fear, his mercy great does prove.

our great transgressions all from us, by him removed are.
The second part.

even so the Lord does pity them that him do truly fear.

and how that we are all but dust, he does remember well.

even as a flower amid'st the field, he flourishes a space.

and of the same where it did grow, no sign remains at all.

and to their childrens children still, his righteousness extends.

remember his Commandments, that they may them perform.

his kingdom is most absolute, and rules over all alone.

and his Commandments perform, by harkening to his word.

and ye celestial ministers, that execute his will.

in his dominion every where, my soul bless thou the Lord.
Psalm. CIV.
Sing this as the 67. Psalm.
MY soul, O bless the Lord, thou Lord my God, art very great:
with honors height and Majesty, thou clothed art in state.

who like a curtain do stretch out the heavens that are so bright.

who does the clouds his Chariot make, who winged with winds makes way,

his Ministers whom he imployes, a fiercely flaming fire.

that it should never be at all removed any way.

the waters lifted up aloft, above the mountains froth'd.

and at thy thunders roaring voice, they parted hastily.

go down again into the place, which thou for them did found.

lest they to drown all lands again, a deluge new should breed.

which gathering strength amongst the hills, do strongly run their race:
The second part.

the Asses wild do quench their thirst in the most desert part.

which on green branches singing loud, for melody excel.

and of thy works the pleasant fruit, the earth with plenty fills.

and herb for man: that he may make the earth food in plenty yield.

and oil that makes his face to shine, and bread that strength imparts.

the Cedars high of Lebanon, which he himself did plant.

and lodged aloft on stately Firres, the storke securely rests.

and underneath the rocks retired, the little Coneys play.

the time when as he should go down, the Sun does likewise know.

that beasts from woods by silent fields, emboldened are to stray.

all unto God who did them make, have their recourse for food.

they straight retiring to their dens, do make the day their night.

and plyes his guiltless husbandry, till night does call him in.

thou made them all, the earth each where is of thy riches full.
The third part.

what great, what small, even numberless, are dwellers in the deep

there Leviathan is, whom thou have made therein to play.

that in due time thou may to them give meat that they may live.

thou liberally spread'st forth thy hand, and good things them do fill.

thou take away their breath, they dye, and to their dust straight fall.

thou of the earth the furrowed face, with beauty do renew.

the Lord shall in the works rejoice, which he himself did make.

and if he but the mountains touch, then all of them do smoke.

and I, whilst I my being have, will to my God sing praise.

and in the Lord that mighty is, I ever glad will be.

let them quite cease, bless thou the Lord my soul, praise ye him still.
Psalm. CV.
Sing this as the 59. Psalm.
O Give due thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name,
among'st the people all his deeds to make them known proclaim.

of all his works that wondrous are, to talk, your tongues employ.

and let the heart of them rejoice, that seek unto the Lord.

and seek as your chief happiness, continually his face.

his wonders, and the judgments all, which from his mouth proceed.

and you that Jacobs children are, of whom he did make choice.

his judgments, more then eminent, through all the earth are seen.

and to a thousand of descents, the word he did command.
The second part.

and unto Isaac afterward, his oath that was made good.

to Israel for a Covenant, that never end should have.

the lot which afterward by you inherited shall be.

yea, but a very few, and these but strangers in it then.

and from one kingdom parting straight, another people proved:

yea, for their sakes he did reprove the Kings that were most strong.

and let my Prophets by your means no kind of harm receive.

yea, he the staff of strengthening bread, did wholly break over all.
The third part.

who unto bondage was betrayed, even Joseph for their guide.



he that the peoples ruler was, did send to set him free.

to him of all that he possessed, he did the charge commit.

and even unto his Senators, that wisdom teach he might.

and Jacob was a soiourner into the land of Ham.

that even then these that were their foes, they did become more strong.

and even most subtly to use his servants whom he loved.
The fourth part.

and Aaron whom he chosen had, with him together went.

and in the land of cursed Ham, his wonders made them know.

and they against his sacred word, rebelled in no degree.

the fishes straight empoyson'd thus, lay dead in every flood.

even in the chambers of their Kings, which swarming crawled about.

huge swarms of vermin, lice and flies, their coasts each where did fill.

and in their land most terribly, the flaming fire did burn.


The fifth part.

and did devour the needful fruits that beautified their ground.

yea, even the very chief of all, in whom their strength was placed.

and of their Tribes there was not one, whom weakness did withold.

the fear of them so long before, had seizd on every heart.

he made a fire to clear their way, so long as it was night.

and with a bread rained down from heaven, did satisfy them all.

which having quenched the thirsty parts, did like a river grow.

which with his servant Abraham, a Covenant did bind.

with gladness, these which he for his had chus'd from all about.

and what the peoples toils had gayn'd, they did inherit there.

and that they still might keep his laws, give praise unto the Lord.
Psalm. CVI.
Sing this as the 52. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord; O to the Lord give thanks for what is past,
for, he is infinitely good, his mercy still does last.

can utter? who can all his praise as he deserves set forth?

and he from doing righteousness, who not at all does swerve.

with thy salvation, O my God, to visit me appear.

that I with thine inheritance, to glory may be made.

we did commit iniquity, we wickedly have done.

in Egypt, and they not upon thy numerous mercies thought.

yet for his names sake, he them saved, to manifest his might.

so them as through the wilderness, he through the deeps did guide.

and did redeem them from the hand of the enemy, though great.
The second part.

and not so much as one of them, the general loss survived.

and straight transported all with joy, his praises loud did sing.

and for his Counsel any more, they (fondly) waited not.

and in the desert their great God did tempt most wickedly.

they envied Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Lords Saint.





into the figure of an Ox, that grass for food does eat.

by whom such great things brought to pass, they had in Egypt seen.

and things that were most terrible, erst by the red sea shown
The third part.

did stand, (lest he should ruin them) to turn his wrath away.



to make them in the wilderness, even every one to fall.

and in all Countries scatter them, the scorn of every place.

the sacrifices of the dead, they did profanely eat.

and the infectious Pestilence, straight in upon them broke.



so that it went exceeding ill with Moses for their sake.

so that he with unbridled lips, spoke unadvisedly.


The fourth part.



to Canans Idols offered up, the land was stained with blood.

and with their own inventions went a whoring every where.

he (loathing his inheritance) from them his favor turned.

and they that did them highly hate, did over them command.

and in subjection brought down low, their hand did them distress.

and they were brought down very low, for what they had done ill,

the great affliction that them grieved, while as their cry he heard.

and did repent, according to his mercies manifold.

of all those cruel bands, which erst them captives carried had.

that we may thank thy holy name, and triumph in thy praise.

let all the people joining say, Amen, praise ye the Lord.
Psalm. CVII.
Sing this as the 96. Psalm.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for only good he is,
for his great mercy does endure for ever unto his.

whom he has from the enemi's hand redeemed, when in distress.

from whence the Sun does rise, or set, from fourth and from the north.

no habitable City found, where they to dwell might stay.

so that their souls in them overcome, with faintness did remain.

and he them freed from all these evils, to which they had been thrall.

to go unto a City, where securely dwell they might.

and for his works to sons of men, that wonderful do prove.

and he the soul that hungry is, does with his goodness fill.

whom sad afflictions heavy load, and iron strictly bind.
The second part.

and all the Counsels did contemn, of him that is most high.

they did fall down, and there was none could help to them impart.

and out of their distresses all, he straight did them releeve.

and did the bands asunder break, in which they were enthralled.

and for his works to sons of men, that wonderful do prove!

and he the bars that were of iron, has cut in sunder all.

to work iniquities, even all afflicted sorely are.

they in an agony draw near, unto the gates of death.

and out of their distresses all, he straight does them releeve.

and them from their destructions all, in mercy did secure.
The third part.

and for his works to sons of men, that wonderful do prove!

and all his works (while joy abounds) with admiration raise.



which struggling billows, often embraced, do lift up in the air.

their soul, because of troubles great, does melt away and shrink.

do reele and stagger, and are at the end of all their wits.

and out of their distresses all, he straight does them releeve.

so that the raging waves grow still as rocked at last asleep.

so he from gaping gulphs them brings, to their expected port.

and for his works to sons of men, that wonderful do prove!
The fourth part.

and where the Elders use to meet, let them his praise declare.

and of the waters all the springs become a solid ground.

because that they who dwell therein, are given to wickedness.

and he the ground that erst was dry, does turn to water springs.

that they a City may prepare, commodiously to live.

that they may likewise plant their Vines, which fruits at full may yield.

and does not suffer to decrease their Cattels numerous store.

whilst them oppression, misery and sorrow does overthrow.

amid'st the barren wilderness, where as there is no way.

and does him (as a numerous flock) with families supply.

and then of all iniquity, the mouth shall stopped be.

the loving kindness of the Lord, even they shall understand.
Psalm. CVIII.
Sing this as the 95. Psalm.
O Thou that art my God, my heart now fixed is in me:
even with my glory I will sing, and give due praise to thee.

I will awake before the light can beautify the ground.

and to all nations in the world, I will extol thy worth.

and even unto the highest clouds, thy spotless truth extends.

and let thy glory every where above the earth appear.

with thy right hand deliver me, and answer when I call.

I Succoths valley will mete out, I Sichem will divide.

the chief strength is, and Judah still my lawgiver is made.

and Palestina as my prey, I will in triumph bring.

or who will lead me, till I come the Edomites among?

and wilt not thou, O mighty God, forth with our armies go?

because it is mere vanity, to hope for help from men.

and there is none, but only he that can our foes overthrow.
Psalm. CIX.
Sing this as the 89. Psalm.
HOld not thy peace, O thou that art the God of all my praise,

The mouth of the deceitful too, are opened me to wrong,
they have against me spoken much, but with a lying tongue.

and given to far without a cause, would needs with me debate.

but unto prayer, as my strength, I do my self retire.

and all the love that I had shown, they recompensed with hate.

let Satan ready to do harm, be ranked at his right hand.

yea, and the prayer that he makes, let it a sin become.



out of their places desolate, let them seek bread in vain.

and let the haughty strangers pride, make all his toiles a prey.

and on his children fatherless, let none compassion have.

and in the times that are to come, extinguished be their name.

and never let his Mothers sin be blotted out at all.

that he may wholly from the earth, cut off their memory.
The second part.

the poor and needy: that he might the broken heart even kill.

as he loathed blessing, so let it be far from him removed.

like water, and in all his bones like oil, still let it go.

and for a girdle too which he continually does bear.

and of all them, against my soul, that evil to speak not spared.

because thy mercy still is good, from trouble set me free.

my heart most deeply wounded is, and bleeds within my breast.

and as a Grasshopper despised, am tossed to and fro.
The third part.

my flesh far changed from what before, does fail of fatness now.

and they with scorn did shake their heads, when as they looked on me.



when they arise, but who thee serves, let him rejoice in thee.

even with their own confusion all, as with a mantle over.

yea, I amongst the multitude, will praise to him impart.

from those that do condemn his soul, that he may him defend.
Psalm. CX.
Sing this as the 98. Psalm.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord at my right hand sit thou;
till that they may thy footstool be, I make thine enemies vow.

in midst of them that are thy foes, thy sovereignty extend.

out of the mornings womb thou do thy dew of youth possess.

according to the order of Melchisedeck, still blessed.

in that great day when it does burn, shall then even strike through kings.

fill all the place, and he shall wound over many lands, each head.

and therefore shall the head by him be lifted up on high.
Psalm. CXI.
Sing this as the 120. Psalm.
PRaise ye, praise to the Lord
my whole heart shall afford,
where him the righteous serve.

sought out of all with care,
that love them to observe.

and glorious is, still stable,
his righteousness he grounds.

from all oblivion free,
the Lord in grace abounds.

for ever in his mind,
his Covenant firm stands.

to those that are his own,
to give them the heathens lands.

and verity: all his
Commandments sure are.

and truth are done, and shall
still stand fast every where.

his people to amend,
that Covenant of his:
That it might ever stand,
he strictly did command,
his name most reverend is,

one first must fear the Lord:
they understand best sure,
That do obey his will;
his praise the world to fill,
for ever does endure.
Another of the same.
PRaise ye the Lord, the Lord to praise, my whole heart I will set,
where ere the Congregation is, or where the just are met.

and carefully, by all that do delight therein, are sought.

and his untainted righteousness, shall ever him array.

the Lord most gracious is, and of compassion ever full.

the Covenant made, he evermore will in remembrance bear.

that with the heathens lands he may their heritage enlarge.



for evermore enioyn'd: his name most holy, reverend is.

have they that do his will, his praise for ever does endure.
Psalm. CXII.
PRaise ye the Lord, and blessed is he
That fears him, and his law much loves:

The race of th'upright blessed proves.

His righteousness no time can bound.

Even out of darkness light does spring,
He to compassion is inclined,
And just does provein every thing.

And weighs discreetly all his ends.

For, still remembered are the just.

His heart is set on God to trust.

Till what he wished on foes he see.

His righteousness does still firm hold,
His horn with honor shall be raised,

And gnashing teeth, shall melt for spite,
The wicked's hopes shall perish quite.
Another of the same.
PRaise ye the Lord, the man is blessed that fears the Lord aright,
and who in his Commandments does greatly take delight.

and of the man that upright is, even blessed shall be the race.

and his unspotted righteousness, endures for evermore.

he (full of mercy) gracious is, and righteously inclined.

he with discretion his affairs will guide unto an end.

the righteous in remembrance shall even everlasting prove.

his heart is fixed upon the Lord, in whom he trusts still.

till that he see what he desires upon his foes to light.

for ever, and his horn shall be with honor raised at last.

shall melt away, and their desire shall quickly perish quite.
Psalm. CXIII.
YE the Lords servants, praise the Lord,
unto his name due praise afford.


till where at last it does decline,
the Lords names praise all should proclaim.

most high is, and his glory great,
does far above the heavens excel.

is like unto the Lord our God,
who gloriously on high does dwell!

all things within the heaven that be,
and in the earth over all about.

and needy ones in him that trust,
he from the dunghill does lift out.

even with his peoples Prince to get
a place: he makes with children stored

a joyful mother this to see,
be thankful then and praise the Lord.
Another of the same.
PRaise ye the Lord, who serve the Lord, O praise, praise ye his name.








with children, be a mother glad, praise therefore ye the Lord.
Psalm. CXIV.
Sing this as the 95. Psalm.
When Israel other bounds to seek, did Egypts gladly change,
and Jacobs house, a people left that spoke a language strange,

and Israel his dominion was, whereas he did command.



and what, O Jordan, ayled thee, that thou wast quite driven back?

and all ye hills that little are, like to the wanton Lambs?

while as the God of Jacob does with majesty appear.

and from the veyns of solid flint, a flowing stream did bring.
Psalm. CXV.
Sing this as the 98. Psalm.
Not unto us, Lord, not to us, but all the glory take
unto thy name: even for thy truth, and for thy mercies sake.





they noses have embossed by art, but want the sense to smell.

nor can their throat afford a sound, by which the tongue may talk.





bless Isreal's house, and he will bless the house of Aaron still.





nor any one of them at all, in silence who descend.

from this time forth for evermore, give praise unto the Lord.
Psalm CXVI.
Sing this as the 95. Psalm.
I Fervently do love the Lord, because he did give ear
unto my voice, and kindly did my supplications hear.

by me therefore while as I live, he called upon shall be.

laid hold on me, I trouble found, and was to sorrow thrall.





thou freely did mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling, free.




The second part.

and I will ever call upon the great name of the Lord.

even where his people present are, in the most reverend form.

of these whom in his mercy he esteems as Saints of his.

I am thy handmaids son, and thou from bands have set me free.

and of the Lord the holy name, shall called upon be still.

even where his people present are, in the most reverent form.

in midst of thee Jerusalem, all ye praise still the Lord.
Psalm CXVII.
Sing this as the 99. Psalm.
YE Nations all, unto the Lord, give praise, as is his right:
and all ye people, give him praise, with honor at the height.

the Lord his truth for everlasts, all ye praise still the Lord.
Psalm. CXVIII.
Sing this as the 84. Psalm.
O Thank the Lord, for he is good, his mercy lasts for aye;




and in a place that was most large, did set me quickly free.

that does depend upon man's power, can any way appall.

I therefore on them that me hate what I desire shall see.

then to put confidence in one that is of mortal race.

then even in them that Princes are, our confidence to place.

but in the Lords most holy name, I will them quite root out.

but in the Lords most holy name, I will them quite root out.

for in the Lords most holy name, I will destroy them all.
The second part.



within the Tents: the Lords right hand does valiantly for his.

yea, of the Lord, the strong right hand does still most valiantly.



I Will enter them, and by me there the Lord shall praised be.

in at the which who righteous are, shall surely enter all.

and thou in mercy art become Salvation unto me.


The third part.

we will exceedingly rejoice, and in the same be glad.

prosperity unto us sent, I now most humbly crave.

out of the house that is the Lords, you blessed all have we.

cause bind the Sacrifice with cords, the Altars horns unto.

thou only art my mighty God, I will thy glory raise.

because his mercy wonderful endure for ever shall.
Psalm. CXIX.
ALEPH.
^ Blessed are all those, who undefiled continue in the way,
who in the Lords most holy law, from walking never stray.
all they that never from his testimonies part:
and that him ever fervently do seek with all their heart.





when as thy righteous judgments all, shall learned be by me.

O do not utterly, O Lord, me in thy wrath forsake.
BETH. The second part.
That he may cleanse his way aright, what shall a young man do?
yea, even according to thy word, by taking heed thereto.

O grant from thy Commandments, that I may not depart.



the mighty judgments many times that from thy mouth have gone.

and does the wealth of all the world, in my conceit exced.


GIMEL: The third part.
With thine own servant, who thee loves, deal bountifully, Lord,
that so I may be made to live, and keep thy holy word.



thy judgments height to understand, to which my thoughts aspire.



but meditate thy servant did, upon thy statutes still.

and them how to direct my course, for Counselors I use.
DALETH. The fourth part.
MY soul is low, but quicken me according to thy word,


so I of all thy wondrous works, with knowledge shall discourse.

according to thy sacred word, give strength for my relief.

and grant me graciously thy law, to which I may take heed.

and all thy judgments deeply weighed, I did before me lay.


HE. The fifth part.
TEach me, O Lord, to know the way whereas thy Statutes tend,
and I inviolably then shall keep it to the end.

yea, I the same sincerely shall observe with all my heart.

of thy Command'ments I may go, for therein I delight.

and unto wretched avarice, O let it never decline.




VAW. The sixth part.
LEt me thy mercies likewise, Lord now in due time receive,
even thy salvation by thy word, as I assurance have.

to him that does reproach me still, for I trust in thy word.

for in thy judgments I have hoped, which are for ever sound.





and I will meditate upon thy holy statutes often.
ZAIIN. The seventh part.
REmember on the word thou did unto thy servant give,
upon the which thou still in hope have caused me to live.

for when I was near spent, thy word has quickened me again.

yet from thy laws integrity, I no way have declined.

and in contemplating the same, I did great comfort find.




CHETH. The eighth part.
THou for my portion, do thy self O Lord, to me, afford:
I with my self determined have to keep with care thy word.

and now according to thy word, be merciful to me.

unto thy Testimonies, Lord, my feet have turned with haste.



because of these thy judgments all, that ever righteous be.

Thy mercies fill the earth, O Lord, to me thy statutes teach.
TETH. The ninth part.
THou still to do thy servant good, have gracious been, O Lord;
and have performed abundantly, according to thy word.

for thy Commandments I have believed in my heart.



but I thy precepts will observe entirely with my heart.



than gold and silver multiplied, which unto thousands be.
IOD. The tenth part.
THy hands have made and fashioned me, me understanding give,
that so I thy Commandments may learn, while as I live.





without a cause: but meditate I in thy precepts will.

and they to whom made clearly known, thy Testimonies be.

that me at all to be ashamed, no kind of thing may move.
CAPH. The eleventh part.
MY soul for thy salvation faints, thy word my hope makes live:


and yet thy statutes dear to me, I never do forget.

to make thy judgment fall on them that persecute me still?



but I thy precepts never left, by which thy will I know.

I ^hail the Testimony keep, that from thy mouth does flow.
LAMED. The twelfth part.
THy word in heaven, Lord, settled is, thy faithfulness is sure:


for all of them thy will are bound, as servants to obey.

afflictions weight had pressed me down, till I had perished quite.



but I thy testimonies will consider of with joy.

but thy Commandment is large, and further does extend.
MEM: The thirteenth part.
I Think all day upon thy law, O how the same I prize!


for all my meditations from thy Testimonies flow.



for thou by them me fully have instructed in my heart.

yea, even more sweet unto my mouth, then honey is, they be.

and therefore I do highly hate each way that false I find.
NVN. The fourteenth part.
THy word to rule my wandering steps, is as a lantern bright,
and in the path where I do walk, does serve me for a light.



and teach thy judgments unto me, that them observe I may.



I taken have: for they all joy unto my heart afford.

and have resolved even to the end, so to continue still.
SAMECH. The fifteenth part.
I Love thy law exceedingly, but all vain thoughts do hate:


for what my God commanded has, I am resolved to keep.

and let me not of what I hoped, in end ashamed be.



the Testimonies that are thine I therefore truly love.

thy judgments are so terrible, that they do make me quake.
AIIN. The sixteenth part.
I Judgment, Lord, and justice still did executed see:
then to my fierce oppressors power, do not abandon me.

and who are puffed up with pride, let them not me oppress.



that I thy testimonies all, sufficiently may know.



in every thing, and each false way is hateful unto me.
PE. The seventeenth part.
EVen every way most wonderful, thy Testimonies are,
and my soul therefore ever does observe them all with care.

it understanding gives to them, that simple were before.

for, I for thy Commandment, did long most earnestly.

as thou do use unto all those, thy holy name that love.




TZADE. The eighteenth part.



because that of thy sacred words, my foes oblivious be.



thy holy law, Lord, clearly is the very truth most pure.

yet, thy Commandments, O Lord, my chief delight still be.

give understanding unto me, and I shall live secure.
COPH. The nineteenth part.
WIth my whole heart, I cried, Lord hear, thy statutes keep I will:




according to thy judgment, Lord, with comfort quicken me.

and yet in heart they are far off, from thinking on thy law.

and thy Command'ments everyone, are very truth indeed.

that they for ever stablish'd were, thy sacred will to show.
RESH. The twentieth part.
BEhold how I afflicted am, and my deliverer be,
for at all times thy holy law, remembered is by me.



according to thy judgments then, O quicken me with speed.

yet from thy testimonies true, I never do decline.



thy righteous judgments every one, for evermore endure.
SCHIN. The one and twentieth part.
GReat Princes were without a cause to persecute me brought:
but of thy word, within my heart, a reverent awe was wrought.





and thy Commandments each way have done most faithfully.

and I the same as dear to me, exceedingly do love.

for all the ways that I do walk, are ever in thy sight.
TAW. The two and twentieth part.
O Let the earnest cry I make, come near, before thee, Lord,
and understanding grant to me, according to thy word.

and even according to thy word, O Lord deliver me.





and let thy judgments which are great give ever help to me.

for thy Commandments in mind, I always do retain.
Psalm. CXX.
I To the Lord distressed,
with cries my grief expressed,
and he gave ear to me.

and from a fraudfull tongue,
my soul, O Lord, set free.

what profit can thou find,
what shall be done to thee?

with burning coals for heat,
of Juniper that be.

soiourning thus should lie
in Mesech such a space,
That I with miscontents
should dwell within the Tents
of Kedars wicked race?

with him that doing wrong,
from peace estranged is far.

but when I spoke of it,
they straight were bent for war.
Another of the same.
I When distressed, cried to the Lord, and he gave ear to me:




that in the Tents of Kedar yet, I dwell against my will.


Psalm. CXXI.
^ I Will lift up enflamed with love, mine eyes those hills to see,
whence comes all help to me.

and the earth by his great might.

will not permit, (beloved)
That ty foot should be moved.

lo, who does Israel keep,
not slumber will, nor sleep.

does for thy keeper stand,
a shade at thy right hand.

Sun smites thee not by day,
nor Moon by night no way.

shall his protection have,
and he thy soul shall save.

when thou do come or go,
it shall be ever so.
Another of the same.
I To these his will lift mine eyes, whence comes all mine aid.


and he that does with care thee keep, will in no slumber fall.



nor of the Moon shall thou at all be smitten in the night.

the Lord in mercy shall preserve thy soul from any harm:

from this time forth for evermore, the Lord will thee secure.
Psalm. CXXII.
^ I In my heart was made to be exceeding glad,
when ever they to me did say,
straight to the house that is chusde by the Lord for his,
we will together take our way.

within thy gates shall meet.

even as a City fair,
which is compact with care,
within it self in every part.

yea, even the Lords tribes thither
where Isreal's testimony is,
that so the mighty Lord
may see them all afford,
due praise to that great name of his.

the thrones which are the seat
whence upright judgment must proceed:
yea even the very same,
which for their thrones they claim,
which are of holy David's seed.

Jerusalem may grace,
they all shall prosper who thee love.

and in thy stately hals,
may ev'rything still prosperous prove.

and who my brethren are,
I will say, peace within thee be.

has there for his abode
a house, I will seek good to thee.
Another of the same.
O How I was exceeding glad, when they to me did say;
straight to the Lords most holy house, come, let us take our way.



to Isreal's testimony there, to thank the Lords great name.

yea, even the thrones that are ordained for holy David's race.

all they that thee entirely love, shall prosper in each place.

and let thy Palaces in them, prosperity contain.

I now with all my heart will say, may peace within thee be.

I earnestly will care how thou may with all good be stored.
Psalm. CXXIII.
Sing this as the 119. Psalm.
I Lift mine eyes to thee, O thou that in the heavens do'it dwell,

Or as a maid does of her dame, the hand attend: even thus
our eyes wait on the Lord, till he have mercy upon us.

for we are made exceedingly, to base contempt a prey.

and with the insolent contempt of them that swell with pride.
Psalm. CXXIV.
^ NOw Israel may say, and be approved,
if that the Lord for ever to be feared,

had not the Lord a partner with us proved,
when men so fiercely were against us moved.

When as their wrath against us burned with spite:


yea, over our soul the waters proud had past.

To be their prey: our soul from fowlers snare


Is all our help, who heaven and earth did frame.
Another of the same.
HAd not the Lord been on our side, may Israel now say,


which kindled up us to consume, did so extremely rage.

yea, over our very souls the stream impetuously had gone.



the treacherous snare is broken quite, and we escaped are.

who both the glorious heavens above, and the earth below did frame.
Psalm. CXXV.
THey in the Lord that firmly trust, shall like mount Sion prove,
the which for ever does abide, and none can it remove.

so does the Lord environ his from henceforth evermore.

lest it their hands who righteous are, to wickedness should wrest.

and unto them that in their hearts are every way upright.

unto their crooked wicked ways, where vanity does guide,
The Lord above shall lead them forth, to ruin and disgrace,
with them that work iniquity, but Israel shall have peace.
Psalm CXXVI.
WHen that the Lord from bondage back, his Sion did reclaim,
we in an ecstasy entranced, were like to them that dream.

then did the heathen say, for them the Lord great things has done.

whilst we consider of the same, to us it gladness brings.



rejoicing doubtless shall return, with sheaves to serve his need.
Psalm. CXXVII.
EXcept the Lord the house to rear,
Do freely lend his helping hand,
No other's toiles can make it stand,
Except to free the town from fear:
The Lord as Captain it maintain,
Each watchman else does watch in vain.

To rise before the Sun give light:
In vain ye sit up late at night,
Or yet of sorrows eat the bread.
For, thus does he afford a sleep,
To his beloved whom he does keep.

The Lords inheritance declared:
The wombs dear fruit is his reward,

Even so of youth the children be,
Of worldly strength the first degree.

That man whose quiver richly stored,
Them in abundance can afford:
They shall not be ashamed at all,
But they shall speak into the gate,
To such who them (as foes) do hate.
Another of the same.
EXcept the Lord in mercy do to build the house delight,
they labor out in vain that seek to build it by their might.
And so except the City still be guarded by the Lord,
the waking is but all in vain that watchmen do afford.

and though you do go late to bed, yet do you nothing gain.
Even though your weary body still, on bread of sorrows feed,
for unto his beloved so he gives sleep at need.

and of the fertile womb the fruit is given for his reward.

so the beloved children are, that to our youth belong.

they shall not blush, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.
Psalm. CXXVIII.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
O! every one that fears the Lord, most highly happy is,
that does direct his steps to walk in all the ways are his.

thou shall be happy, and it shall be ever well with thee.

thy Children like to olive plants, about thy table round



thou shall thy childrens children see, and peace on Isreal's brood.
Psalm. CXXIX.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
THey many a time with troubles great, did vex me every way,
and that even from my very youth, may Israel now say.

and that even from my very youth, but never could prevail.



yea, let them all be turned back, that hate to Sion bear.

which wanting moisture, withered dies, before it can grow up.

nor yet of him that binds sheaves the bosom filled can be.

nor of the Lord that in the name we do you bless at all.
Psalm. CXXX.
O Lord to thee out of the deepes, ascended has my cry,




my soul continually does wait, my hope is in his word.

do for the morning, even then they do for the mornings light.

of mercy plenty, and likewise redemption for all his.

from all his great iniquities, which now so heavy be.
Psalm. CXXXI.
MY heart, O Lord, not haughty is, mine eyes not lofty be:
I with great matters meddle not, nor things too high for me.

a child that weaned is, my soul is like a weaned child.

yea, let him hope from this time forth, and so for evermore.
Psalm. CXXXII.
^ REmember David, Lord, and all his sufferings for thy sake,


nor will I once so much as touch the borders of my bed.

and mine eyelids in any sort, shall never slumber more.

a dwelling for the mighty God of Jacob, and his race.

where shadowie woods do darken fields, we have it clearly found.

and at his footstool worship will, expressing reverence so.

thou, and the arc of thy great strength, we humbly thee request.

and let all them that are thy Saints, with shouting joyful prove.
The second part.

of him whom thou anointed have, turn not away the face.

even of thy body, I the fruit will in thy throne enstall.

their sons shall ever on thy throne, be free from ruins reach.



and I will satisfy her poor for nourishment with bread.

and all her Saints (as happy made,) aloud for joy shall shout.

I for mine own anointed one, a lamp ordained have.

but upon him exalted high, still flourish shall his Crown.
Psalm. CXXXIII.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
BEhold how good a thing it is, and pleasant to the mind,
that brethren should together dwell, with bonds of love combinde.

which even to run as rained down upon the beard was made.
Even that of Aarons comely beard, which streamed from his Crown,
and to his garments utmost skirts, in precious drops fell down.

for there the Lord his blessing placed, even life without an end.
Psalm. CXXXIV.
BEhold, bless ye the Lord, all ye that serve him right,
within the Lords most holy house, who waiting stand by night.


Psalm. CXXXV.
^ PRaise ye the Lord, and of the Lord praise ye the holy name,
O ye the servants of the Lord, his praise aloud proclaim.

of that house which to God belongs, whom only we obey.

due praises to his holy name, for it is a pleasant thing.



in heaven, and in the earth, in seas, and all deep places too.

he makes the lightnings ushering rain, his pleasure to attend.

who smote of Egypt the first borne, of man and beast each kind.

on Pharaoh, and all those on him who serving did attend.



an heritage to Israel, his people whom he loved.
The second part.

and thy memorial, O Lord, through generations all.

concerning those that serve him right, he will himself repent.

and by men's hands that they are wrought, their frailty does unfold.

and they can nothing see at all, though they have eyes in show.

nor in their artificial mouths, can any breath be found.

and so indeed is every one that trusts in their might.

bless thou the Lord, O reverenced house, that art of Aarons race,

and all of you that fear the Lord, the Lord for ever bless.

who at Jerusalem does dwell, to him due praise afford.
Psalm. CXXXVI.
Sing this as the 148. Psalm.
O Give the Lord due thanks,
For he is good indeed:

To give due thanks proceed.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Due thanks give every one:

Even by himself alone.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

The heavens (made by him) prove:

The waters all above.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Great lights which we do see.

The ruler still to be.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

That rule and do adorn:

Of Egypt the first borne.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Brought Israel without harm,

And with a stretched out arm.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

The red Sea did divide:

Did Israel safely guide.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

In the red sea struck dead:

Who did his people lead.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

In indignation smite,

Who fell confounded quite.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Over Amorites had reared:

For his huge stature feared.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Their land he freely gave:

For Israel to have.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

In our estate most low:

Who sought our overthrow.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.

Does freely furnish food:

Give thanks as only good.
For rich in store,
His mercies sure,
To his endure
For evermore.
Psalm CXXXVII.
^ OF Babylon the rivers by, we sadly did sit down:
yea, when dear Sion came to mind, straight tears our cheeks did drown.

amid'st their solitary shades, even where they thickest were.

and they that our destroyers were, sought mirth of us to have.

shall we the song that is the Lords, sing in a foreign land.

of my right hand the cunning quite, let it forgotten be.

if I place not Jerusalem, even my chief joy above.

when thy Jerusalem was spoiled, did cry, raze, raze it quite.

blessed shall he be, as thou with us, who deals with thee in the end.

and them (with no compassion moved,) does dash against the stones.
Psalm. CXXXVIII.
Sing this as the 47. Psalm.
I Will, O Lord, give praise to thee, and that with all my heart:
before the Gods I singing will to thee due praise impart.

and thy most glorious name by me shall be exalted still.
For thy great kindness full of love, and for thy truth, O Lord:
for thou, even all thy name above, have magnified thy word.

and with new strength within my soul, thou made me strong to be.

when of thy mouth the sacred words, they once do hear, O Lord.

for, of the Lord the glory great is seen in every thing.

but he does know them all afar, that are possessed with pride.

thou of my foes shall curb the wrath, thy right hand shall me save.

O do not, Lord, in wrath forsake the work of thine own hands.
Psalm. CXXXIX.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
O Lord, thou have me searched and known, how I sit down or stand


and still with all the ways I walk, thou well acquainted art.

but altogether, lo, O Lord, it straight is known to thee.

and upon me have laid thy hand, that I can fly no more.

it soars so high above my reach, I can it not attain.

or to what corner can I fly, to escape thy presence so?

and if I make my bed in hell, behold I there find thee.

and in the seas remotest parts, my dwelling place should make.

and thy right hand shall hold me there, as still before thy face.

the very night all turned to light, about me shall abide.
The second part.

does shine like day, alike to thee both darkness is and light.

when in my mothers belly lodged, I covered was by thee.

thy works are marv'lous, and my soul to know the same is glad.

whilst I most curiously was wrought, in parts of earth most low.

which were to be, were in thy book, whilst yet of them were none.

O God, how great their number is, if seriously surveyed!

and whenever I awake, then I am still with thee.

and therefore all ye bloody men, with speed from me depart.

and they that are thine enemies, do take thy name in vain.

and with those who against thee rise, am I not grieved much?



and in thine everlasting way, for ever lead thou me.
Psalm. CXL.
DEliver me, Lord, from the man that unto evil is bent,
and safety likewise give to me, from him that is violent.

and they continually for war, together gathered be.

of Adders underneath their lips, the deadly poison is.

that is violent, who to overthrow my goings purposed have.

they have set grinnes, and spread a net for me by the way side.

and let my supplications voice, O Lord, be heard by thee.

a covering in the day of war, did to my head afford.

nor further not his wicked plot, lest proudly they aspire.

even by the mischief of their lips, let them all covered be.

even headlong down in dungeons deep, whence they may not retire.

and evil the man that is violent, shall hunt him to overthrow.

and of the poor defend the right, that they may safe remain.

and they that upright are in heart, shall in thy presence dwell.
Psalm CXLI.
^ O Lord my God, to thee I cry, make haste and come to me,
and give thine ear unto my voice, when as I cry to thee.

and make as th'evening sacrifice, my lifted hands to be.

and of my lips to save me so, keep ever safe the door.

with them that work iniquity, nor of their dainties eat.

let him reprove me, it shall prove as precious oil to me.
Which being so by them applied, shall break my head no way,
for, yet in their calamities I even for them will pray.

they shall with comfort hear my words, for they are very sweet.

as when one wood to cut, or cleave, on the earth his strength does try.

and never leave thou destitute my soul in any case.

and from the engines of all those who mischief do intend.

that there they may together fall, whilst I withal escape.
Psalm. CXLII.
Sing this as the 141. Psalm.
WIth earnest cries unto the Lord, I made my voice ascend,
my supplication to the Lord, I with my voice did send.

and all wherewith I troubled was, I showed him before.

they privily where I did walk, have laid a snare for me.

but none would know me, all help failed, none for my soul did care.

and in the land of them that live, my portion art for aye.

save me from them that me pursue, they are more strong then I.

the just shall compass me, for thou shall liberal be to me.
Psalm. CXLIII.
Sing this as the 141. Psalm.
LOrd hear the prayers and requests, which I present to thee,
and as thou just and faithful art, an answer make to me.

for none that lives can in thy sight, himself as just defend.

he hathin darkness made me dwell, as who long since did dye.

my heavy heart within me too, all desolate now is.

I meditate on all thy works, works that thy hands have wrought.

even as a land that thirsty is, still thirsts after thee.

like them that go down to the pit, lest I provein short space.

show me the way where I should walk, to thee my soul ascends.

I unto thee have my recourse, that I may hidden be.

lead me that I into the land of uprightness may go.

and as thou righteousness do love, my soul from trouble free.

that do afflict my grieved soul, for I serve thee alone.
Psalm. CXLIV.
Sing this as the 141. Psalm.
Blessed be the Lord, for all my strength is only from his might,
he does my hands teach how to war, my fingers how to fight.

in whom I trust, and who to me does make my people yield.

or yet man's son, that thou of him so great account should make?

his days (like shadows) dark and swift, do vanish straight away.

do thou but once the mountains touch, and all of them shall smoke.

shoot out thine arrows to destroy, till they be quite undone.

from waters great, and from the hand of children strange me free,

and their right hand, a right hand is of falsehood only found.

on instrument that has ten strings, thy praises sing will I.

his servant David from the sword, who still in safety brings.

and their right hand, a right hand is of falsehood to deceive.

our daughters as the corner stones, that grace a Palace rare.

that thousands may our sheep bring forth, ten thousands in our street.

nor in, nor out, that from complaints our streets may still be free.

yea, happy is that people, who have for their God, the Lord.
Psalm. CXLV.
^ O Thou my God that art my King, thee now extol I will,
and likewise I thy holy name, will bless for ever still.

for ever, and for ever shall thy name be praised by me.

his greatness is unsearchable above what can be thought.

and with the fame of thy great acts, shall seek the world to fill.

and all thy works that wondrous are, my tongue shall magnify.

and I thy greatness to the world, will publicly declare.

of thy great goodness, and still sing thy righteousness they shall.

and, though provoked, to anger slow, to mercy still inclined.
The second part.

and over all the works he does, his tender mercies are.



and of his kingdoms glorious state, the majesty to show.

and thy dominion lasts throughout all generations still.

and likewise those that are bowed down, he does raise up again.

and thou, when time the same requires, does furnish them with food.

and do content the longing wish of every living thing.

and still in all the works he does, for ever holy is.

even to all such as call on him in uprightness of heart.

he will give ear unto their cry, and save them by his might.

but all the wicked in his wrath, will utterly destroy.

and let all flesh for evermore, still bless his holy name.
Psalm. CXLVI.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord, O praise the Lord, my soul, him whilst I live


nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help at all.

and in that very day with him, his thoughts all perish must.

whose hope upon the Lord his God, continually depends.

with all the things that they contain, who truth for ever keeps.

who gives the hungry food, the Lord the prisoners does free.

the Lord does raise the humble up, he loves the righteous all.

and fatherless he does releeve, but wicked ways o'returnes.

from age to age, shall still endure, O then praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CXLVII.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good, praise to our God to sing:
for it exceeding pleasant is, praise is a comely thing.

and Isreal's outcasts all by him, together gathered are.

and lovingly binds up the wounds that had made them to smart.

and he upon each one of them, even by their names does call.



upon the Harp unto our God, with cheerfulness sing praise.

prepares rain, who makes grass upon the mountains grow.

so does he likewise when they cry unto the Ravens young brood.

and in the legs of any man, no pleasure takes he.

and they that in his mercy hope, are gracious in his sight.



and with the finest of the wheat, he likewise does thee fill.

and his true word does swiftly run, where ever he commands.

and straight he does the hoary frost like ashes cast abroad.

and who (what ever strength he has) can stand before his cold?

his stormy wind, whereby he makes the waters straight to flow.

his statutes and his judgments all, he Israel makes to know.

nor yet have they his judgments known, therefore praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CXLVIII.
PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye,
Even from the heavens the Lord;
In parts that highest be,
To him due praise afford.

You Angels pure,
His praise procure,
All you his host.

Thou Sun that shin'st so bright,
Praise him with stars in state,
Thou moon that clear'st the night.

Ye floods that move,
The heavens above,
His glory raise.

Let this them freely lead,
Which does obedience claim,
They by his word were made.

So still to be,
^^d his decree
Shall ever last.

Of God the praises sound
You dragons forcing fears,
And deeps of all this round.

Fire, hail, and snow,
And storms that blow
To work Gods will.

And hills more low that lie,
You trees which fruits do charge,
And Cedars mounting high.

You creeping things,
And you with wings
Aloft that soar.

And people great and small,
You Princes of the land,
And you worlds Judges all.

And Virgins fair,
You aged that are,
And infants young.

The Lords name praise aright,
For his great name alone
Is excellent at height.

Which none can even:
It earth and heaven
Is far above.

His peoples horn by grace;
Of all his Saints the praise;
Yea, even of Isreal's race.
With children stored,
A people near,
And to him dear,
Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm. CXLIX.
Sing this as the 145. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord a song all made of new,
and where his Saints assembled are, give him his praises due.

let them that Sions children are, in their own king be glad.

let them with Timbrell and with Harp, his praise in songs advance.

and he the meek will beautiful by his salvation make.

let them themselves upon their beds, to sing aloud employ.

and let their hand a sword two edged, victoriously retain.

and make deserved punishment upon the people fall.

yea, and with iron fetters strong, the nobles of their land.

this honor have all his dear Saints, therefore praise ye the Lord.
Psalm. CL.
Sing this as the 137. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord, our God within his Sanctuary praise;
within his firmament of power, his glory duly raise.

praise him as does his greatness fit, above what can be thought.

and give due praises unto him with Harp and Psaltery.

with instruments that stringed are, with Organs do the same.

let each thing that has breath him praise: for ever praise the Lord.
FINIS.

