A JEWEL FOR THE EAR.

By To. Wilkinson

Romans 10, 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. (...)
To all those that are desirous, not only to be hearers of the word, but
dooers of the will of god. Grace, mercy and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior.
WIlling to satisfy the especial entreaty of some, and for a general
benefit to all Gods Church, I have set out to public view, this Sermon of
preparatiue, which I preached in my Parish Church at Horton in Kent. I know
there is no word of God but has his profit, 2 Ti^. 3, 16
for so says paul, that al Scripture is profitable, but set this a part and
we shall like him that after John 5, 5.
he had bin diseased, eight and thirty years, lay at the poole of Bethsaida
for help, and yet was never the near because he had none to help him, nor
knew not how to get in when the angel came down to stir the water: this is
the reason why there are at this day so many unfruitful hearers, for that
albeit men's souls are even sick for want of knowledge, though they have lien
at the well head and by the water of life, and had a continual sound of the
Gospel in their ear, yet in six and forty years this ignorance cannot be
expelled, because when the Angel of Gods will does preach the word and stir
up the water of life, they know not how to move their ears toward it. This
therefore (beloved) I have set down as a direction to teach men how to hear,
that so often as the poole hereafter shall be stirred, and the word of God
preached unto you, y^^ may know how to use it to your benefit, therefore learn
this Sermon, and profit by all, neglect this and leese all. I have called it a
Jewel, as Christ called the Gospel a pearl, for without this Jewel Mat. 13.
4,
you shall never find that pearl, I have fitted it for the ear: unto which
if ye apply it, it shall be an ornament to the ear as Soloman said of wisdom
Prou. 1, 9.
it would be as a chain to thy neck, therefore fail^ not but apply it: he
which suffers the Jews to rob the Egiptians of their Jewels, and when they
after melted them to make a calfe, did suffer us to rob them of their
spiritual Jewel, Let us take he least for our abuse of the word he stir up
the Iewe^ again to rob us of this pearl of the Gospel, and cause them to
rise again by our fall, as we have risen by theirs.

God of his mercy turn our hearts, and teach us to embrace his word as we
ought. Amen.

Yours in Christ. To. Wilkinson.

A Jewel for the EAR.
Matthew 13, 9. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.
BEcause (beloved) the hearing of the word is so holy a thing, and holy
things are not rashly to be attempted: I have thought good in this my
entrance to lay down a preparatiue, that we may know, with what reverence we
are come into the temple, with what attention to hear, desire to learn, and
care to practice: for well I remember, that when the Isralites were sommoned to
appear before the Lord in Sina, they were first commanded to sanctify Exodus
19, 10, 11
their hearts, and wash their clothes, even as Moses might not come near the
Angel til he had put of his shoes, because Exodus 3, 5
the grownd was holy whereon he stood: this reason as nearly touches us, for
if the place be as holy, the exercise as holy now as then, why should not we
come as prepared as they, least coming with uncircumcised ears and unprepared
hearts it be said to us as to him that intruded him self at the wedding,
frinde, how came thou hither not having on a Mat. 22, 12
wedding garment? In my first Sermon upon those words of the prophet. For Sions
Esaias. 62, 1
sake I will not hold my tongue, I let you know what was the duty of the
speaker, now it comes in good order to tell you the duty of the hearer, for
if it could any way concern you to know our duty, much more auaileble will
it be to learn your own: for a declaration whereof I have chosen this Text,
He that has ears to hear let him hear. I know we are all by nature
curious, and every man's nature is to regard an other man's duty before his own,
even as Peter said to Christ May. what shall John Ioh. 21, 21
do? To whom Christ roundly answered again, what is that to thee? as if he meant
that every man should look to himself and let John alone: so would I persuade
you (for that ye are hearers) to learn the hearers duty, and let the speaker
alone: for albeit there be such a reference between hearing and speaking, as
they may not well be severed, yet the necessity of hearing does more generally
concern all, for God said, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord,
but he never said, O earth, earth, earth, preach the word of the Lord, for
Arons roabe befits Ier. 22, 29
not every man upon the earth, but every man is bound to wear this Jewel at
his ear, for Faith comes by hearing, as if Saint Paul had said, where is
no hearing there can be no faith: therefore To. 10, 17
Abraham spoke out of heaven, and his voice did pearce even the bowels of hell.
Luke 16, 29
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them: and when he says, let
them, it is more then a bare toleration, as to say, they may if they will, for
it is a flat charge, because god therefore sent Moses and the Prophets into ye
world that ye world of necessity should hear. There is a kind of people that
think the whole burden of the Saboth to lie upon the speaker, therefore
Christ to weed out that fancy says likewise, Take heed how Luke 8, 18.
you hear, to show that there is a necessity and an art of hearing as well
as of speaking. These two are fitly compared to a lock and a key, for as the
key opens the lock and makes entrance in at the door, so the tongue of the
minister should open the ear of the hearer, that the spirit of knowledge and
understanding might pass into the heart: and so it should seem that speaking
is ordained to hearing, as the means is directed to the end: for when God had
commanded that the skirts of Arons robe should be hunge about with Pomegranats
of silk, and an intercourse of bells between them, the Exodus 28, 34 and 35.
reason was added, That so often as he ministered in the holy place, and went in
and out before the Lord, his sound should be heard: but walls and windows
cannot hear, therefore by all likelihood that doctrine was intended for men:
and if for men why not for you? The holy Ghoast descended upon the Apostles
not in the shape of heads, that they should only understand the word, nor of
hearts that they should only love the word, but like toongs that they should
preach the word: so that when God sent out his disciples with toongs, his
meaning was that ye should meet them in the half way with ears, and so ye
see the correspondence between these two Scriptures, how justly they fit and
iumpe together, for Syons sake I will not hold my tongue: He that has ears to
hear let him hear. For if it be necessary that we should preach for Syons
sake, then it is requisite that Syon should hear for her own sake.

This saying of our Savior, He that has ears etc. is the argument by which
he does beg attention for the parable of the Sower, to show that the doctrine
it contained, was both so excellent in it self, and so necessary for the
world, as if a man were worth but his ears he could not choose but hear: and
it may concern either all in general, because all have ears, or the elect
particulerly because they only have ears to hear. For the farmer, if there
were no other reason why men should hear but this, because God has given an
ear, yet it binds very strongly: therefore see how God speaks unto us even
in the fleshly instrument of hearing: Christ does not urge upon us the dignity
of himself the speaker, neither the necessity of the doctrine, nor the misery
which befalls to a man by not hearing: but leaving al these arguments, he
reasons against us even from flesh and blood, and proves even by the member
and instrument of the ear, that men ought to be hearers of the word. We must
not think our ears are given us for worldly uses only, to harken after our
profit, to listen to him that can teach us a Gospel of gold, that can tickle
our ears with music, or our minds with dishonest Apoc. 2, 3.
mirth, but God has planted the ear for spiritual uses, even as Saint John
says, let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says: mark well the
words, for that we should mark them he has seven times repeated them. Let
him that has an ear hear, not what the world says, nor what the flesh
says, nor what the devil says, but what the spirit says: that if both speak
at once we should listen to the spirit, and turn the deaf side to the devil:
and if the ear be the door of the heart, then fitly might David say, Lift up
Psalm. 24, 7.
your heads ye gates and be ye open you everlasting doors: and not every
guest, but the king of glory shall come in. And what marvel is it if the
ears were consecrated to holy uses, since there is no part or member of the
body or soul which god has not ordained to some spiritual end. Did god create
the eye that it should only be a light to the body, and in no sort give light
to the soul? or did he not rather principally create it, that it might tell the
soul what beauty was in the visible cretures, that the soul might thereby
conjecture what glory is in the invisible god. Did god give man a mouth only
to bargain and buy withal, or call for the necessities of this life, or
rather to singe of his testimonies and set forth his praise? O god my heart is
prepared (says David) Psalm. 108.
and so is my tongue: and then he presently infers upon it, I will sing and
give praise, for what should he do with a tongue that gives not praise. God has
given us wit and brains, but not only for worldly uses and devises, not to
invent instruments of music as Iuball did, nor works of brass as Tubal-kain
did, nor understanding policies as Achitophel did, but to study for heavenly
wisdom Eccles. 12.
as Soloman did, to meditate of Gods laws as David did. God has given us
hearts and affections, and yet not to love the world, but to set our affections
wholly one him: in a word, there is no part or member in soul and body which
ought not as a Nazarite to be consecrate and vowed to the service of God.
Saloman judged those days to be evil days, wherein a man could not use his
members to remember the Creator, wherein the keepers should tremble, the
strong men should bow, they that look out at the windows should wax dark,
wherein the doors should be shut by the base sound of the grinding, and the
daughters of singing should be abased, those he judged evil days, as if it
were as good in a manner to have noe hands as such trembling hands: to have
no ioints as, such feeble ioints: to have no eyes as blind eyes: to be without
an ear, as to have a deaf ear: then by the contrary, if these be evil days,
wherein a man cannot use his members, they must needs be good wherein God has
given a free use of all. So as it may seem that God in each part or member of a
man's body, did intend some special use for his worship and service, unto
which if the parts in youth were not employed in the evil days, they would be
fruitless and unprofitable: Will those eyes which are wont to wander and gaze
after every vanity, will they in the evil days be learned and taught to
behold gods will in his precious word, and his great glory in all the creatures?
Will the tongue which has ever bin accustomed and invred with all vices, as
lying, standering, scurrility and blasphemy, will it in the euel days be taught
to sound out the praise of god. Will those ears which have been so accustomed
with filthe and folly, will they in the evil days be taught to hear the word
of God: therefore while we have eyes, let us behold, and he that has ears let
him hear. It is not only a bare gift of nature or work of the womb that we
have eyes, ears, and tongues, Act. 17, 28
but it is even the grace of God from above, for in him we live, we move, and
have our being: and god bestows not his graces for nothing: I say there is no
member of a man's body but carries in it a print of Gods love and testimony
of his grace: but above all the rest more specially, are we beholding to him
for our eyes and ears, for that by these twoe as by a channel the knowledge of
God is conveyed into our souls, for by the eye we come to the natural man's
divinity in suruaying the creatures, because as Paul says Romans 1, 20
the visible things of god that is his eternal power and Godhead are seen by
the creation of the world, if they were seen by the creation, then our eye is
our schoolemaister to bring us to the knowledge of the Creator: but that
knowledge is imperfect as the glimmering of a light, but by our ear more
specially and expressly we attain to the knowledge of Gods revealed will: so
that God never comes so near a man's soul as when he enters in by the door
of the ear, therefore, the ear is a most precious member if men knew how to
use it: and better were it to loose a better member the^ to want it, if a man
loose an eye an arm or a leg, he judges himself as a cripple, unworthy to
live among men, and fit for no place but for a spittle: and yet these are but
maimes in the body: but if God take away the use of hearing, it is a sign he
is angry indeed, and threatens a famine to the soul, for the soul feeds
at the ear, as the body by the mouth: therefore better loose all then loose
it. Our Savior Math. 5. 29 30.
Christ said, If thy right eye cause thee to offend pluck it out, if thy
right hand cause thee to offend cut it off, but he never said, if thine ear
offend thee stop it up, for there is a greater use of it then of hands or eyes:
for a man may want his hands and have faith, or his eyes and have faith, but
hardlye can he want his ears and have faith: for Faith comes by hearing,
not by seeing, or feeling, but it enters in at the ear, and so sinketh down
to the heart: therefore He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says,
and consider that God gave the ear, that men should profit by hearing, even as
he bestowed his tallentes that the factors should gain and profit by them. We
are Gods factors, and our members are his tallents, the eye is a tallent, the
tongue is a tallent, and the ear is a tallent: for this benefitte a Christian
has, that the righteous Mammon is portable, though the unrighteous be not, for
where as the men of the world have no wealth but in their chestes and barnes,
the righteous carry theirs about them in their souls and bodies, for every
member is a tallent, which being faithfully and wisely employed, there is a
treasure laid up for the soul in heaven, but being not employed, there is a
day of reckoning when every man according to the tallent of grace bestowed on
him shall be bound to yield an account of his stewardshipp, even of our eyes,
our toongs and ears, whereof we make so slender a reckoning. At that time it
will finally avail us to say, I employed mine ears to earthly uses, for then
it will be said to us as to him that buried his tallent in the earth, Go take
him, bind him hand and foot: then shall those hands be chained with fetters,
which by example of their refused to glorify god: then shall those eyes be
afrighted with horrible and ghastly visions, which in the creatures would never
behold the glory of God* then shall that toonge be tormemted with unquenchable
flames which never sought to set forth the praise of God, and then shall those
ears be filled with yelling, with howling, and gnashing of teeth, which never
regarded to hear the word of God: therefore whosoever he be to whom God has
given an ear let him hear.

But what is that which Christ says?

He that has an ear to hear: as if there were an ear which were not to
hear; we are to understand it as a note of special difference, for though we
have all ears, yet all have not ears to hear: but as there is a kind of
idle or Idol Pastors which have mouths and speak not, so there is a kind of
idle hearers which have ears and hear not, which sit in their seats as
images in the glass windows, bending their knees, lifting up their hands, and
casting up their eyes, yet after so many years, and so many masses had never
the honesty to give one Amen: only this difference there is, that whereas the
Saints in the glass windows keep out the wind, these fruitelesse hearers
possess the places wherein they do no good at all: and let it not seem
strange, that there should be ears which are not to hear, for Paul says of
the Jews that God had given them a spirit Romans 11, 2
of slumbring, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear, because they had the instrument but wanted the right use, for only
those may be said to have ears to hear which first by our selves are vowed,
and then after by the spirit of God are sanctified to that holy use: so that
Christ speaks especially of the children of the Church, for they only have
sanctified and prepared ears. This therefore (beloved) is that we desire to
learn how to prepare and provide our selves, that we may bring ears to hear
and hear with profitte, least we depart from the Church, as the five foolish
Virgins from the gates of heaven, as good not come as come for no good:
therefore the first thing I am to exhort you to is, that we may come together
for though private prayer be not unprofitable, and familiar exhortation want
not his use, yet our meeting together has a special blessing promised to it
by him which said, where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of Mat. 18, 20
them: and indeed our hearing presupposes coming, for we cannot hear
together except we come together, therefore David set coming first, and
hearing after, Psalm. 34, 11
and said, Come Children and harken, and I will teach ye the fear of the Lord:
so say I to you, first come and then hearken, let it be with you as with David
who rejoiced when they said, Come let us go into the house of the Lord,
because Psalm. 122, 1
one day in Gods courts is better then a thousand else where and who had not
rather be a doore-keeper in the house of god, then to dwell in the tabernacle of
wickedness?

Consider what spirit was in David, when he said, that the Sparrow and
Swallow were blessed, because they might lodge their young so near the alter, as
if a poor bird were to be envied for her nest: or rather to teach men that
they ought to prease as hard to touch but the walls of the temple, as she that
desired to touch but the hem of Christ's garment: and that if any on should
say, Come let us go into the house of the Lord, men ought to be as the curtens
of the Tabecnacle, whereof but one being drawn, all the rest did follow
after; the Centurion boasted that he had such servants as if he Mat. 8, 9
said to one, come, he comes, and yet he called them for his own private
profit, but God a greater master then the centurion says come yea and calls
us for our profit, and yet we come not: nay every creeping worm will put us to
shame and condemn us, for God spoke Ps. 105, 34
but the word and the Grash-hoppers came, yea and Catterpillers innumerable;
but God has spoken to us many words, and yet our number (God knows) is
numerable enough: (there is a kind of Catterpiller that comes to the Church,
a sacrilegious vermin devouring holy things, which live by ye sweet that they
sweat not for, but they come unsent for for God never spoke to them, neither
do I commend their diligence in coming, for a blessed thing it were if God
should send a weste wind to blow them into the sea:) but I speak of those
poor creatures whom God never calls but they come and are obedient, and
their obedience ascends up to heaven, and from heaven is descended back
again to condemn our disobedience, for from heaven God spoke it, that the Ox
should come to his owner and the Ass to his Esaias. 1, 3.
masters cribb, but Israel Gods own people would not understand, nor come: O
therefore all ye that are Gods people come and hearken; and take this lesson
withal, yt ye yield not to come as Peter yielded to forgive his brother, seven
times and then ha done; for I say unto you not seven times but seventy times
seven times, yea so often as the seventh day shall come upon you come and
hollow it. The At^enians came to hear Paul but it was for nouilty of his
doctrine, as there be (I am in doubt and I fear it) in this place who are come
to hear the Sermon only because it is new and strange to have a preacher,
but when preachinge shall wax stale, they will not hear the voice of the
charmer charm he never so wisely: these men for a brunt are very devout, as
he who received the word in stony grownd, rejoicing at the first, and hearing
it with joy, but that joy endured Mat. 13, 20
but a while, for his zeal possessed him like an ague, very hot for the time
but when the fit was over, he fell to his old bias, as the dog to his vomit:
remember David says. Blessed are they that dwell in Psalm. 84, 4
Gods house. The Church of God is not like a Inn, for once or twice to
soiourne in, but it is to dwell in, and dwellinge is a continual abiding, we
must have our hearts there, our treasure there, and bring our Children there, as
the Swallows lays her young by the alter: in a word we must altogether dwell
there, that at what time soever Christ shall come he may find us in the temple
and not in a Tavern, in the house of prayer, and not in a den of thieves. We
need not say (beloved) as Peter said, Let us make us three tabernacles, for
God has built us a temple and tabernacle to our hands, only let us bring
readdy affections and say, Bonum ect esse hic, it is good for us to be here:
which if with assiduitie and diligence ye shall perform, then will I say of
you as David of himself, The zeal of gods house has eaten you up but if ye
Psalm. 69, 9
faint and wax cold, I must say that you have eaten up your zeal, therefore
in the name of god let us come with diligence, Gods liberality calls for
diligence at your hands, who of all the trees in Paradise did ask for
himself but one, of all the days in seven asks ye but one, if ye will give
him another he will accept it as a freewill offringe, but but fail not to
give him one, and pay it faithfully, who of his own does ask yet one so
sparingly. I know what will be your excuses, ye have married a wife, or bought
a yoke of oxen, therefore ye cannot come, but deceive not your selves, for
these are no excuses? shall a wife keep you back from following Christ: yet
better it were for a man to live alone then to have such an helper: what though
Adam said, Man Genesis 2, 24
shall forsake father and mother to cleave Luke 14, 26
to his wife, yet Christ said, a man must hate father and mother and wife to
come to him. But ye will plead that ye have bought a yoke of oxen? Postponetur
Deus bonibus qui nos aequauit Angelis says an old writer? Will you set God
behind your Oxen who has made you equal with Angels? These things are good:
but in their order and due place, but seek ye first the kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, and then let wives and Oxen follow after: for even
our necessary businesses and lawful affairs if they hinder us from Gods
service, are turned into sin, even as the pure waters in Egypt were turned
into blood. If lawful businesses may not hinder our coming to the Church of
God, then much less may idle sportes and unlawful games detain us: if
bargaininge and wiuing may not excuse us, much less will piping and dancing.
The Saboth is a day of holy rest, not of unholy riot: the Iraelites might not
gather their Manna upon it, and may we Exo. 16, 26
run a rioting upon it? What would they do to them whom they find
prophaninge Gods Saboth with drunken delights, who stoned him to Nu. 15, 26
death whom they found gatheringe sticks for needful use? But this is our
corruption of nature, every idle sport prouokes us to sacrilege, to rob God
of his glory in his saboth, and sacrifice it to the Devil: Diabolus te vocat
et venis, Mundus te vocat et venis, Caro te vocat et venis, Cultus Dei te vocat
et non venis, says an ancient father. The deuel calls by temtation and ye
yield unto it, the world calls and ye listen to it, the flesh calls and
ye come to it, but the worship of God calls and ye care not for it. Diogenes
to try the nature of the Athenians, disguised himself unhandsomely, daunced
rudely, and set his voice to singe ilfauordly, and the people came flocking
about him: behold (says he) the nature of this people, so often as I took upon
me to speak of an honest life or virtuous conversation, they passed by me as a
visited person, and left me alone, but now I frame my self to make sports like
a fool, they like a flock of fools come preasing about me: there is nothing
that chokes men's zeal so much as that they hunte so greedily after vanity of
the world, neither was there any reason why Esau was profane but because he
was a man of the field, for while he was hunting for venison abrod, Jacob
caught up the blessing and birthright at home, even as often times it falls
out that while Gods blessinge is a dealing in the Church, the people are
rebelling and rioting in the street, therefore come to the Church and God will
bless you.

When you have obtained of your selus to come, the next thing it is to perform
attention, for David says not, come children and hear, but come and hearken:
and if hearing were enough to satisfy a Saboth day, then might ye drive in
your oxen too for they can apprehend an outward sound as well as ye, but
though they have ears, yet they have not ears to hear. In the Scripture
hearing and harkning is all one, and our harkning it is Opus animi non Auris,
as one says, a work of the mind and not of the outward ear, a dilligent
observing in the mind of that which is said, therefore the Gramarians, do fitly
signify attention under the word. Animaduertere, vt animum aduerteremus non
aurem that we should not only turn our ears but set our mind to it: but
that can a beast never do because he has no mind, and he that brings his
ears to Church and leaves his mind at home he comes like a beast.

Our attention have five great enemies, The enemies of attention.
the first is a straying thought, when all the powers of our soul should wait
upon the voice of the preacher, then are our minds in our coffers, or in our
pastures, or where they should not be: wherefore pray for a steady and stayed
heart. The second is a wandering eye, gazing after every picture, upon every
mote, or fly, and rolling up and down in every corner, for as Soloman says
the eyes of a fool are in Pro. 17, 24 Eccl. 2, 14.
every corner. But a wise man's eyes are in his head The third is a needelesse
shifting and stirring of the body, a fumbling with hands, a shuffling with
the feet, a risinge and remouinge from place when there is noe cause to
provoke us: and let it not seem strange that these small trifles should
hinder our attention, for even the little birds of the air did pick up the
seed of the word, least it should take root and go down to the heart. The
fourth is an vnreverent talking and uncivil laughing in the Church, as if the
Temple of God were a place of mart or exchange, where every man might single
out his companion and freely discourse de omni e^te and non ente, of every
matter and occasion offered and ministered, these are they that make the temple
of God a den of thieves. The fifth is a service and se^celes sleeping, for some
there be who are no sooner in their seats but their hearts are a sleep, as if
they came to see visions, and looks with Jacob to see the Angels going up,
when as they might as well see Eutichus fallinge down: Therefore quicken your
senses, rouse up your dulnes, and remember him which said to his disciples,
Could yea not watch with me Mat. 26, 40
one hour? To these five ye may add (if ye plese) a sixth which of all the rest
is most scandolous and offensive, and that is a shamful departing out of the
church and violent breaking from the congregation, wherein a man does as it
were openly protest, that he is exceeding weary, and has but too much for his
mo^ey, so that Joseph was never more willing to depart out of prison, then he
out of the Church, nor Simeon better content to die when he said. Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace. But such men can hardly depart in
peace, for seldom it is when they leave not behind them, both the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the peace of God which passes all understanding.

After attention is required remembrance, to lay it up in the storehouse of
our memory, for what avails it to be attentive for the time and so soon as we
be gone to forget all, to suffer the birds to pick up the seed which Christ
had sown before. Saint James compares such a man to one beholdinge his face
in a glass, who goes his way and forgets imediately what manner of man he
was: and fitly are such ears resembled to a sieue, which while ye dip it in
the Iam. 1, 23 24.
water receives it in at a thousand holes, but take it up, and the water
runs out faster then ever it came in: so is it with forgetful hearers, they
mark attentively, conceive presently, and ^or a time are touched inwardly, but
the next toy drives all out again, but Blessed are Luke 11, 28
they that hear the word of God and keep it: it should seem that Peter
carried such a sieue in his head, else how could the devil sifte him as wheat.
for noe sooner had Christ forewarned him that he would forswear him, but ye
dieull sifted ye word out of his ears, and he forgot it, and so not
remembering the words was the cause of Peter's apostasy, for so soon as he
remembered the words, the text says he went out and wept bitterly: therefore
let us not only hear but remember too, for that spirit which says O my
people Psalm. 78, 1 Prou. 3, 1
hear my law, says likewise my Son forget not my law. Therefore God
prescribed helps of memory to the Isralites, commanding them to bind his
words upon their hands for a sign, that they should be as frontlets between
their eyes, that they should write them upon the posts of their houses, and
on their gates, and in a word that they should use all helps against
forgetfulness, for that was Gods meaning and no more: and if we seek for a
help indeed, then conference is the help, when a man is delighted to talk of
that at home which has been spoken at the Church, for it may be that will
pearce into the head at a second repeting, which at the first report would not,
even as a nail may be driven in at a second or third stroke, which could not
at the first: and indeed it is Gods commanndement to the Isralites, that they
should talk of his law among their children when they were in their houses,
when they taulked or else walked by the way, as also at their vprising and
down laying: therefore let us think that this charg concerns us likewise,
and say with David. Our tongue shall talk of thy righteousness Psa. 72, 24
all the day long that at what time soever Christ shall come he may find us
talking of his testimonies, as when he ouertooke his desciples walking to
Emaus, he found them communing of his death and passion. After attention and
memory the last and chief point is to lay it to the heart, for God especially
respects the heart, and if that be wanting he misseth it at the Esa. 29, 13
first, and says, This people honors me with their lips, or with their
ears, but their heart is far from me. It is a small thing to remember only what
was said, it is but a sign of a good memory at the best, and if that be
sufficient then let the devil come into the temple too, for he has memory
more then enough, to quote any Scripture against Christ, or whosoever shall
encounter him, and many hipocrits which hang upon the Church have a certain
swimming in their brain, a speculatiue divinity, by which they can hold talk
at a table to discourse of any point Mat. 4.
in Religion, or course out a controversy to the proof, but God is not served
with wit and memory, therefore he says further, Thou shall lay up these words
in thy heart, and in thy soul To lay Gods word to the heart is to take hold of
it by the heart and apply it to the conscience, as when we hear of gods mercy to
be ravished with joy* and when we hear of his judgments to be stricken with
fear* when we hear of his promises to rise up in hope, when we hear of our
sins to repent and loath our selves. This is the laying of the word to our
heart, and thus did Marie when she heard what straung things the shepherds
reported from the Angels: Saint Luke says, She kept all those sayings and
pondred them in her heart, A special Luke 2, 10
help to this is an often reuoluing and meditating in our minds of that we have
heard, for David did not only talk of Gods testimonies amongst his friends,
but being alone likewise did meditate of his law, for so he says, that in Gods
law was his continual meditation and that both evening and morning, and seven
times in a day, and it has bin the practice of Gods saints from time to time,
to enter into continual meditation of his mercy and of his judgments. It is
commended in Isaac that every evening he went Ge. 24, 63 Esaias 5, 12, 14.
out to meditate: in the law those beasts were only clean which chewed the
cud, by which was figured a spiritual meditating and ruminating of heavenly
things: and it is the cause of much uncleanness in men's lives, and of much
judgment upon the world, because they meditate not of Gods ways. Indeed says
the prophet, The harp and violl, the Timbrell and pipe, and wine are in their
bankets, but the works of God they consider not, therefore hell has enlarged
it self and opened her mouth, and they that rejoiced shall go down into it:
and so says the Prophet Jeremy. That the whole land is fallen into
desolation because there is none that considers in his heart Ier. 12, 11
Therefore in the name of God (beloved) let us prepare our ears and hearts, that
we may first hear, then remember, and last of all lay up the word in our
hearts, for this is the right hearing, and he that hears has not only ears,
but ears to hear, I would ye did consider that every man by his obedience in
this regard is judged of what flock he is, for so says Christ, My sheep hear
my Ioh. 10, 27
voice: so that if a man be desirous to hear, then straight he is judged to be
of christ's flock: but if the word be unsavory, and breed no delight in his
heart: it is a shreud presumption that that man is a Goat: And great reason we
have to delight in Gods voice, for there is no word proceeding out of his
mouth, but it sauoureth of mercy and salvation to the soul, for so Cant. 5, 13
the Church testified of Christ, that his lips are like to Lillies dropping
down pure mirrhe, and how then should God endure our contempt who prefer the
devil before him: nay God will endite us not only of contempt but of mockery
too, for if we shall beseech God to supply the means of hearing, and send down
a prophet amongst us, and when that Prdphet comes, shall shut our ears
against him, what is that but a mock? Besides what an unreasonable thing is it
that we desire God to hear us, who could never vouchsafe to hear him, if we
stand in any need of God how clamorous are we and importunate upon him.

Hear my prayer O Lord, bow down thine ear unto my supplicatton, and why
hidest thou thy face and forgettest all our afflictions, and if God seem a
little to delay us, how hasty are we upon him, come Lord Jesus, come quickly
and make noe long tarrying my God, and O god make have to help us: but when God
speaks to us there is none that turns his ear, as if we had him in a string,
that he were bound to us and not we to him: therefore it shall come to pass
that we shall pray and he shall not hear us, for so he threatens. Because I
have called and ye refused, Prou. 7, 24 26, 27, etc.
I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes, when
your fear comes like a sudden desolation, and your destruction like a
whirlewinde, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, then shall they
call upon me but I will not answer, they shall seek me earelie but they shall
not find me, because they hated knowledge. God shall take from you either the
preaching of the word as he threatens by Amos. I will Amo. 8, 11
send a famine into the land, not a famine of bread, nor thirst for water, but
of hearing the word of the Lord. Or God shall take from you the Preacher of the
word, when ye shall run from coast to coaste, and shall find none to preach
peace unto your consciences, or at the least god shall take away the gifts of
the Preacher because of the hardness of your hearts. It is a notable observation
of Saint Gregory that God does sometime multiply his gifts and his spirit
upon the Preacher because the hearer is desirous to learn: and sometime
again he does take away his gifts and his spirit from the Preacher even for
a plague and judgment upon the people, because they neither desire to hear or
care to learn. Therefore do ye prepare your hearts and ears to hear and I
doubt not but god will multiply his spirit and send a blessing upon these my
labors. And of this let me advise you before hand, that no one of you at any
time presume to set his foot within these walls, who first sets not down
with himself to practice in his life what here he hears with his ear. Some
come not to have their lives resormed, but to have their ears tickled as at a
play: some come for nouelty, some for fashion, some to sleep, some to see, and
some to be seen, but few to practice: but let these things be far from you,
for our savior Christ says. He that is of God, bears gods words: (nay he
goes further in the John. 8, 47
same place speaking to the unbelieving Jews, ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God, and Saint James Iam. 1, 22
says, that he deceives himself who is only a hearer of the word and not a
dooer: for Gods word is a leven, whose nature is to turn the whole lump into
his own nature, to season and make it like it self as when you have heard a
Sermon of humility to show forth the fruit of that Sermon in your lives and
conuersasions: when you have heard a Sermon of repentance to be stricken in
heart with a feeling of your sins: when you have heard of Gods judgments
against blasphemy, covetousness, lying, stealing, against usury or profaning
of the Sabboths, every man to set downs with himself I will surely (with Gods
help) purge my self of this and that corruption, and amend in my self what I
now see is amiss, then may we say of you ye are our Sermon as Paul said to
the Corrinthians ye are our Ep^stle 2 cor. 3, 2,
When whatsoever doctrine has flowed out of our mouths does spring up as
freshly in your lives: let us therefore say with David, O Lord prepare the
hearts of this people unto thee, send down thy holy spirit into our hearts and
into our ears, govern us when we come to hear, for paul may plant, and Apollo
water, but thou must give increase, and in vain shall the voice of the preacher
beat upon the door of our ears, unless thou fill our hearts with thy
spirit, which we beseech thee of thy infinite mercy and goodness to perform
that we may proceed from grace to grace, until we come to the state of glory
unto which the Lord of his mercy bring us. To the son and to the holy
ghoast, (three persons but one God) be ascribed all praise dominion and glory
now and for evermore. Amen.

Finis.

