ROGER WIDDRINGTONS Last REIOYNDER TO Mr. THOMAS FITZ-HERBERTS REPLY CONCERNING
THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, And the POPES power to depose PRINCES: Wherein all his
arguments, taken from the Laws of God, in the old and new Testament, of
Nature, of Nations, from the Canon and Civil Law, and from the Popes Breues,
condemning the Oath, and the Cardinals Decree, forbidding two of Widdringtons
Books are answered: Also many Replies and Instances of Cardinal Bellarmine in
his Schulckenius, and of Leonard Lessius in his Singleton are confuted, and
diverse cunning shifts of Cardinal Peron are discovered.

PROVERBS 12. The lip of truth shall be stable for ever; but he that is an
hasty witness frames a tongue of lying.

IHS


Permissu Superiorum. 1619.

The CONTENTS of this TREATISE.
THE Preface to the Reader: wherein it is showed first, how dangerous and
pernicious a thing it is, under pretense of zeal to Catholic Religion, and to
the Sea Apostolic, to coin, teach, and publish by fraud and violence false
articles of Catholic faith, especially in things, which do greatly derogate
from the temporal Sovereignty of absolute Princes. Secondly, how exceedingly
Widdringtons Adversaries do prejudice themselves and their cause, by handling
this controversy concerning the Oath of Allegiance, and the Popes power to
depose Princes, in such a fraudulent, uncharitable, and slanderous manner; and
in not permitting learned Catholics, to whom the charge of souls is
committed, and who ought always to be ready to satisfy every one, that
asks them a reason of their Catholic faith, to try and examine by the true
touchstone of Catholic faith, and the undoubted principles of Catholic
Religion, whether the faith, which they pretend to be Catholic, be a false
and forged Catholic faith, or no: Thirdly, what is Widdringtons chief drift
in making this Reioynder, and in continuing still to handle this controversy.
CHAP. I.
Widdrington freeth himself of two frauds, whereof he is wrongfully accused,
and returns them back again up- his Adversary. Secondly, he discovers
the fraud and falsehood of his Adversaries reasons, which he yields for the
supposition of his Discourse, and that therein he contradicts his own
grounds. Thirdly, he plainly shows, that he has answered probably, and like
a good Catholic.
CHAP II.
Widdringtons answer to an argument of his Adversary, taken from the rule of
the law, [The accessory follows the principal,] is confirmed. Secondly, Two
Instances which he brought against that rule, are proved to be sound and
sufficient. Thirdly, that place of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 6. If you have Secular
judgments, etc. is at large examined.
CHAP. III.
Widdringtons answer to Fa. Lessius argument taken from that maxim, [Hee that
can do the greater, can do the less,] is confirmed. Secondly, the four
Instances, which he brought to confute the said argument and maxim, are
examined, and proved to be neither frivolous nor impertinent, but sound,
sufficient, and to the purpose. Thirdly, Cardinal Bellarmines example touching
the translation of the Roman Empire, and the argument which D. Schulckenius
brings to confirm the same, with two other examples of Clodoueus King of
France, and of Boleslaus King of Polony, are confuted.
CHAP. IIII.
Widdringtons interpretation of that clause of the Oath, wherein the doctrine
[that Princes who are excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed,
or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever,] is abiured as impious
and heretical, is proved to be sound and sufficient, and is cleared from all
absurdity and contradiction, even by M. Fitzherberts own examples, and that
it may without perjury be sworn by any Catholic.
CHAP. V.
Widdringtons answers to all M. Fitzherberts arguments, taken from the law of
God, both in the old and new Testament, are proved to be truly probable and
sincere, and no way fraudulent, or contrary to his own doctrine. SEC. 1.
First, all the authorities, which are brought out of the old law, are confuted
in general, by the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine and other learned Divines.
Secondly, the arguments taken from that place of Deuteron. 17. Si difficile and
ambiguum, etc. and the examples of Eleazar and Iosue, and from the difference
of the sacrifices to be offered for Priests and Princes, together with the
testimonies of Philo, Theodoret, and Procopius, are answered in particular.
SEC. 2. All M. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the old law, since the
institution of Kings, are at large examined: and first his argument, taken from
the authority of Priests and Prophets, to create, anoint, chastise and depose
Kings, is disprooued. Secondly, Widdringtons answers to the examples of Queen
Athalia, deposed by Ioiada the high Priest, and of King Ozias deposed by
Azarias the high Priest, are confirmed, and whatsoever D. Schulckenius
obiecteth against the said answers is related, and answered. Thirdly, it is
showed, that the authority of S. Chrysostom brought by M. Fitzherbert to
confirm the example of King Ozias, makes nothing for him, but against him,
and that in urging this authority he deals fraudulenty, peruerteth Saint
Chrysostomes meaning, and also contradicts Card. Bellarmine. SEC. 3. All M.
Fitzherberts arguments taken from the new Testament, are examined: and first,
his comparison between the old law, and the new, the figure and the verity is
proved to make against himself. Secondly, those words of our Savior,
Whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. and Feed my sheep, are declared, and the
arguments drawn from thence, and from the nature of a well instituted
Commonwealth are satisfied; and Doctor Schulckenius Reply is proved to be
fraudulent and insufficient. Thirdly, the authority of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.
affirming, that he and the rest were ready to revenge all disobedience, is
answered: M. Fitzherberts fraud in alleging the authority of S. Augustine is
plainly discovered, and the Conclusion of his Chapter showed to be false and
fraudulent.
CHAP. VI.
M. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the law of Nature are confuted: and first
it is showed, in what manner temporal things are by the law of Nature
subordinate to spiritual, and the temporal Commonwealth to the Church of
Christ. Secondly, that Religious Priests cannot by the law of Nature punish
temporal Princes temporally; and that in the law of Nature the civil society
was supreme, and disposed of all things, as well concerning religion, as State,
and that therefore the new Oath, denying the Popes power to depose Princes, is
not repugnant to the law of Nature. Thirdly, the difference betwixt the
directive and coerciue power, and how temporal things become spiritual, is
declared, and from thence proved, that the Church may command, but not inflict
temporal punishments; and diverse Replies of M. Fitzherbert and D. Schulckenius
are confuted.
CHAP. VII.
1. Certain places of the old and new Testament are explained: 2. D.
Schulckenius Reply to the answer Widdrington made to those words, Whatsoever
thou shall loose, etc. and thirdly, Cardinal Bellarmines second reason, and
Fa. Parsons answer to the Earl of Salisburie grounded thereon; and fourthly
other arguments brought by M. Fitzherbert, from the examples of Ananias and
Saphyra, and of others, and from the practice of the Church, and the person of
man, are clearly confuted.
CHAP. VIII.
M. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the law of Nations and the Civil law are
answered: and first the difference betwixt the Priests of the old and new
Testament, and the Priests of other Nations, and also betwixt the law of
Nations and of Nature, is declared. Secondly, from thence it is proved, that
among all Nations the civil commonwealth was supreme, and disposed of all
things both spiritual and temporal, and punished all persons both Priests and
others with temporal punishments, and consequently that the new Oath cannot be
impugned by the law of Nations. Thirdly, what M. Fitzherbert obiecteth from the
Civil Law, is confuted.
CHAP IX.
First, the difficulties which some make concerning the authority of the
Lateran Council are propounded. Secondly, the decree of the Council, which is
commonly urged to prove the Popes power to depose Princes, is related.
Thirdly, Widdringtons first answer to the said decree is proved to be sound
and sufficient, and M. Fitzherberts replies against the same are confuted.
CHAP. X.
Widdringtons second answer to the decree of the Lateran Council (affirming
that absolute Princes are not comprehended therein, because they are not
mentioned by their proper names, but by inferior titles) is proved to be
neitheir improbable nor absurd, but conform to the doctrine of learned Divines
and Lawyers; and M. Fitzherberts exceptions against the said answer are showed
to be very insufficient and fraudulent.
CHAP. XI.
Widdringtons first answer to an objection propounded by himself is proved
to be sufficient, and that the consent of temporal Princes is necessary to
the validity of Ecclesiastical constitutions, which inflict temporal
punishments, and consequently are not made by true spiritual authority.
Secondly, the doctrine of the Lord Cardinal Peron, in his speech to the Lower
house of Parliament against the Oath propounded by them, is examined. Thirdly,
M. Fitzherberts objections grounded upon the decrees of Pope Callixtus,
Vrbanus, the Council of Eliberis in Spain, and the constitution of the
Apostles are clearly confuted.
CHAP. XII.
An other answer of Widdrington grounded upon certain Glossers, or
Expositours of the Canon Law is confirmed, and M. Fitzherberts exceptions
against the same are proved to be fraudulent and insufficient. Secondly, it is
showed, that from no Canon of the Church it can be proved, that the custom of
the Church is, or has been to inflict by her spiritual authority temporal
penalties. Thirdly, the true difference betwixt the Divines and Canonists,
concerning the Popes power in temporalls is declared.
CHAP. XIII.
Widdringtons third answer to the decree of the Lateran Council is confirmed.
Secondly, it is showed, how certain it is, according to the doctrine of
learned Catholics, that the Church cannot err in decrees or precepts of
manners; from whence it is clearly deduced, that from the Decree, or rather
Act of the Lateran Council it cannot with any color of probability be
proved, that it is a point of faith, that the Pope has authority to depose
temporal Princes. Thridly, all M. Fitzherberts arguments to show the contrary,
are most plainly confuted.
CHAP. XIIII.
Three Instances grounded upon three examples of Popes Decrees and sentences
brought by Widdrington, to confute three arguments of Fa. Lessius, whereby he
labors in vain to demonstrate, that the foundations of the Decrees and
sentences of Popes and Counsels, must be certain and of faith, are proved
to be sound and sufficient. Secondly, the first example brought by Widdrington
is confirmed, and M. Fitzherberts exceptions against the same are confuted, and
he himself in setting down Widdringtons. Instances, and applying them to the
decree of the Lateran Council, is convinced of manifest fraud and falsehood.
Thirdly, that proposition, Many things may be certain to the Sea Apostolic,
and yet seem uncertain to other learned men, is examined.
CHAP. XV.
Widdringtons second example and his Instances grounded thereon, are confirmed,
and M. Fitzherbert in impugning the same is convinced of manifest fraud and
ignorance, in taxing therein of fondness the learned Divines of his own
Society. Also Widdringtons third example, and his Instances grounded thereon,
are proved to be sound and sufficient, and M. Fitzherberts fraud in relating
the said Instances, and applying them to the Lateran Council, is plainly
discovered.
CHAP. XVI.
Another argument, or rather answer of Widdrington is confirmed, and M.
Fitzherbert in laboring to prove that Widdrington by his own grant is fallen
into heresy or error, is convinced of palpable ignorance. The Conclusion of
all Widdringtons discourse in his Preface to his Apologeticall answer, is
confirmed; and what M. Fitzherbert excepteth against the same, and also his
brief Recapitulation of all his Discourse in this his Treatise, are confuted.
CHAP. XVII.
M. Fitzherberts uncharitable Admonition to the Catholic Reader, that
Widdrington is no other then an heretic, disguised and masked under the vizard
of a Catholic, and that his submission to the Catholic Roman Church,
proceeds from no other ground, but from a deep dissimulation, or rather
artificial and execrable hypocrisy to delude and deceive Catholics, is
clearly confuted, and proved to be void of charity, learning, and sincerity:
and what reasons the King and State may have to permit such submissions, is
there declared. Widdringtons answer to the Popes Breues, forbidding the Oath,
is confirmed, and he freed from all disobedience and irreuerence for not
admitting them. The decree of the Cardinals forbidding two of Widdringtons
Books, and commanding him to purge himself forthwith, is fully answered by
his Purgation, and humble Supplication, which he made forthwith to his
Holiness.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOw dangerous and pernicious a thing it is (dear Contreymen) in any temporal
Kingdom or Commonwealth to coin, or willingly to utter, and much more by
fraud or violence to force the people to accept of counterfeit money, any man
of mean understanding may easily perceive. And truly no less dangerous and
pernicious is it in the spiritual Kingdom and Church of Christ, 1 Timothy 3.
which is the pillar and firmament of truth, to invent, forge, or divulge, and
which is far worse, to thrust upon the faithful by fraud and violence false
articles and positions for true and infallible Catholic faith, but especially
in things which are greatly prejudicial to the temporal Sovereignty of
Christian Princes, whom Christ our Savior, has appointed to be Nurcing
Fathers and Protectours of his Church: Isay 19. Council. Trid. sess. 25. cap.
20. de Reform.
for that thereby not only Christian Princes are extremely wronged, but also
the Christian Religion is greatly scandalized, and the souls both of Princes
and subjects are much endangered: and therefore no less thanks do they deserve
at the hands of the Church of God, who should discover a false and forged
Catholic faith, and the first inuenters or publishers thereof, then do they
at the hands of the temporal Kingdom, who should disclose false and
counterfeit money, and the first coiners or vtterers of the same.

2 And this is the very case between me and my Adversaries in this
controversy concerning the Popes pretended authority to depose temporal
Princes, and to dispose of all their temporalls. For I accuse them, and also in
my judgment clearly convince them, that they have, if not coined and forged,
yet at leastwise not only taught and divulged, and, which is worse,
endeavored by fraud and violence to thrust upon Catholics a false and forged
Catholic faith, but also that they have wrongfully defamed and slandered those
Catholics, and my self in particular, who do plainly discover their
falsehoods, and that they seek both by deceitful and violent means to hinder
as well the learned as the unlearned people, that they shall not by the true
touchstone and undoubted rules of the Catholic faith, and by reading those
books which do exactly and sincerely debate this question, examine in what a
fraudulent manner they seek to color this their false and newly forged
Catholic faith: wherein they do most egregiously abuse all Christian Princes
and people, most exceedingly scandalize Catholic Religon, and as much as lies
in them, they make the Sea Apostolic odious and dreadful both to Princes and
people, and give occasion of perpetual discord betwixt the Kingdom and the
Priesthood, whereby they prepare the way to Antichrist, and lay open a wide gap
to Schism, heresy, Atheism, and infidelity.

3 For if under the pretense of advancing the Popes authority in so great
prejudice of Regal Sovereignty, we once forsake the ancient and approved
rules, by which as by an assured touchstone the true Christian and Catholic
faith, has always been discerned from the false and counterfeit, what
undoubted grounds, shall we have to build our Catholic faith upon, which In the
Creed of S. Athanasius.
unless every one shall keep entire, and inuiolate, without doubt he shall
perish eternally? If Christian Princes and people once perceive, that the
supreme Pastors of Gods Church do both permit and applaud some learned men,
who are otherwise potent in the Court of Rome, to impose by fraud and violence
upon the Church of Christ, in favor of that authority which they pretend to
have over all temporals, a false and forged Catholic faith for true, and to
disgrace and slander all those who shall detect their forgeries, why may not
the said Princes and people justly suspect, as Fa. Lessius argues In his
Singleton part. 3. number. 74.
, that the Catholic faith and Religion is for a great part thereof a mere
invention of men, devised of set purpose by Popes, Bishops, and Clergy men in
policy, that they may more securely dominiere, and under a show of piety and
Religion, dispose of all temporals at their pleasure? And therefore how much
these men are to answer at the day of judgment, for so greatly wronging
Christian Princes, for so mightily scandalizing Catholic Religion, for so much
endangering the souls of all sorts of people, and for so unjustly oppressing
and slandering innocent and zealous Catholics, who do plainly discover their
fraud and falsehoods, I cannot but tremble, when I seriously consider the same.

4. And if perhaps my Adversaries will in their own defense allege, that one
may be excused from all fault before God and man, who in zeal should teach any
doctrine to be Catholic, which he sincerely in his conscience thinks to be
truly Catholic, albeit perchance in very deed it is not so; as also he that
utters counterfeit money not knowing it to be counterfeit, but sincerely
thinking that it is good and lawful coin, is not to be condemned before God
or man: I answer, that all things done in zeal are not free from sin, when
the zeal is blind, and grounded upon an erroneous conscience, and culpable
ignorance: Otherwise we might excuse from all fault the Jews, for crucifying
our Savior, and putting to death his Disciples, Luke 23.
for that they did it through ignorance, and thought thereby to do service to
God; John 16.
and S. Paul for blaspheming and persecuting the Christians, before his
conversion, Acts 1.
because he did it being ignorant in incredulity.

5 And therefore first I wish them to remember that admonition, Bell. lib 2. de
gemitu columbae cap 9.
which Cardinal Bellarmine my chiefest Adversary gives to the Pastors and
Prelates of the Church upon occasion of relating the fearful death of Pope
Innocent the third, who greatly busied himself with the deposing of temporal
Princes, and with the disposing of temporal kingdoms, whereby great wars,
and much effusion of innocent blood, were caused in the Church of God (which
perchance was one of the three causes for which the said Pope, as Cardinal
Bellarmine rehearses, had been damned eternally, if he had not repented at
the hour of his death.) For first he deposed Philip, and set up Otho, Matthew.
Paris in vita Ioannis ad annu^. 1210. Page 220.
then he deposed Otho, for seeking to recover certain towns and forts
belonging to the Empire, which the said Pope in the time of Frederikes minority
had taken into his own possession: afterward he sought to thrust out of Italy
the said Frederike the second, Blondus decad. 2. l b. 6. Abbas Vrsperg. ad
annu^ 1212.
who before at Aquisgraue was crowned Emperor by the said Pope Innocent his
authority. I omit now to relate how here in England he carried himself, first
in taking part with the Barons, and deposing King John, Matthew Paris in vita
Ioannis ad annu^. 1212. page 223. And Stow in the life of King John.
and (which neither Car. Bellarmine, nor Suarez dare justify, who will not
admit that the Pope may lawfully depose a King, and give his Kingdom from the
next heir; who is free from all fault, to another) in giving the Kingdom to
the King of France, and his posterity for ever, whereby he deprived the next
lawful heir Henry the 3. being a child, of his right, without any fault
committed by him: But after the Popes Legate had cunningly persuaded King John,
to resign up his Crown and Kingdom to the Pope, then he took King John's
part against the King of France, and the Barons, and commanded them not molest
him, for that he was now become the Popes Vassal. But mark, I pray you, what
Card. Bellarmine writes of this Pope Innocent.

6 About this time, says he, Surius ad 16. Iunij.
relating Surius words in the life of S. Ludgard, Pope Innocent the third,
after the celebrating of the Lateran Council, departed this life, and
forthwith he appeared visibly to Ludgard. But she seeing him compassed about
with a great flame of fire, demanded who he was: He answered, that he was Pope
Innocent: And what is this, says she with a pitiful groan, that the common
Father of us all is so cruelly tormented? He answered, For three causes am I
so tormented, which also had most justly adjudged me to everlasting torments,
if by the intercession of the most pious Mother of God, to whom I built a
Monastery, I had not repented at the last hour. And truly I have escaped
eternal death, but I shall be tormented with most grievous punishments until
the day of Judgment: But the Mother of mercy obtained for me of her Son,
that I might come to thee to desire prayers: which when he had said, he
presently vanished away. And Ludgard told his necessities to her Sisters, that
they might relieve him: but she greatly pitying his case did afflict her self
for his cause, with wonderful punishment. Let the Reader know, says Thomas
Cantipratensis the writer of her life, (from whom Surius took the same) that
those three causes are, by the revealing of Ludgard, not unknown to us, but
for the reverence of so great a Pope, we would not relate them.

7 Which example, says Card. Bellarmine, is wont oftentimes to terrify me
exceedingly, and to cause me to tremble. For if so commendable a Pope, and who
in the eyes of men was accounted not only honest and prudent, but also a
Saint, and worthy to be imitated, did escape so narrowly hell fire, and is to
be punished until the day of Judgment, with the most grievous fire of
Purgatory, what Prelate would not tremble? who would not examine most exactly
the secrets of his conscience? For I do easily persuade my self, that so
great a Pope could not commit deadly sins, but being deceived under the show
of good, by flatterrs, and those of his own household, of whom it is said in
the Gospel, Matthew. 10
A man's enemies are they of his own howshold. Therefore let us all learn by
this so great an example, to examine carefully our conscience, least perchance
it be erroneous, albeit to us it seem to be right and sound. Thus Cardinal
Bellarmine, whose counsel in this point, I think it necessary, that all my
Adversaries with Cardinal Bellarmine the chiefest of them, and my self should
duly consider, least that the zeal, which all of us pretend to have, be
blind, and not according to knowledge, and that our conscience, albeit to us it
seem to be right and sound, be erroneous, and grounded upon culpable
ignorance. For my own part, I have examined my conscience very carefully, and
cannot find my self guilty of any fault, for examining this controversy
touching the lawfulness of the Oath, and the Popes power to depose Princes,
and that I was not moved thereunto for fear, flattery, hope of gain, or any
other worldly respect, but truly and sincerely, God is my witness, for the
love, I bear to God, Religion, my Prince and Country, to find out the
Catholic truth, and being found, to embrace, profess, and follow it, and
thereby according to our Saviors commandment, to render to God and Caesar
that obedience, which does belong to them.

8 Secondly, therefore I wish my Adversaries to consider, what may in the
judgment of any prudent man, be thought of those men, who by fraud or violence
should seek to force upon any one a great sum of gold, which he greatly
suspecteth to be false and counterfaite, and therefore refuses to accept
thereof, before he has fully tried whether it be true or forged coin: and
whether any fault be to be found in him, both for desiring to have the gold
examined by the touchstone, and those ways by which true gold is discerned
from counterfaite, before he be compelled to take it for good and current;
and also for giving his reasons why he thinks the same to be false and
forged: And if they will not suffer him to make trial, whether it be good or
no, but will needs have him to take it for good gold, when not only himself,
but also diverse other skillful Goldsmiths do greatly suspect, yea and are
fully persuaded, that it is naught and counterfaite, and if he refuse to accept
thereof in that manner, they should seek to disgrace him with the Prince and
people, and to accuse him of disobedience to the State, and who wilfully
refuses to accept and acknowledge the Kings coin for lawful, whether these
men do not great wrong to that party, and whether it may not be prudently
thought, that they have a guilty conscience, and that they themselves suspect
the said gold, not to be indeed so good and current, as in words they would
pretend.

9 Now the case between me and my Adversaries is far worse then this. For
they have sought by false and fraudulent means, not only to impose upon the
whole Christian world, a false and counterfeit Catholic faith, for truly
Catholic, but to slander and defame all those Catholics, and my self in
particular, who, for the reasons we have often propounded, refuse to accept
thereof for Catholic, until it be better proved so to be, and to condemn us
of temerity, and disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, yea and of flat heresy;
and they would make the world believe, that we are not true Catholics, but
heretics disguised and masked under the vizard of Catholics. For so says M.
Fitzherbert c. 17. nu. 19.
And albeit we do publicly profess our selves to be true Catholics, and do
submit all our writings to the judgment and censure of the Catholic Roman
Church, and do sincerely and solemnly protest to recall and recant forthwith
our error, if we have committed any, as soon as it shall be made known unto
us, that we have written any thing amiss, yet they fear not to affirm,
contrary to all justice and charity, that all this our profession, submission,
and protestation, is but a false luster and gloss, So says Fitzherbert c. 17
nu. 1. and 26.
to cast upon our counterfaite ware of purpose to deceive, and that it
proceeds from no other ground, but from a deep dissimulation, or rather an
artificial and execrable hypocrisy to delude and deceive Catholics.

10 Neither will they suffer us to examine by the true grounds of Catholic
Religion their newly invented Catholic faith, and to yield our reasons, which
do fully persuade us, that their faith, which they pretend to be Catholic, is
not ancient and true, but a newly invented, and a false and forged Catholic
faith, but they have caused his Holiness to condemn our books, which in our
judgment do plainly discover their forgeries, and to forbid all Catholics,
as well learned as unlearned to read them, without signifying unto us any one
thing in particular which we have written amiss, although we have often and
earnestly requested to know the same: but all that they say or write, we must,
forsooth, without any further examination approve for good and current
doctrine, albeit we have most plainly convinced them of manifest fraud and
falsehood, in almost every one of their arguments and answers, which they have
brought to prove their doctrine, in this point of the Popes spiritual
authority to depose Princes, and to inflict temporal punishments, to be truly
Catholic. All which being duly considered, what infinite wrong they have done
us, it is too too manifest, and albeit they pretend true zeal to Catholic
Religion, and to the Sea Apostolic, yet for my own part I cannot see, but that
any prudent man may justly suppose their zeal to be blind, and not according
to knowledge, but grounded upon culpable or wilful ignorance, and that they
themselves suspect their own conscience to be eroneous, and their cause to be
naught, and therefore would not have it to be further sifted and examined.

11 For seeing that the nature of truth, being like to pure and perfect gold, is
such, that the more it is examined, the more clear and perspicuous it does
still appear, and contrariwise falsehood the more it is sifted, the absurdity
thereof still shows it self more manifest; if my Adversaries are in their
consciences persuaded, as in words they profess, that they have truth on
their side, and that the authority of spiritual Pastors to excommunicate upon
just cause Christian Princes, to bind and loose, and to dispense in Oaths in
general, which all Catholics acknowledge to be included in their spiritual
power, be denied in the late Oath of allegiance, as they pretend, or that their
authority to depose Princes, which all men confess to be denied in the Oath,
be certain, out of controversy, and a clear point of Catholic faith (for
which two causes chiefly they cry out against the Oath, and condemn it for
unlawful, as containing in it more then temporal allegiance, to wit, a
manifest denial of Ecclesiastical authority,) why are they so much afraid to
have the matter charitably and sincerely debated by learned men? Why will they
not suffer those Catholics, especially who are learned, and to whom the charge
of souls is committed, and are able to discern betwixt truth and falsehood,
betwixt Catholic faith and opinion, 1. Pet. 3.
and who ought to be always ready and prepared, to satisfy every one that
asks them a reason of that faith which is in them, to read such books as
do sincerely and exactly handle this controversy, and all the difficulties on
both sides, and do plainly declare, in what particular manner all Christians
are bound by the law of Christ, according to the true and approved grounds of
Catholic Religion, Matthew. 22.
to render to God and Caesar that which is their due?

12 Why do they so shamefully abuse his Holiness, by misinforming him, that
his power to excommunicate, to bind and loose, and to absolve from Oaths in
general, is denied in the Oath, and that his power to depose Princes, which
indeed the Oath denies, is a point of faith, and thereupon by urging him to
condemn the Oath, as containing in it many things flat contrary to faith and
salvation, and to forbid those books of Catholic Writers, that do plainly
discover their forgeries, and evidently convince, that no such spiritual
power, as they pretend, is denied in the Oath, and that his power to depose
Princes, which the Oath denies, is not a point of faith, but has ever since
the time of Pope Gregory the seventh (for before his age the practice thereof
was not heard of, Onuphrius. l. 4. de varia creat. Romani Pont.
as Onuphrius witnesses) it has ever been a great controversy betwixt
Popes, and Christian Princes, and those Catholics who have favored either
part: and, which is more extrauagant, by urging him to command under pain of
Censures the Author of those books to purge himself forthwith, and yet not
to signify unto him any one crime either in general, or in particular of
which he should purge himself, although he has very often most humbly and
instantly requested to know the same?

13 Why does not Cardinal Bellarmine, my chiefest Adversary, being accused by
me to his Holiness, in public writings of manifest frauds, falsehoods,
corruptions, and calumnies, clear himself all this time of such foul
imputations, which cannot but greatly blemish his honor, and quite discredit
his cause in the understanding of any judicious man? if in his conscience he
think himself to be guiltless, and that I have falsely accused him, why does
he not answer and justify himself, and show to the world that I have belyed
him, that also thereby I may see my error, and ask him public forgiveness,
and be penitent for the same? If he see that I am innocent, why does he not
restore my credit, which he has wrongfully taken away, and in plain terms
confess, that he was deceived and mistaken in this controversy, and
imitating the example of famous Saint Augustine, retract all that he has
written amiss, especially to the hurt and disgrace of innocent men? Can any
man of judgment imagine, that he being now so near his grave, would take
such pains to write every year some one or other little Treatise of devotion
(which nevertheless will not excuse him before God, from restoring the good
name of them whom he has falsely defamed) and that he would be so careless
to purge himself of such shameless crimes, which cannot but leave his memory
tainted with perpetual infamy, if with his credit he could clear himself?
And therefore, if he did sincerely consider the admonition he gave to other
Prelates, upon occasion of Pope Innocents examples, to examine their conscience
carefully, whether it be sound or erroneous, he might truly have just cause
to be sore afraid, and greatly to suspect, that howsoever he makes an
outward show of zeal, sanctity, and devotion, he has within an erroneous
and seared conscience, for which he must shortly, before the tribunal of God
render a strict account.

14 All which their proceedings being duly considered, whether they are not
manifest signs, that in their own consciences they suspect the justice of
their cause, and do plainly see, that they are not able to make good their
newly invented Catholic faith, and yet will still go on to maintain by
fraud and violence, what they cannot by reason and argument, wherein also how
much they discredit themselves and their cause, how mightily they scandalize
Catholic Religion, and make the Sea Apostolic odious to Princes and subjects,
how egregiously they wrong and slander innocent Catholics, and how greatly
they endanger their own souls and others, I leave to the judgment of any
prudent and pious man.

15 Wherefore my chief drift, good Reader, in this my answer to M.
Fitzherbert is first, to keep and maintain entire and inuiolate the purity
of true Catholic faith and Religion, which is greatly defiled, not only by
impugning true and undoubted articles of faith, but also by forging and
defending false articles for true. Secondly, to defend my innocence (which as
long as I have a pen to write, or a tongue to speak, I will, God willing, not
be afraid to maintain against any man whatsoever, that shall falsely accuse
me and my doctrine of heresy) and to make known my sincere proceeding in
handling this great and dangerous controversy, which concerns our obedience
due to God and Caesar, and the fraudulent and corrupt dealing of my
Adversaries, who by fraud and violence seek to afflict, entangle, and disturb
the consciences of scrupulous and unlearned Catholics, and to nourish in their
hearts such dangerous speculations, which without manifest treason can never
be put in practice. Thirdly, to make manifest to all men that the doctrine for
the Popes power to depose Princes is not certain, unquestionable, and a point
of faith, but very doubtful, uncertain, and at the most only probable: and
consequently, that it cannot be practiced by the Pope, or any other
whatsoever, without manifest injury to the Prince, who is in lawful possession
of his Kingdom, of which the Pope under pretense only of a probable power or
title seeks by his sentence to deprive him; for that according to the
approved rule of the law, and grounded upon natural reason, In causa dubia, De
regulis Iuris in 6. and ff. de regulis Iuris regula, In pari causa.
sieve incerta melior and potior est conditio possidentis. In a doubtful or
disputable case the condition of the possessour is to be preferred. And
therefore, as well observes Fa. Lessius in his Singleton Par. 2. nu. 38.
, potestas, quae non omnino certa, sed probabilis, non potest esse fundamentum,
etc. A power, which is not altogether certain, but probable, cannot be a
ground or foundation, whereby immediately one may be punished, and be deprived
of his right and dominion, but such a power must be most certain, and not
doubtful, or disputable, etc.

16 So that there is a great difference to be made, for as much as concerns
practice, betwixt a power only probable, which tends to favor, and is
hurtful to none, and which is penal and prejudicial to a third person, who
is deprived thereby of some thing which he lawfully possesses. For it is most
certain, and approved by all Divines, that one may practice a probable power,
to use Lessius words, Quando agitur de fauore and beneficio, and nemo cogitur,
nemo iure propinquo seu in re obtento spoliatur, sed potestas quae non omnino
certa sed probabilis, non potest esse fundamentum, etc. When it is treated of a
favor and benefit, and no man is forced, or compelled, no man is spoiled of
his next right, or which he possesses indeed, but a power which is not
altogether certain, but probable, cannot be a ground or foundation, whereby
immediately one may be punished, or deprived of his right and dominion, etc.
And for this cause my Adversaries, knowing right well that if they should once
admit that this power of the Pope is only probable, they must con-consequently
grant, that it is merus titulus sine re, and can never be lawfully put in
practice by any Pope, Prince, or subject whatsoever, have so much labored to
convince out of all laws humane and divine, that this power is not only
probable, but most certain, and a clear point of faith. But how shamefully
they have spent their labor in vain, and what frivolous and fallacious
arguments they have brought under pretense of spiritual good, to make
Sovereign Princes (whom all the ancient Fathers with uniforme consent
acknowledge to be supreme on earth, and next under God in temporals) to be
in temporals subject to the Pope, and that the more they strive to make their
doctrine in this point to be certain, and of faith, the more they show it
still to be less probable, and to be invented and maintained only in favor
of the Pope without sufficient grounds, thou shall see it, good Reader, in this
Treatise made as clear and manifest, as the light at noonday.

17 Only I must desire thy patience and pardon, for my often repeating the
self same things, which may seem to some to be both superfluous and tedious,
but to me for satisfaction chiefly of the unlearned Reader, it seemed very
necessary, especially, for that the chief state of the controversy depends
thereon, and yet my Adversaries will scarce take notice thereof, yea, and are
not ashamed to affirm, that I do not teach any such things, although they
have been by me very often inculcated. As among other things, for example
sake, albeit I have in all my books so often repeated that distinction betwixt
the directive and coerciue power, betwixt commanding, enioyning, or imposing,
and inflicting, punishing, or disposing, and that I do so often and so
expressly affirm, that spiritual Pastors have by the institution of Christ
authority to command, enjoin, and impose temporal and coporall penalties, but
to inflict them, to punish temporally, and to dispose of temporal things,
only by the consent and grant of temporal Princes, Page 258.
yet Cardinal Bellarmine in his Schulckenius is not ashamed to auerre, that
Widdrington denies the Pope to have authority to command temporal Princes in
temporals in order to spiritual good, and thereupon taxes him of teaching
flat heresy; and the most that M. Fitzherbert proves in this his Reply, is,
as you shall see, that spiritual Pastors may, for the necessity of the
Church, and the good of souls, command, enjoin, and impose temporal and
corporal afflictions, as fasting, alms deeds, using of haire-cloth, and the
like, whereof no Catholic makes doubt: And therefore I thought it necessary
to inculcate, as often as occasion should require the aforesaid distinction, it
being the maine mark to which the greatest part of all my Adversaries
arguments, and of my answers do principally tend, and whereon the whole state
of the Controversy betwixt me and them, concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes, and to dispose of all temporals, does chiefly depend.

CHAP. I.
Wherein Widdrington freeth himself from two frauds, whereof he is
wrongfully accused, and returns them back upon his Adversary; secondly he
discovers the fraud, and falsehood of his Adversaries reasons, which he
yields for the supposition of his Discourse, and that therein he
contradicts his own grounds; and thirdly he plainly shows, that he has
answered probably, and like a good Catholic.

1. THere be three things (Good Reader) which my Adversary Mr. Fitzherbert in
the first chapter of his Reply does wrongfully lay to my charge. The first is,
that I have lamely, and fraudulently set down the sum and substance of his
discourse in the two first Chapters of his Supplement; the second, that in
relating a supposition of his, I have used two frauds, the one in the relation
of his words, and the other in the use and application of them: the third is,
that I have neither answered probably, nor like a good Catholic. And because
the Reader may the better judge of the sufficiency, and truth of both our
answers, (for my only desire is that the truth in this difficult
controversy may be clearly known) I will observe the same method, order,
and number of Chapters, which he does; and therefore my answer to his first
accusation, for that he remitteth his Reader for proof thereof to his fifth,
sixth, and seventh Chapters, I will also refer to those places, and only his
two accusations I will examine with him in this Chapter.

2 To begin therefore with his second accusation, whereas in the beginning of
my answer to the substance of M. Fitzherberts discourse, I affirmed, Dis^
^^^ol. in (...) ^ect (...)
that first of all he supposes, that the Popes power to excommunicate and
depose Princes, (if they deserve it, and the good of the Church, and the
salvation of souls do necessarily require it) is deni^d in this oath,
whereupon he concludes afterward, that although the oath does not expressly
affirm, that the Kings Majesty is supreme head of the English Church nor in
plain words deny the Pope so to be; yet it supposes, and implies both the
one, and the other, and thereupon denies the Popes authority to excommunicate
and depose a temporal Prince: and howsoever the matter may be otherwise
colored, it is evident, that the true reason, why the said authority of the
Pope is impugned by the oath, is no other, but because the Kings Majesty is
held to be no way subject to the Pope, yea and to be himself supreme head
of the Church of God in England. This being presupposed, he goes about to
prove, that this oath is repugnant to the law of God, of Nature of Nations,
Canon, and Civil, etc.

3 Now Mr. Fitzherbert does bouldly, but untruly affirm, that I have used
herein two frauds, the one in the relation of his words, the other in the use
and application of them. For albeit, says he, Chap. 1. nu. 7
Widdrington alleges them truly, and does not falsify my text, yet he
relates them in such sort, that his Reader must needs conceive, that I lay
them down in the very beginning of my Discourse for the only foundation, and
ground of all my building; and therefore as soon as he has cited them, he
says, hoc posito probare contendit, etc. this being supposed, he labors to
prove, that this oath is repugnant to the Divine, and Natural law, to the law
of Nations, Civil, and Canon. So he, and then he proceeds to the
abridgement of all my Discourse, beginning with the law of God in the old
Testament, and so goes on with the rest, and impugneth my supposition, as the
only foundation of all my Discourse and arguments.

4. But the truth is, he finds those words of mine in the 66. page of my
Supplement, (as it may appear by his own quotation thereof) after I have
discoursed of the law of God in the old, and new Testament, and of the laws of
Nature, and Nations, and of the Civil law, in the conclusion whereof I have
those words, referring them to the Civil law only: for having proved, that
the said law confirms and establishes the Popes supremacy, I inferred, that
it cannot favor, and much less enjoin, and justify the oath for two
reasons; the one, because the said oath is in part grounded upon the belief,
that the Kings Majesty is supreme head of the Church of God in England, and
no way subject to the Pope (which is repugnant to the Civil law) and the
other, because the Civil law acknowledging the subjection of temporal Princes
to the Pope in matters belonging to their souls, and to the good of the
Church, does by a necessary consequent acknowledge, that they may be punished
by him temporally in their persons and states, where the good of souls and the
service of God does require it, according to the rule of the law, Accossorium
sequitur principale, the accessorie follows the principal. Then, I say, I
argued in the place, which he cites, and I remitted my Reader for the
confirmation of this second reason to a more ample Discourse thereof before in
the same chapter. Nu 66. and 56.
Now then it appears (as I have said) that he has dealt fraudulently with
me two ways, the one in referring my supposition to all the laws, whereof I
treated, whereas I referred the same expressly, and only to the Civil law: the
other, etc. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

5 But truly I cannot but wonder, that this my Adversary should at the very
first beginning of his Reply be so inconsiderate, as in wrongfully accusing me
of fraud, to deal so untruly and fraudulently himself, which could not but
greatly empaire his credit with the ^udicious Reader, and cause him to be
jealous of his sincerity in the rest of his Replies, when at the very first
entrance he should find in him such fraudulent proceeding. For that which I
affirmed is very true, and I marvel, that Mr. Fitzherbert does not blush to
deny the same, to wit, that he did first of all, that is, at the very first
beginning of his Discourse in the sixth page of his Supplement, before he began
to prove the oath to be repugnant to any law Divine, or Humane, suppose that
the Popes power to excommunicate and depose Princes (if they deserve it, and
the good of the Church, and the salvation of souls do necessarily require it)
is denied in this oath. For these be his express words in the sixth page, and
ninth number of his Supplement.

6 Therefore I think good to let him understand here, that my meaning is not
to contradict any article of the oath, that concerns merely Civil obedience
to our Sovereign, but such clauses only, as do either directly, or indirectly
prejudice the authority of our spiritual supreme Pastor, and namely those
which do exempt temporal Princes from excommunication and deposition by the
Pope, when just occasion shall be given by them, and the necessity of the
Church, and the good of souls require it: to which purpose I will prove
(mark well these words) that this new oath in respect of such clauses is
repugnant to all laws Humane, and Divine, and therefore justly condemned by
his Holiness, and refused by Catholics. First then I will speak of the law
of God, etc. So he.

7 Wherefore it is apparent, that Mr. Fitzherbert in the very beginning of his
Discourse refers his aforesaid supposition to all laws both Humane, and
Divine, and yet now to tax me of fraud, he does not blush to say, that I
have dealt fraudulently with him in referring his aforesaid supposition to all
the laws whereof he treats, whereas, says he, he referred the same
expressly and only to the Civil law: Which error of his I would not willingly
have construed in the worser sense but attribute it only to his oblivion, and
forgetfulness of what he himself had written in the beginning of his
Discourse, and not to any fraud in him, but that my words which he himself
does relate, are so plain, that he cannot be excused either from manifest
fraud, or from so palpable an error, which no man of understanding can
scarcely commit. For mark my words, which he himself sets down. First of
all he [M. Fitz.] supposes that the Popes power to excommunicate, and depose
Princes, is denied in this oath; whereupon afterward (to wit, in the 66. page,
as it is evident by my quotation) he concludes, that although the oath does
not expressly affirm, that the Kings Majesty is supreme head of the English
Church, nor in plain words deny the Pope so to be, yet it supposes, and
implies both the one, and the other, and thereupon denies the Popes
authority to excommunicate and depose a temporal Prince, etc.

8 Now who sees not, that I did clearly distinguish betwixt first of all, and
afterward, betwixt his supposition, which I referred to first of all, and to
the beginning of his discourse in the sixth page, before he began to treat of
any of the laws, as also it may evidently appear by those words of mine, This
being supposed he labors to prove, etc, and betwixt his conclusion, which
I referred to afterward, and quoted the 66. page, where he treats in
particular of the Civil law. But because I quoted only the place, where my
Adversary makes the aforesaid conclusion, for that the Reader could
otherwise hardly find it out, unless he should read 66. pages together, and
did not quote the place, where he made his supposition, for that by those
words of mine, first of all he supposes, and those other, This being supposed
he labors to prove, that this oath is repugnant to the law of God, of
Nature, of Nations, Civil and Canon, the Reader might easily perceive, that
this supposition of his was in the beginning of his discourse, before he
began to treat of any of the laws; Belike my Adversary thought, that he
might easily from hence have some color to tax me of fraudulent proceeding at
the very first beginning, little imagining that my words should be so narrowly
scanned, and that the Reader would easily conceive the difference betwixt first
of all, and afterward, betwixt his supposition in the beginning of his
discourse, page 6. and his conclusion, page 66. but guile has herein beguiled
it self, and whilst my Adversary by taxing me of fraud, thought to
discredit me at the very first entrance, he has clearly proved himself
to be guilty both of fraud and falsehood.

9 The second fraud, which my Adversary Widdrington has used, says Mr.
Fitzherbert, Nu. 6.
is, for that he labors, as it seems, to persuade his Reader, that all my
arguments and reasons are grounded upon a false supposition of my own, which
he says, I do not any way prove, but suppose as known of it self, and
this he seems to gather out of my own words alleged by him, as you have
heard, wherein I affirm, that the new oath supposes and implies a denial of
the Popes supremacy, although it be not expressly denied therein (he should
have said, wherein I affirm, that the oath denies the Popes authority to
excommunicate and depose a temporal Prince, for this is that, which I said,
he did suppose, and no way prove) When nevertheless Nu. 9.
he could not but see, even in the very same place, from whence he took my
words, that I did not prove the oath to be unlawful by that supposition
only, but also by the subordination, and subjection of temporal things to
spiritual, when the good of souls, and the service of God requires it:
Besides that, it is most evident in my discourse concerning diverse of those
laws, that I deduced the unlawfulness of the oath, from the very substance of
them, as it will manifestly appear hereafter, when I shall come to touch them
in particular. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

10 But that I have used no fraud at all in my words, as my Adversary untruly
affirms, and that rather that imputation of fraud may be retorted back
upon himself, it is very apparent. For in the beginning of his discourse, to
wit, in the sixth page of his Supplement, he supposes, as you have seen, that
the Popes power to excommunicate and to depose Princes is denied in this oath,
which also afterward in the 66. page he confirms, and in regard only of
these two clauses, he takes upon him to prove, that the Popes spiritual
authority is denied therein: Which his supposition, for as much as concerns
his power to excommunicate, and consequently his spiritual Supremacy, for
that the former is according to the doctrine of all Catholics included in this
latter, as a particular in the universal, I showed in my Theological
Disputation against Cardinal Bellarmine, Fa. Gretzer, Disputatio Theol. c. 4.
sect. ^
and Lessius to be clearly false, and withal, in my answer to the substance
of this my Adversaries discourse, I affirmed, that he does not prove it with
any one argument at all, but supposes it as known of it self: which any man
that will but slightly run over his discourse, may presently perceive to be
true.

11 For albeit he does boldly affirm, and suppose, that the Popes power to
excommunicate, and to depose Princes is denied in this oath, and consequently,
if the Popes power to excommunicate Princes be not denied therein, his
position, or copulative proposition is false, for that to the truth of a
copulative proposition it is required, that both parts of the copulation be
true, and to make it false, it suffices that one only part of the copulation
be false, yet he brings no one argument in his whole Discourse to prove,
that the Popes power to excommunicate Princes is denied in the oath, but
cunningly passes over to his power to depose, which all men confess to be
expressly denied therein. Neither can any man, who is not desirous of set
purpose to misconstrue my words, and meaning, imagine that I intended either
to deny that the Popes power to depose Princes is impugned in the oath, for
that my whole Disputation, and also my answer to this my Adversaries
Discourse, does plainly show the contrary, or to affirm, that my Adversary
does suppose as known of it self, and by no reason at all endeavor to
prove, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and that therefore the oath
in regard of this clause, which is expressly denied therein, is unlawful, for
that I have briefly related and answered many of his arguments to this purpose,
and those words of mine, which he himself relates, This being supposed, he
goes about to prove, that the oath is repugnant to the law of God, etc. do
clearly convince the same.

12. But my only intention and meaning was to affirm, as the Reader may
plainly gather from my words, that my Adversary at the very first entrance
of his Discourse supposes, that the oath does contain in it a denial of the
Popes power to excommunicate and to depose Princes, and that to these two
general heads he promised to reduce all the arguments and exceptions, which
he should bring against the oath; And that although he has endeavored by the
subordination of temporal things to spiritual, and by many other arguments
drawn from divine and humane laws, to prove, that the Pope has power to
depose Princes, yet concerning his power to excommunicate, which all Catholics
do believe to be granted to him by Christ, that he brings no one
argument, or show of an argument, to prove, that it is denied in this oath,
but supposes it, as being granted, or known of it self.

13 Whereby it is apparent that I am free from all fraud in this point, and
that my Adversary cannot be excused from fraudulent proceeding, both for
wrongfully accusing me of fraud, and also for taking upon him in the
beginning of his Discourse to impugn the oath, as being repugnant to all laws
humane and divine, for that it contains a denial of the Popes power to
excommunicate and to depose Princes, and yet not bringing any one argument to
prove that his power to excommunicate is denied therein, but supposing it as
known or granted, and cunningly passing over to his power to depose: which
considering It has ever been a great controversy, says Fa. Azor, Tom. 2. l.
11. cap. 5. q. 8.
betwixt Emperors and Kings on the one part, and the Bishops of Rome on the
other, and the Schoolmen, says Trithemius, In Chronico Monast. Hirsaug. ad
annum. 1106.
do contend about the same, it is no hard matter for a man of mean
Theological learning to scrape together, as Mr. Fitzherbert has done, out of
so many Authors, who have written in favor of the Popes power to depose
Princes, some colorable arguments to prove the same; all which nevertheless
have been heretofore by me, and others very clearly answered.

14 Considering therefore, that neither his Majesty did intend to deny in this
oath the Popes power to excommunicate him, although the lower house of
Parliament, as his Majesty himself affirms, In his Premonition. p. 9.
at the first framing thereof, made it to contain as much, which he forced
them to reform, neither is there any one clause in the oath, from which it may
be gathered, that the said power to excommunicate is denied therein, neither
did my Adversary bring any one argument, or show of an argument to prove the
same, although in the very beginning of his Discourse he promises to prove,
that the oath in respect of this clause is repugnant to all laws humane and
divine: for this cause I used these words, which now my Adversary carpeth at,
That it is a wonder that learned men do not blush to affirm with so great
confidence, that to be his Majesty's meaning, which he himself in public
writings does expressly profess not to be his meaning, and to inculcate so
often and so coldly without any solid proof, that very argument (concerning
the denial of the Popes power to excommunicate) which both by his Majesty,
and many others has been so often very soundly confuted.

15 Now Mr. Fitzherbert takes great exceptions against these words, and
groundeth upon them his third accusation, that I have neither answered
probably, nor like a good Catholic. Whereto I answer first, says he, Nu. 14.
concerning his vain brag of the sound confutation of our argument, that
seeing the same has no other ground or proof here, but his own word, and
idle affirmation, it deserves no other answer for this place, but a flat
denial. But I might likewise return his own answer of his vain brag and
idle affirmation, to those words of his, Nu. 10. 11. 12.
That the oath implies the denial of the Popes Supremacy, and that he and
others have amply proved, that whosoever abiureth the Popes power to depose
Princes, does consequently abjure his spiritual authority: yet I will
abstain from such bitter terms, and whether it be a vain brag of my own,
and an idle affirmation, or rather a very true assertion, that their argument
concerning the denial of the Popes power to excommunicate, whereof in that
place I did only speak, has been sufficiently confuted or no, the Reader by
my answers may easily perceive.

16 For Cardinal Bellarmine, Fa. Lessius, Gretzer, and this my Adversary do
affirm the oath to be unlawful, and to deny the Popes spiritual authority,
for that it denies his power to excommunicate, which all Catholics grant to
be included in his spiritual Primacy. That his power to excommunicate is
denied in this oath, Fa. Gretzer, and my Adversary do suppose as manifest,
neither do they bring any one argument for the proof thereof, and therefore
their assertion, or rather supposition may with a mere denial be as easily
confuted. Cardinal Bellarmine also at the first did barely, and without any
proof, but only by the way of an interrogation affirm, or rather suppose the
same. And being taxed by his Majesty of falsehood, for affirming so boldly,
That the Popes power to excommunicate are heretical Kings, is plainly denied
in the oath, seeing that this point converning the Popes power to
excommunicate, was in this oath purposely declined by his Majesty, yet
Cardinal Bellarmine afterward in his Apology, Cap. 15.
brings no other proof for clearing himself of that imputation, then which
in effect he had brought before.

17 That I did truly affirm, says he, that the Popes power to excommunicate
even heretical Kings is denied in that form of oath, it is manifest by those
words of the oath. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any
declaration, or sentence of Excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or
to be made or granted by the Pope or his Successors, etc. I will bear faith,
and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors. But whosoever
swears that he will obey an heretical King, notwithstanding the Popes
excommunication, does not he together swear, that he acknowledges not in the
Pope power to excommunicate heretical Kings? for otherwise it were not an
oath, but sacrilege, to swear, that he will not obey the sentence of
Excommunication made by the Pope against an heretical King, if he should
believe, that the Pope has power to excommunicate heretical Kings.

18 To this argument I gave two answers. In Disput. Theol. cap. 4. sect. 1.
The first was, that a Catholic man either terrified with fear, or moved for
hope of gain, may swear, that he will not obey a just Excommunication, and by
so swearing commit sacrilege, who nevertheless does believe, that the Pope
has power to excommunicate: And therefore from those words of the oath [
notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication, etc. I will bear true
allegiance to his Majesty, etc.] or to speak more plainly from these words
[notwithstanding aiust Excommunication I will not obey it] it cannot be
rightly inferred, that I therefore deny the Popes power to excommunicate. But
whosoever swears in that manner, says Cardinal Bellarmine, either denies
the power to excommunicate, or commits sacrilege. Be it so. But if this
second were freely granted him, this nevertheless being granted, I cannot in
any wise perceive that to be true, which he before did absolutely, and
without any disjunction affirm; In this branch of the oath the Popes power to
excommunicate heretical Kings is plainly denied.

19 My second and principal answer was the very same in effect, which his
Majesty before had given, to wit, that by swearing the foresaid branch,
neither the Popes power to Excommunicate is abiured, nor any sacrilege
committed. For he who swears, that notwithstanding any sentence of
Excommunication to be denounced against the King, he will bear faith, and true
allegiance to his Majesty, although he does swear, that he will obey the
King being excommunicated, because Excommunication has not power to deprive
Kings of their temporal dominions and Jurisdiction, Apol. nu. 346.
as Becanus with many other learned Divines, whom I cited in my Apology, does
affirm, yet he does not swear, that he will not obey a just Excommunication,
as Cardinal Bellarmine does ill conclude. For albeit he believes, that the
Pope has authority to excommunicate heretical Kings, yet he does not
believe, that Excommunication, being a spiritual Censure, works this
temporal effect, to deprive heretical Kings of their Royal authority, to
make Kings no Kings, or to take away from subjects their natural and civil
obedience, which by the law of God, according to Cardinal Bellarmines own
doctrine, In tract. contra Barcl. cap. 21. page 202.
is due to all Kings, although they be heretics, so long as they remain Kings.

20 Now Fa. Lessius argued in this manner. You will say, says he that the
power to excommunicate is not here denied, but only a certain effect of
Excommunication, which is, that notwithstanding a Prince be excommunicated, yet
shall not the subjects be released from the bond of their allegiance. But this
effect does necessarily follow the sentence of Excommunication, as the practice
of the Church for the space of more then twelve hundred years does show. To
this argument I answered, that by no practice at all of the Church it can be
proved, that the absoluing of subjects from the bond of their alleagiance,
which by the law of God is due to all absolute Princes, is an effect of
Excommunication, but at the most another punishment, although sometimes imposed
together with Excommunication, as Becanus with many other learned Catholics
do acknowledge: concerning which punishment, whether it may for any crime be
imposed by the Popes authority upon absolute Princes, or only upon inferior
Princes by the consent of absolute Princes, to whom they are subject in
temporals, it has even been and is also now a controversy among learned
Catholics, as by the testimony of those two Authors, whom I cited a little
before, Nu. 13.
and also of many others cited by me else where, in Apolog. nu. 4 and seq. and
in this Treatise, part. 1. per totum. Becanus in q. de fide haereticis seruanda
cap. 8. nu. 16. Becan. in Controu. Angl. cap. 3. q. 2. Suarez tom. 5. disp. 15.
sec. 6. nu. 3.
it does clearly appear.

21 From hence it is very apparent, says Becanus, that heretics by this
precisely that they are excommunicated, are not deprived of their dominion or
jurisdiction either over their subjects, or over their temporal goods, but
this deprivation is a distinct punishment, and inflicted by a distinct law. And
again, It is one thing, says he, to excommunicate a King, and another thing
to depose him, or to deprive him of his kingdom, neither is the one
necessarily, connected with the other. Many Kings and Emperors have been
excommunicated, and yet not therefore deposed, and contrariwise many deposed
and yet not therefore excommunicated.

22 Excommunication says Suarez, can not have this effect (to take away the
dominion of a kingdom, or of a people, and the paying of tributes, and doing
services which are answearable thereunto) concerning such subjects, unless an
other thing be first supposed, which is, that the Lords be deprived of their
dominion, or the use thereof, because the dominion remaining still in it force,
it can not be, but that the subjects are bound to obey and consequently to
communicate at leastwise as much as is necessary to fulfill their obligation,
according to the chapter Inter alia desentent. excommun. But Excommunication of
it self has not this effect, because as it does not deprive of the dominion
of other temporal things, nor of the use of them, so it does not deprive of
this dominion, because there is no more reason of that, neither is there any
law, wherein this is specially ordained of Excommunication; I say of
Excommunication, because this is sometimes ordained in the law concerning some
excommunicated persons, as heretics, yet by this special ordination we may
understand, that Excommunication of it self has not this effect; for when
this effect is to follow, it is necessary, that it be specially expressed in
the law or sentence. And therefore when this effect is adjoined, I do not call
it an effect of Excommunication, but a peculiar punishment imposed together
with Excommunication, as when an heretic is excommunicated, and deprived of
the dominion of his goods, this deprivation is not an effect of
Excommunication, but a certain punishment joined together with
Excommunication. Thus Suarez.

23 We have therefore out of Becanus, and Suarez, that the depriving Princes of
their dominion, or jurisdiction is not an effect of Excommunication, contrary
to that which Fa. Lessius said; We have also out of Cardinal Bellarmine,
Bellar. in. trac. contra Barcl. cap. 21. Page 202.
and the same Suarez, that subjects are not released from the bond of their
obedience, unless the Prince be deprived of his dominion, or jurisdiction, for
that to deny obedience to a Prince, says Cardinal Bellarmine, so long as he
remains Prince, is repugnant to the law of God; and the dominion or
jurisdiction of a Prince, says Suarez, Suarez in Defens. fidei Cath. lib. 6.
cap. 3. nu. 6.
remaining in its force, and not being taken away, it can not be, but that the
subjects are bound to obey, because the obligation of obedience, says he, in
any degree or state whatsoever does so long endure in the subject, as the
dignity, or power, and jurisdiction does endure in the Superior, for these are
correlatiues, and the one depends upon the other. So that you see how well
these learned Divines of the Society of Jesus do agree among themselves in
assigning the reason, for which this oath of allegiance does contain in it a
manifest denial of the Popes power to excommunicate, and of his spiritual
Supremacy. And whether English Catholics for so weak and slender arguments,
and wherein our learned Adversaries do not agree among themselves, are bound
to hazard their perpetual liberty, In Append. part. 2. sect. 4.
and whole estate, with the utter ruin of their posterity, I remit to the
judgment of the pious and prudent Reader. Thus I answered in my Theological
Disputation, which afterward in my Appendix to Suarez I did more fully
explain. Now let the Reader judge, whether this my answer to their argument
be a vain brag, and an idle affirmation of my own, or a solid confutation
thereof, and whether I had not reason to affirm, that learned men do not
blush to inculcate so often and secoldly without any solid proof that very
argument, which both by his Majesty, and many others has been very soundly
confuted, considering that my Adversary does so boldly affirm, that the oath
is unlawful and repugnant to all laws humane and divine, for that it denies
the Popes power to excommunicate, and yet he brings no argument at all to
prove the same, but it must, forsooth, be supposed as certain, and besides he
concealeth what I before at large had answered to the aforesaid argument. And
thus much concerning his first answer and exception.

24 Secondly, says my Adversary, Nu. 14
touching the declaration of his Majesty's mind in this point; I cannot but
marvel, that such a learned man, as this Author is held to be, cannot
distinguish betwixt the contents of the oath, and the end or intention of him
that ordained it. For I will not deny, but that his Majesty might intend
nothing else by ordaining this oath, but to exact of his subjects a profession
of their obedience unto him, and yet nevertheless he that should take the
oath should thereby abjure the Popes Supremacy (for the reasons before
declared) notwithstanding his Majesty's protestation of his intention. This
will be evident, See these reasons beneath, nu 33. and seq.
if we turn the case to a like oath of the Popes part, as for example; if the
Pope should exact an oath of Catholics to swear, that the King cannot deprive
a lawful Bishop of Canterbury, and should withal protest, that he means not
thereby to make them abjure, or deny the Kings authority, but only to profess
their duty and obedience to the Sea Apostolic, I make no doubt, but that the
Protestants would say according to their grounds, that this protestation and
declaration of the Popes mind, could not excuse the takers of such an oath from
the denial of the Kings Royal authority, because his Ecclesiastical
Supremacy is (according to the Protestants opinion) so necessarily included in
his Regal, or Kingly power, that whosoever denies the one, does consequently
deny the other. In which respect, I say, the Popes protestation of his meaning,
or intention could not in the Protestants opinion, warrant the swearers from
perjury.

25 And so say we in this case of his Majesty's public profession, and
declaration of his intention, that it cannot alter the nature of the oath, or
derogate any thing from the contents thereof, or from the Popes Supremacy, or
from his Majesty's belief concerning the same, and much less can it make any
thing in the oath lawful, which is otherways unlawful: and therefore I say,
that seeing the Popes power to depose Princes, is necessarily included
(according to our doctrine and belief) in the Popes Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, that the takers of the new oath cannot be excused from the denial
of the Popes supreme authority, nor consequently from perjury,
notwithstanding any protestation of his Majesty to the contrary: for if he
should protest, that he does not force the takers of the oath to abjure the
Popes Supreamacie, it were Protestatio contraria factis, a protestation
contrary to his deeds, which the Lawyers hold to be nothing worth.

26 But first my Adversary could not but clearly see, howsoever here he is
pleased to babble, that I, who as he scoffingly says, am held to be so learned
a man, not only could distinguish, it being no such difficult point of wit, or
learning, but also did oftentimes in my Apology, Apologeticall answer,
Theological Disputation, and in my Appendix to Suarez in express words
distinguish betwixt the end of the work and of the worker, of the Art, and
Artificer, of the law and precepts therein contained, and of the Lawmaker: and
showed, that when the words of any law are ambiguous, they are to be understood
according to the intention and meaning of the Lawmaker, and that neither the
intention of his Majesty was to deny in this oath the Popes power to
excommunicate, or any other his spiritual authority, but only to require of
his Catholic subjects a profession of that temporal and civil obedience,
which all subjects by the law of God and nature do owe to their lawful Prince,
neither in the oath is contained any clause, which by learned Catholics is not
thought to belong to temporal, and civil obedience.

27 Wherefore there is a great disparitie betwixt the oath, which the Pope
should exact concerning his Majesty's power not to deprive a lawful Bishop of
Canterbury, and this new oath of allegiance concerning the Popes authority
not to depose his Majesty's: because that Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which his
Majesty does challenge, is, according to the opinion of all Protestants,
necessarily included in his Regal or Kingly power, insomuch that whosoever
denies the one, does consequently, in the opinion of all Protestants, deny the
other: but the Popes authority to depose Princes is not, according to the
opinion of all Catholics, necessarily included in the Popes spiritual
Supremacy, for that many learned Catholics do hold, that the Pope has no
such power to depose Princes, and therefore he that denies his power to
depose, does not consequently, according to the opinion of all Catholics, deny
his spiritual Supremacy. And albeit Mr. Fitzherbert does boldly affirm,
that, according to his belief, the Popes power to depose Princes is
necessarily included in the Popes Ecclesiastical Supremacy, yet I will be
bold to say, that his belief herein is not Catholic, or Universal, but a
particular belief or rather an opinion of his own and of some other
Catholics, the contrary doctrine being, as I said, even to this day
maintained by many learned and virtuous Catholics. And therefore until he
bring some better ground for his belief, then his bare I say, I will also be
bold to say, that the takers of the new oath are according to the doctrine of
learned Catholics excused from the denial of the Popes supreme authority,
seeing that, according to the opinion of many learned Catholics, the Pope has
no such power to depose, and so neither is his Majesty's protestation repugnant
to his deeds, nor his intention disagreeable to the contents of the oath.

28. Secondly, although my Adversary to prove the oath unlawful, and to
contain a denial of the Popes Supremacy, does seem now to fly from his
Majesty's intention to the contents of the oath, and expressly says, That he
will not deny, but that his Majesty by ordaining this oath, might intend
nothing else but to exact of his subjects a profession of their obedience, and
temporal allegiance, and not of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy; nevertheless
he seems before to affirm, that his Majesty's intention, opinion, and
understanding is, that the Popes spiritual authority is abiured in this oath,
and his Ecclesiastical Supremacy is acknowledged therein, which the judicious
Reader may plainly gather both by those words in his Supplement before
related, wherein he avouches See his words beneath, Nu. seq. 29.
That it is evident enough that the true reason why the Popes authority to
excommunicate and depose a temporal Prince is impugned by the oath, is no
other, but because the Kings Majesty is held (both by himself and other
Protestants) to be no way subject to the Pope, yea and to be himself supreme
head of the Church of God in England, and also by the first of these two
reasons, which he brings here in his Reply, why he suppoposed, that the oath
implies a denial of the Popes Supremacy.

29 And as for my supposition, says he, Nu. 10.
that the Oath implies the denial of the Popes Supremacy (he should have said
of the Popes authority to excommunicate and depose a temporal Prince, for
this was his supposition, as I clearly showed before) Thou shall understand,
good Reader, that I was moved thereto by two reasons, which are manifest
enough in the very place, which Widdrington cites: The one was, because it is
evident, that the faith and belief of all English Protestants is, that the
Kings Majesty is no way subject to the Pope, but that he is himself supreme
head of the Church of God, in England. Whereupon it may with great reason be
inferred, that the denial of the Popes power to depose his Majesty, which is
expressly contained in the oath, is supposed and implied therein, as a necessary
consequent of their belief, who ordained it.

30 For it is great reason to interpret all assertions, positions, laws, or
decrees (especially such as touch Religion) according to the doctrine and
belief of the Authors thereof, for it is to be presumed, that every one
speaks, writes, and decrees, according to the grounds and principles of his
belief and Religion, as every Artisan works according to the grounds and
principles of his Art. And therefore, as the positions, assertions, and decrees
of known and professed Catholics are to be interpreted according to the
grounds of the Catholic faith, so also the positions of all Sectaries
whatsoever are to be understood according to the different doctrines of their
Sects: In so much, that if a Catholic and a Protestant should affirm both of
them one thing (which might be controuersed in respect of Religion) the sense
and meaning of either of them is to be interpreted according to their different
Religions, and their different grounds, and sense thereof. And upon this
consideration I made no doubt to affirm, that the new oath, denying the Popes
power to depose his Majesty implies the denial of the Popes Supremacy; for
that not only his Majesty, but also all they of the Parliament which decreed
it, do hold and believe, that the Pope can not depose his Majesty, because
he has no authority at all in England, and especially over his Majesty.

31 My other reason was the same that I touched before, concerning the
necessary deduction of the Popes power to depose Princes from his
Ecclesiastical Supremacy: for albeit the Supremacy of the Pope be not expressly
abiured, or denied by this oath, yet it is denied covertly by a necessary
consequent, because his authority to depose Princes (which is necessarily
deduced from the supreme power that Christ gave him) is denied thereby: as in
like case, if we should deny that his Majesty has any lawful power to
suspend, or deprive the Archbishop of Canterbury, all Protestants would say,
that we deny not only his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but also his temporal
and Kingly authority, because the power to suspend and deprive Bishops within
his Realm, is included therein, and necessarily deduced from it in the opinion
of all Protestants. And in like manner we say with much more reason, that
whosoever abiureth the Popes power to depose Princes, he does consequently
abjure his spiritual authority, because the former is included in the later,
and does necessarily follow of it, as it has been amply proved by diverse,
and namely by me in my Supplement, Chap. 5.6 and 7
whereof I shall have further occasion to lay down the particulars hereafter.
Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

32 But first of all, good Reader, I wish thee to consider, how cunningly this
my Adversary concealeth the first part of his supposition concerning the
denial of the Popes power to excommunicate, whereof only I understood those
words whereon he groundeth his third accusation. In the beginning of his
Discourse he supposed, as you have seen, that the Popes spiritual Supremacy
is denied in this oath, for that his power to excommunicate and depose Princes
is denied therein. And because his Majesty had in express words publicly
affirmed, that his intention was not to deny in this oath the Popes power to
excommunicate, answering also the argument, which Cardinal Bellarmine out of
those words of the oath ( notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication etc.)
brought to prove the contrary: and because my Adversary did also without any
proof at all, suppose, as Fa. Gretzer had done before him, that the Popes
power to excommunicate, and consequently his spiritual Supremacy is denied
therein, for this cause I used those words, that truly it is a wonder, that
learned men do not blush etc. which my Adversary a little before carped at.
Now, forsooth, he pretending to yield a reason of his supposition, yet yields
none at all concerning this part thereof touching the Popes power to
excommunicate, for which only I used the aforesaid words, and which if he
could sufficiently prove to be denied in this oath, all Catholics would
forthwith grant him, that the oath contains a denial of the Popes
spiritual Supremacy, which includes as a general the particular authority
to inflict spiritual Censures, but he cunningly passes over to the Popes
power to depose Princes, which no man doubts, but is denied in this oath, and
yields two reasons, such ones as they be, why he supposed the oath to
contain a denial of the Popes Supremacy, for that the Popes power to depose
Princes is denied therein.

33 His second reason (for thereof I will speak in the first place) which he
took from the contents of the oath, is the same, which he touched before
concerning the necessary deduction, according to his belief and doctrine, of
the Popes power to depose Princes from his Ecclesiastical Supremacy: But his
belief and doctrine herein, as also I touched before, is not Catholic, but a
particular belief, or rather opinion of himself and some other, and not
general of all Catholics, for that many learned Catholics, as I showed
before, are of opinion, that Christ has not given to S. Peter or to the
Church, authority to depose Princes, or to inflict temporal punishments, as
death, exile, privation of goods, or imprisonment, but only Ecclesiastical or
spiritual Censures. And therefore there is a great disparitie in the
similitude, which my Adversary brings betwixt his Majesty's authority to
suspend, or deprive the Archbishop of Canterbury in the opinion of
Protestants, and the Popes power to depose Princes in the opinion of
Catholics, for that al Protestants do believe, that his Majesty's power to
suspend or deprive an Archbishop (taking suspension in that sense, wherein the
Protestants do hold, that his Majesty has power to suspend and deprive) is
necessarily included in his Regal authority, but all Catholics do not
believe, (whatsoever my Adversary and some few others do) that the power to
depose Princes is necessarily included in that spiritual Supremacy, which
Christ has given to S. Peter and his Successors, as has been amply proved
by me and diverse others, and what particulars Mr. Fitzherbert has laid here,
or in his Supplement concerning this point, we will beneath in their due places
examine.

34 His first reason he deduced from the grounds and principles of the
Protestants Religion, and from the doctrine and belief of his Majesty, and
those of the Parliament, who made the oath. But how silly and insufficient this
reason is, yea and repugnant to his own grounds, and also of Fa. Parsons, in
whose defense he wrote his Supplement, any man of judgment may quickly
perceive. For behold his reason: It is great reason, says he, to interpret
all assertions, positions, laws or decrees (especially such as touch Religion)
according to the doctrine, and belief of the Authors thereof, for it is to be
presumed, that every one speaks (...) and decrees according to the grounds
and principles of his belief and Religion, but it is an assertion, position,
and the belief, not only of his Majesty, but also of the Parliament, which
decreed the oath, that the Pope cannot depose his Majesty, because he has no
authority at all in England, and especially, over his Majesty, therefore it
is great reason to affirm, that the new oath denying the Popes power to depose
his Majesty, implies a denial of the Popes Supremacy.

35 But first his Minor proposition is very untrue: For neither his Majesty,
nor the Protestants do hold, that the Pope can not depose his Majesty,
because he has no authority at all in England, and especially over his
Majesty. This indeed is the reason, why they hold, that the Pope cannot
excommunicate his Majesty, because he has no authority at all in England,
and especially over his Majesty. But the reason, why they hold that the Pope
has no authority to depose his Majesty, is, for that deposition, being not an
Ecclesiastical or spiritual, but a civil and temporal censure or
punishment, for what crime soever it be imposed, can not be inflicted by any
Ecclesiastical or spiritual authority. For which reason the Protestants do
hold, that although the Protestant Bishops of this Realm have Ecclesiastical
and Episcopal authority herein England, yet they have no authority by virtue
of their Episcopal power to depose or deprive his Majesty of his temporal
dominions, for that they take deposition, or any such temporal violence, as
his Majesty affirms, In his Premonition. page 9.
to be far without the limits of such a spiritual Censure, as
Excommunication is.

36 And although this be sufficient to show the insufficiency of this my
Adversaries reason, yet granting him only for Disputation sake, which he in
his Minor proposition untruly affirms, that his Majesty, and the Parliament
should hold, that the Pope can not depose his Majesty, because he has no
authority at all in England, his reason nevertheless is both insufficient,
and also repugnant to that, which Fa. Parsons, and he himself suppose to be
true. For albeit Fa. Parsons does confidently affirm, In his book entitled,
The judgment of a Catholic English man etc. part. 1. nu. 22. page 13. and 16.
that there is no man who sticks or makes difficulty to acknowledge our
Sovereign to be true King, and rightful Lord over all his Dominions, for that
every English Catholic will swear and acknowledge most willingly all those
parts and clauses of the oath, that do any way appertain to the civil and
temporal obedience due to his Majesty, whom he acknowledges to be his true
and lawful King, and Sovereign over all his Dominions, and the same in effect
does my Adversary in his supposition affirm, as you have seen before, Nu. 6.
yet, according to this his reason, neither he, nor any other Catholic can
acknowledge King James to be our true and lawful Sovereign, nor can promise
to yield him all temporal alleagiance, nor to defend him from all treasons,
and traitorous conspiracies, nor to disclose them, when they shall come to their
knowledge, when any such acknowledgement shall be demanded at their hands by
the Protestant Magistrate: for that in the opinion of all Protestants, the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of his Majesty, as my Adversary himself confesses,
is included, and necessarily deduced from his temporal and Kingly authority:
and all reconcilements to the Pope, and all returnings of Priests into this
land made by the Popes authority, are by the laws of this Realm made
treasons, and traitorous conspiracies.

37 Seeing therefore, to use my Adversaries words, It is great reason to
interpret all assertions, positions, laws or decrees (especially such as
touch Religion) according to the doctrine, and belief of the Authors thereof,
for it is to be presumed, that every one speaks, writes, and decrees
according to the principles and grounds of his belief and Religion, it is
clear, that if my Adversaries argument be good, neither he, nor any other
Catholic can acknowledge King James to be their true and lawful Sovereign,
and that they will yield him all temporal allegiance, and defend him from all
treasons, and disclose them when they shall come to their knowledge, for that,
in the opinion of all Protestants, his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as my
Adversary himself confesses, is included in his Regal and Kingly authority,
and according to the laws of this Realm all reconcilements to the Pope, and
all returnings of Priests into this land, made by the Popes authority, are
treasons and traitorous conspiracies. So that you see what contradiction there
is in my Adversaries sayings, and what a pretty argument he has made to
prove himself a traitor, seeing that according to his own grounds, he can
not acknowledge King James to be his true and lawful Sovereign, nor promise
to yield him all temporal allegiance, if it should be exacted by the
Protestant Magistrate, for that in the opinion of all Protestants his Majesty's
spiritual Supremacy is included in his Regal and Kingly authority.

38 But secondly, if Mr. Fitzherbert had been pleased out of the desire of
truth to handle this question between him and me sincerely, and not with a
flourish of words to obscure the difficulty, and blind the understanding of
simple and scrupulous Catholics, he might either out of his own judgment, or
at lest wise from of that, which I in my Theological Disputation did answer
to the arguments of Gretzer, Disputatio Theol. c. 2. sect. 1
who thought it unlawful to acknowledge King James to be our Sovereign Lord
in temporals, and of Capellus, Ibid. c. 6. sect. 5.
who also thought it unlawful for any Catholic to promise, that he will
disclose all treasons and traitorous conspiracies for the reasons aforesaid,
and also from that, which out of the doctrine of Suarez, Ibid. c. 1.
I declared in what manner we ought to interpret the words of any law, he
might, I say, have quickly perceived the weakness of his reason, and in what
sense his Mayor proposition, and the proof, which he brings thereof to make
it true are to be understood.

39 For to repeat again his words, It is indeed great reason to interpret
all assertions, positions, laws, and decrees (especially such as touch
Religion) according to the doctrine and belief of the Authors thereof,
whenever the words are doubtful, and unless the Author do in express
words declare his meaning to be the contrary. For it is to be presumed, that
every one, unless he declare the contrary, does commonly speak, write, and
decree according to the grounds and principles of his belief and Religion, as
every Artisan does usually work according to the grounds and principles of his
Art, unless he will take upon him to do some work belonging to another Art;
as if a Physician will take upon him to measure land, then he must work
according to the grounds of Geometry, and not of Physic: And if a Protestant
will speak, write, or decree like a Catholic, and upon Catholic grounds, he
must observe the principles of Catholic Religion, and likewise a Catholic, if
he will speak, write, or decree like a Protestant, and upon Protestant
grounds, must observe the principles of the Protestant Religion. And therefore,
as the positions, assertions, and decrees of known, and professed Catholics,
are to be interpreted according to the grounds of the Catholic faith, unless
they declare to have a contrary meaning; so also the positions of all Sectaries
are to be understood according to the different doctrines of their Sects,
unless they declare their meaning to be otherwise: in so much that if a
Catholic, and a Protestant should affirm both of them one thing, which might
be controuersed in respect of Religion, the sense and meaning of either of them
is to be interpreted according to their different Religions, unless they
declare the contrary. And in this sense my Adversaries Mayor proposition is
true, otherwise it is false; for doubtful, and ambiguous words are ever to
be understood according to the declaration of the speaker, and the words of
every law, whenever they are doubtful, are to be taken in that sense, which
the Lawmaker shall declare his meaning to be.

40 Now his Majesty, who with the Parliament devised this new oath, not for
the Protestants, but to make a trial how his Catholic subjects stand affected
toward him in point of their loyalty and due obedience, has oftentimes, as
my Adversary could not but see in my Theological Disputation, publicly
declared his meaning, In an Act of Parliament anno septimo ca. 6. and in his
Premonition page 9. and in his Apology page 2. nu. 2. and page 246.
and that he intended in this oath to exact of his Catholic subjects nothing
else, then the profession of that temporal allegiance and civil obedience,
which all subjects (what religion soever they profess) by the law of God do
owe to their lawful Prince, with a promise to disclose all contrary uncivil
violence, and to make a distinction, not betwixt Catholics and Protestants,
but betwixt ciuilly obedient Catholics, and such Catholics, as are the
disciples of the Powder Treason: And therefore his Majesty caused the lower
house of Parliament to reform that clause, which contained the denial of the
Popes power to excommunicate him. So careful was he that nothing should be
contained in this Oath, except the profession of natural allegiance, and
civil and temporal obedience. He said [in this oath] for as the oath of
Supremacy, says his Majesty, was devised for putting a difference between
Papists, and them of our profession, so was this oath ordained for making a
difference between the ciuilly obedient Papists, and the perverse disciples of
the Powder Treason. And again, This oath, says his Majesty, was ordained
only for making of a true distinction between Papists of quiet disposition,
and in all other things good Subjects and such other Papists, as in their
hearts maintained the like violent bloody maxims, that the Powder-Traitors
did. The same also but in more ample words affirms his Majesty in his
Apology for the oath.

41 Seeing therefore that his Majesty has so often, and so publicly
declared, that he intended by this oath nothing else, but to make a true
distinction, not betwixt Catholics and Protestants, but betwixt Catholics and
Catholics, and to urge them only to make a profession of that natural and
civil obedience, which all Subjects, of what Religion soever they be, do by
the law of God owe to their lawful Prince, there is no reason to draw an
argument from his Majesty's intention or belief, and from the grounds and
principles of the Protestants Religion, but only from the contents of the oath
it self, to prove it to be unlawful, and to contain in it any thing which is
repugnant to Catholic faith and Religion. And that this is a probable answer,
and not a vain brag, and idle affirmation of my own, it is so evident, that
I dare adventure to remit it to the judgment of my Adversary himself, albeit
he sticks not at this time to affirm, that I have neither answered probably,
nor like a good Catholic.

42 Concerning which last accusation he writes thus: Nu. 17.
Now then to conclude this point, whereas Widdrington says, as you have heard,
that it is marvel, that learned men blush not to affirm the Kings mind to
be that, which his Majesty has declared to be no part of his meaning, I may
well say, that it is a far greater wonder, that he professing to be a
Catholic, and knowing and confessing as he does in his Epistle Dedicatorie,
In Principio.
and after in his Theological Disputation, Cap 10 sec. 2. nu. 1. and 2.
that his Holiness in two Breues has declared his mind concerning this oath,
palam and ex professo, openly and expressly (to wit, that it contains many
things which are manifestly repugnant to the Catholic faith and salvation of
souls) it is, I say, an extreme wonder that he blusheth not extremely to
defend the said oath contrary to the express and strickt commandment of his
spiritual Pastor, whose voi^e he is bound to hear and obey if he be a sheep
of Christ's fold, and child of the Catholic Church. And therefore I conclude,
that he shows himself not only impudent, but also impious in preferring the
declaration of a temporal Prince (which nevertheless being well weighed,
does nothing help his cause, or prejudice ours) before an Apostolical decree
of S. Peter's Successor, whose obedient child he professes and ought to be,
wherein he shows sufficiently how good a Catholic he is, and whom he holds
for his Supreme head in Ecclesiastical causes, as also what probability we
may expect of him hereafter for the confirmation of the rest of his assertions,
seeing that we have found him at the very first so fraudulent, frivolous, and
contrary to his own profession, as you have heard in this Chapter. Thus you
see with what bitterness Mr. Fitzherbert concludes his first Chapter.

43 But if he had been pleased to have dealt uprightly, and as he has in a
most spiteful manner urged against me this objection, which is taken from his
Holiness Breues, so also he had set down the answer which in the tenth
Chapter of my Theological Disputation I gave thereunto, the Reader would
presently have perceived, that my Adversary has passed the bounds of
Christian charity and justice in wrongfully accusing me of impudency,
impiety, and disobedience to the Apostolical decree of S. Peter's Successor,
whose obedient child I did there, and also I do here profess my self to be,
and am ready to obey in all those things, wherein, according to the grounds of
Catholic Religion, he has authority to command: Neither can my Adversary
without blushing affirm, either that the Popes Holiness, albeit he be Saint
Peter's Successor, cannot err in his particular commands and decrees, which
are not propounded to the whole Church, but to particular Churches or
Kingdoms, or that any Catholic is bound to obey him in those things, wherein,
according to the doctrine of learned and virtuous Catholics, he has no
authority to command.

44 First therefore I showed in that place out of the doctrine of Fa. Suarez,
that there are two sorts of humane precepts, as well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil. The one is called a constitutiue precept, which of it self makes that
thing, which it forbids to be unlawful, which otherwise if that precept
were not, would not be unlawful: as the eating of flesh in Lent, and the
doing of servile works upon Sundaies, and Holidayes, which if they were not
forbidden by humane laws, would not be unlawful. And although a constitutiue
precept of humane power may sometimes bind with danger of some great temporal
loss, as of goods, liberty, yea also of life, yet the Ecclesiastical law,
setting aside scandal and contempt, which are forbidden by the law of God, and
nature, do seldom or never bind with very great temporal harm: and
therefore we are not bound to abstain from flesh in Lent, or from doing
servile works upon Sundaies and holidaies, when we are like to incur thereby
any probable danger of some great temporal hurt.

45 The other is called a declaratiue precept, which does not of it self make,
but suppose and declare the thing, which it forbids to be unlawful, as
being before prohibited by some other former law, as theft, murder,
drunkenness and such like, which are otherwise forbidden by the law of God and
nature. And this kind of precept, as well observes Suarex, depends only
upon the reason, for which the act is commanded, or forbidden, or, which is all
one, upon the precedent law, from whence all the obligation of the declaratiue
precept does proceed. Insomuch that if the reason be not true, and that there
is no such precedent law, or obligation, as the declaratiue precept affirms
to be, the declaratiue precept has no force to bind at all: and with the same
certainty, or probability we are bound, or not bound to obey a declaratiue
precept, as it is certain or probable, that there is, or is not any other
former bond and obligation.

46 As for example, his Holiness does by his Breues forbid all English
Catholics to take the new oath of allegiance, for that therein are contained
many things, which are clearly repugnant to faith and salvation. If therefore
it be certain, or probable, that nothing is contained in this oath which is
repugnant to faith, or salvation, it is also certain or probable, that this
declaratiue precept of his Holiness, which is grounded upon this reason, that
something is contained therein contrary to faith and salvation, is, according
to the doctrine of Suarez, of no force to bind, neither are English Catholics
by virtue of this declaratiue prohibition bound to refuse the said oath.

47 Secondly, I also showed in that place, that this declaratiue command of his
Holiness forbidding Catholics to take the oath, for that it contains many
things flat contrary to faith and salvation, is such a declaratiue precept,
which is not grounded upon any infallible reason, or definition of the Church,
but only upon his opinatiue judgment, that his reason is true, and that
either his power to excommunicate, and consequently his spiritual Supremacy
is denied in this oath, which is very untrue, or that his power to depose
Princes, which is denied in the oath, is a clear point of faith, and
necessarily included in his spiritual Supremacy, and consequently the denial
thereof is plainly repugnant to Catholic faith. Which being so, it is
manifest, that we are no further bound to obey this declaratiue prohibition of
his Holiness, then we are bound to follow his opinion, and to believe, that
either his power to excommunicate, or some such like is denied in the oath, or
that whosoever denies his power to depose Princes, denies the Catholic faith.

48 Whereupon I concluded, that considering neither his power to excommunicate,
or any such like is denied in this oath, as I have proved at large against
Card. Bellarmine, and others, nor that his power to depose Princes, which is
expressly denied in the oath, is certain and of faith, the contrary doctrine
being probable and also maintained by many learned Catholics, as partly also I
have already proved by the testimony of learned Catholics before alleged,
and here beneath by answering all my Adversaries objections I will make it
more manifest, Part. 1. per. t^tum.
there can be made no doubt, but that any English Catholic may with a safe
conscience, or without any crime of disobedience to his supreme spiritual
Pastor, or any prejudice to Catholic faith, refuse to obey his Holiness
declaratiue command which is only grounded upon such an opinion, which,
considering the contrary is probable, and defended by many learned Catholics,
may without any note of impudency, impiety or disobedience be rejected by
Catholics.

49 Thirdly, I also affirmed in that place, that no Catholic does only for
this cause take the oath, or think it to be lawful, because the Kings
Majesty, being of a contrary Religion does command it, or think it to be
lawful, as though those Catholics, who take the oath, do it only upon the
Kings bare word affirming the oath to be lawful, and seem thereby to prefer
the opinion of a Protestant Prince in things, which in some sort do belong to
Religion, before the opinion of our supreme spiritual Pastor, but because the
Kings Majesty being our lawful Prince, and Sovereign Lord in temporals, what
religion soever he professes, has established an oath of allegiance to make
a trial how his Catholic subjects stand affected toward him in point of
their loyalty and due obedience, and commanded all Catholics to take the
same, which oath learned Catholics for probable reasons do think to be
truly in oath of temporal allegiance, and to contain nothing which is
repugnant to faith and salvation, therefore English Catholics to obey the just
command of their Prince do take the oath, and think it to be lawful, both
for that they having duly examined all the clauses of the oath, do find
nothing therein contrary to faith and salvation, and also for that many
learned Catholics, whose opinion they may lawfully follow, albeit other
Divines with the Popes Holiness do think otherwise, do constantly maintain
the same.

50 Neither do I give more credit to his Majesty, then to his Holiness, but
both of them with all dutiful respect I do honor, and also believe in those
things, which they of their certain knowledge do affirm to be true: And
therefore, as I believe his Majesty's Royal word affirming, that his intention
was not by this new oath of allegiance to deny the Popes power to
excommunicate; so also I believe, that first Breue of his Holiness was not
surreptitious and written without his knowledge or priuitie, for that in his
second Breue he does auerre as much. But as for the first Breue, wherein
English Catholics are commanded not to take the oath, for that it contains
many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, it being, as I said, only a
declaratiue precept, and grounded upon a fallible, and in my judgment, a very
false opinion, that either the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the
oath, or that it is a point of faith, that the Pope has power so depose
Princes, it is evident, according to Suarez doctrine, that no Catholic is
bound to obey this his declaratiue precept, unless he be also bound either to
believe, that the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the oath, which is
apparently untrue, or to follow his opinion concerning the certainety of his
power to depose, which being in controversy among Schoolmen, and learned
Doctors, and as yet not decided by the Judge, as no man is bound according to
the common doctrine of Vasquez, and many others, to follow it, so also no man
is bound, according to the approved doctrine of Suarez, to obey his declaratiue
precept, which is grounded thereon.

51 Lastly, I observed in that place, that if his Majesty should by Act of
Parliament command all his Catholic subjects to acknowledge by oath, that the
Pope is not by the institution of Christ the direct temporal Lord of this
Kingdom, or of any other, and that he has no direct power to depose his
Majesty, and that they will bear faith and true allegiance only to his
Majesty, as to their direct Lord, and Sovereign, etc. and his Holiness
following the Canonists opinion who hold it heretical to affirm, that the
Pope has not direct dominion over the whole Christian world, should by his
Apostolical Breues, forbid all English Catholics to take such an oath, for
that it contains (as the Canonists imagine) many things contrary to faith and
salvation, (as Pope Sixtus the fifth, if any credit may be given to the
Jesuits themselves did intend to condenme, if he had lived, Cardinal
Bellarmine his first tome of controversies for impugning the Popes direct
dominion in temporals) the very same inuectiue, which Mr. Fitzherbert makes
against me, accusing me of impudency, impiety, disobedience, and of being no
good Catholic, for not obeying the Popes declaratiue precept, which is only
grounded upon such an opion, which no Catholic is bound to follow, for that
the contrary is maintained by many learned Divines, he might also make against
all those Catholics, who following herein Cardinal Bellarmine, and the
common doctrine of Divines, should take that oath, and think it to be
lawful, notwithstanding the Popes declaratiue precept to the contrary. And
doubtless Cardinal Bellarmine who vehemently impugneth the Canonists opinion,
would easily in the like manner as I have cleared my self, defend those
Catholics from all imputation of impudency, impiety, disobedience, or any
other crime, notwithstanding the Popes declaratiue precept to the contrary.

52 Thus did I answer to this objection taken from his Holiness Breues, but
more amply in my Theological Disputation, showing also by sundry examples,
that diverse Popes have in their Apostolical Breues, or decretall letters
registered in the Canon law, maintained false opinions, and which now are flat
heretical, and that therefore their opinions, and consequently their
declaratiue precepts grounded thereon, are not always to be followed by
Catholics, and withal, that many learned Divines have impugned diverse decrees
of Popes concerning the licenses, which they have given to Priests to minister
the Sacrament of Confirmation, and their dispensations in the solemn vow of
religious chastity, and in marriage not consummate, who were not therefore
accounted impudent, impious, or disobedient children of the Catholic Church,
for that such decrees were not grounded upon any infallible definition, but
only upon the Popes fallible opinion, which they of set purpose did impugn,
Sot. in. 4. did. 27. q. 1. ar. 4.
insomuch that learned Sotus fears not to confess, that the Popes, who have
dispensed in marriage not consummate, did err, following therein the Canonists
opinion, and which he boldly affirms to have no show or color of
probability, notwithstanding so many practices of sundry Popes who have
dispensed therein.

53 But this my answer my Adversary does here altogether conceal, compelling
me for clearing my self, to repeat a great part thereof, which if he had
been pleased sincerely to have set down, the Reader would presently have
perceived, that the voice of our supreme Pastor is not always to be followed,
and that it is no great wonder for a sheep of Christ's fold, and child of the
Catholic Church to disobey without blushing, the declaratiue command of his
supreme Pastor, when it is only grounded upon such an opinion, which no
Catholic is bound to follow, for that the contrary is maintained by learned
and virtuous Catholics, as is this, which denies the Popes power to depose
Princes to be a point of faith, and the contrary improbable, and that the Popes
power to excommunicate is impugned in the oath. By which it is evident, how
injuriously Mr. Fitzherbert to disgrace me with his Reader, has accused me of
the aforesaid ignominious crimes, which rather may be retorted upon himself.
And so I will conclude with him this chapter, remitting to the consideration of
the judicious Reader, what probability and sincerity we may expect of him
hereafter for the confirmation of the rest of his Replies and answers, seeing
that we have found him at the very first so fraudulent, frivolous, and
repugnant to himself, as you have heard in this Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Widdringtons answer to an argument of his Adversary taken from that rule of
the law, The accessorie follows the principal, is confirmed, and two
instances, which he brought against that rule, are proved to be sound and
sufficient, and that place of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 6. If you have secular
judgments, etc. is at large examined.

1. MY Adversary in this Chapter goes on with the like bitterness as he did
in the former, and as before he taxed me of fraud, impudency, impiety, and
of being no good Catholic, but how wrongfully you have already seen, so now
he boldly affirms, that my arguments, and answers are partly repugnant to my
own doctrine, and partly malicious, improbable, impertinent, foolish and
ridiculous, but how undeservedly you shall presently perceive. He took upon
him, as you have seen, to prove in his Supplement, that the oath is unlawful,
and repugnant to all laws humane and divine, in respect of two clauses, to
wit, that it does exempt temporal Princes from Excommunication, and deposition
by the Pope, and that therefore it was justly condemned by his Holiness, and
refused by Catholics, although for this later he could not be ignorant, that
where one Catholic has refused it, a hundred have taken it. And as for the
first clause concerning excommunication he passes it over altogether with
silence, neither does he bring any one argument, or show of argument to prove
that the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the oath, for which cause I
affirmed in my Admonition to the Reader, that Mr. Fitzherberts supposition, for
so much as concerns the Popes power to excommunicate Princes, and
consequently his Primacie in spiritualls, which he does not prove with any one
reason to be denied in the oath, but supposes it as manifest, is very untrue.

2 But as for the second clause concerning the Popes power to depose Princes,
which is expressly denied in the oath, he makes a long Rhetorical discourse,
laboring in vain to prove, that according to all laws humane and divine the
Pope has power to depose Princes and to dispose of all their temporals. And
because the brevity of that Admonition, which was made after my Theological
Disputation was in the press, would not permit to examine in particular all
the arguments, which he brought to prove the same, I thought good to answer
briefly such arguments, as seemed most plausible, and withal to insinuate a
certain distinction, which I had oftentimes in my former books declared more
at large, between the Popes power to command temporals, and to dispose of
temporals, to command or impose temporal penalties, and to inflict temporal
penalties, or to punish temporally by way of coercion, which distinction does
plainly declare the true state of the question, which he seeks to obscure,
and quite overthrows all his chiefest grounds.

3 Among the rest of his proofs he brought one from this vulgar rule of the
law, Accessorium sequitur principale, The accessorie follows the principal,
from whence he inferred, Cap. 1. Suppl. nu. 67.
that seeing not only the body, but also temporal goods and states are
inferior to the soul, and ordained for the service thereof, it must needs
follow, that the Church having power and authority over the body for the
benefit of the soul, has also power over temporal goods and states, when it
is necessary for the good of the soul, and for the glory of God, for the
which our souls, bodies, goods, states, and all things else were created, and
ordained, according to that rule of the law, The accessorie follows the
principal.

In Ad. nu. 15
4 To this inference I answered briefly in this manner. Secondly, every learned
man may perceive, how vain that consequence is, which this Author deduceth,
The accessorie follows the principal, therefore the Church having power over
the soul, has consequently power over the body and goods, except it be
understood of the power to command corporal things so far forth as they
serve to spiritual things: For we might also from that principle argue thus:
The accessorie follows the principal, therefore he that is Lord of all
horses, is Lord of all bridles, The Pope has power over the soul of the
Prince, therefore also over his life. Let this Author explicate, what the
Lawyers understand by the name of accessorie, and what by the name of
principal, in that axiom of theirs, which suffers many exceptions, and is
limited by them diverse ways, In the mean time we deny his consequence, [not
consequent,] as Mr. Fitzherbert translateth. So that it is manifest, that I did
not deny that consequence, if it had been understood of the power to command
temporals in order to spiritual good, but because the words are general, and
so may comprehend both, and Mr. Fitzherbert also meant of both, therefore I did
absolutely deny his consequence.

5 Now my Adversary will needs have me forsooth both to contradict my self in
this answer, and also to overthrow my own arguments. For having set down my
answer, he replyeth thus Nu. 2.
Wherein I wish it to be noted, first what Widdrington grants, and after what
he denies, and I doubt not but it will easily appear, that he overthrows
his own arguments, and contradicts himself. He grants, as you see, that
my consequence is not vain, if it be understood of a power in the Pope to
command corporal things, so far forth as they are to serve spiritual
things, and yet he denies my consequence, albeit I do not thereby suppose in
the Pope any other power over bodies, and goods, then such as follows of
their subordination to the soul, which is in effect the same relation, and
limitation that he makes thereof, to wit, so far forth as corporal and
temporal things are to serve spiritual things, as it may evidently appear by
the discourse, which I make concerning the same in my Supplement, from whence
he takes my argument: and therefore I think good to repeat here, what I have
said there touching this point, whereby I hope I shall not only fortify, and
prove my consequence, which he denies, but also explicate fully, what I mean
by the name of accessorie, and principal, as you see he commanded me to do;
he should rather have said, as I wished him to do. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

6 And I also wish the Reader to observe first, what my Adversary pretends
to prove, and after what he proves, and I doubt not, but it will easily
appear, that I do neither overthrow my own arguments, nor any way contradict
my self. He pretends to prove, that the Pope, as Pope, has power in order
to spiritual good to depose temporal Princes, to punish them by depriving
them of their kingdoms, and by disposing of all their temporals, and not only
to command or enjoin, but also to inflict temporal punishments, as it
appears by the whole scope of his Discourse, both in his Supplement, and also
in this Treatise, whereupon a little beneath in this chapter Nu. 10.
he calls that distinction, which I made betwixt the power to command
corporal things, and to punish corporally by way of coercion, a frivolous
distinction, and afterward especially in the sixth chapter, nu. 14. 15. 16. 17.
he labors to impugn the same, and to prove, that if the Pope may command
corporal and temporal things, as they serve the spiritual, and are reduced
thereto, he may also punish his subjects in their bodies or temporal goods,
and dispose of all their temporals for the same respect.

7 And nevertheless neither out of holy Scriptures, nor from this rule of the
law, the Accessorie follows the principal, nor from the subjection of
temporal things to spiritual, nor by any other argument does my Adversary
sufficiently prove, that the Pope has power to dispose of temporals, or to
punish temporally by way of coercion, which he pretended, and would seem to
his Reader to prove, but only that the Pope as Pope has power in order to
spiritual good to command temporal things, and to punish by way of coercion
Christian Princes and people with spiritual or Ecclesiastical Censures. By
which it will easily appear, whether I do contradict my self in my answer,
and overthrow my own arguments or no: For I granted, that the consequence was
not vain, if it were understood of a power in the Pope to command corporal
things in order to spiritual good, but because he pretended to prove, that
the Pope as Pope, can not only command or impose, but also dispose of
temporals, not only enjoin temporal penalties, but also inflict them, or
punish temporally by way of temporal constraint, therefore I did absolutely
deny his consequence, or the consequence as it was understood by him.

8 And if it had pleased my Adversary, after he saw, that I granted the
consequence, if it were understood of the power to command temporal things, as
they are to serve spiritual, to have set down plainly, what he intended to
prove by that consequence, and whether he meant of the power only to command
temporal things, or also to dispose of temporals, as to dispose is
distinguished from to command, the Reader would quickly have perceived his
fraud, and that I do neither contradict my self, nor overthrow my arguments:
but to blind the eyes of his Reader, he does neither affirm the one, nor the
other in this place, but he uses, as you have heard, such general Words,
which may be applied to both. For whereas to clear the understanding of his
Reader, he should have declared of what power he meant, for that I granted the
consequence, if it were understood of the power to command temporals, but if it
were understood of the power to dispose of temporals, in which sense he must
needs understood it, if be will speak to purpose, then I denied his
consequence, yet he only affirms, that he does not thereby suppose in the
Pope any other power over bodies, or goods, the^ such as follows from the
subordination to the soul, which is in effect the same relation and limitation
that Widdrington makes thereof, to wit, so far forth, as corporal and
temporal things are to serve spiritual. But if he had expressed, that
according to his doctrine and not mine, from the subordination and relation of
the soul to the body, and of temporal things to spiritual, it necessarily
follows, that the Pope has power not only to command or impose temporal
things, but also to dispose of temporal things, not only to enjoin temporal
penalties, but also to punish temporally by depriving men of their temporals,
the Reader would presently have perceived both the weakness of his argument,
and the sufficiency of my answer.

9 For it is very apparent, and my Adversary knows it right well, that I
always denied, that either from the subordination, subjection, or relation of
temporal things to spiritual things, of temporal ends to spiritual ends, of
temporal power to spiritual power, of temporal Princes to spiritual
Pastors, or from any other ground, rule, or principle, it does necessarily
follow, that the Pope as Pope, and by his Pastoral office, has power to
dispose of temporal things, to depose temporal Princes, to inflict temporal
punishments, or which is all one, to punish temporally by way of temporal
constraint, as by depriving any man of his goods, liberty, or life, although I
ever granted, that the Pope as Pope has power to command or impose temporal
things, and to enjoin corporal or temporal punishments in order to
spiritual good, or, which is all one, so far forth as temporal things are
to serve spiritual things, that is, are to be used to the honor of God, and
the good of souls: and to compel, by the inflicting of spiritual censures or
punishments, all Christians to obey his just command. And therefore with good
reason, and conformably to my own doctrine I granted the consequence, if it
were understood of the power to command temporals, and also denied it, if it
were understood, as my Adversary must needs understand it, of the power to
dispose of temporals, and to punish temporally by way of temporal constraint.
Neither does my Adversary by that Discourse, which he made in his Supplement,
and now repeateth again, prove any other thing, then that the Pope by the
ordinary power of his Pastoral office, may command temporal things, and
enjoin temporal penalties in order to spiritual good: And therefore it had
been needless to set down here his words, but that the Reader shall see
that I am not willing to conceal any one of his arguments. Thus therefore he
writes Nu. 3.
:

10 Having discoursed in my Supplement, Supplem. c. 1 nu. 65.
of the written Law of God delivered to us in the New Testament, and proved
thereby, that our Savior made Saint Peter the supreme Pastor and Governor
of his Church, I proved also the extension of his spiritual power to
temporal things thus: The spiritual Pastor, said I, having power over the
soul, must needs have authority over the body, and temporal goods or states
so far forth, at lest, as it shall be convenient for the good of the soul,
according to the rule of the Law, to wit, he that has the greater power has
the less: By the which reason the Apostle justified his dealing with temporal
affairs, yea with such as appertained to political government, when he
advised the Corinthians to constitute and appoint Judges among themselves, to
decide their controversies, rather then to have recourse to the tribunals of
Infidels. Nescitis, etc. Know you not, says he, 1. Cor. 6.
that we shall judge Angels, how much more secular things? as who would say,
Seeing we have the greater and more eminent authority, have we not also the
less? if we have power over spiritual things, shall we not have power over
temporal and secular things? Thus argues the Apostle, and thereupon doubted
not to intermeddle in the temporal and political government, which then
belonged to the Pagan Emperors.

11 But how weak, and altogether insufficient is this Discourse of his, to
prove the Popes power to depose temporal Princes, to dispose of all their
temporals, and to punish temporally by way of coertion, which is the maine
mark, at which my Adversary aymeth, any man of indifferent understanding and
learning may easily perceive. For first, although it be true, that the
spiritual Pastor has that spiritual power, over the soul and body, which
for as much as appertains to the power it self, and not in regard of all
other things, which are requisite, that the power shall have effect, is
sufficient and necessary to the eternal salvation of souls, yet that he
must needs have even over the soul, and much less over the body, and
temporal goods, and states all that power, which is convenient for the good of
soul, as my Adversary here affirms, is very untrue: for this were a too too
large extension of the Popes pastoral power over the soul and body, and would
clearly prove, that the Pope should have power to do miracles, as the
Apostles had, and by miraculous operations to bring actually all Christians to
the kingdom of heaven. For no man, as I think, can make doubt, but that the
Pope to have all that power, whereby all Christians shall be actually saved,
is very convenient for the good of souls. Neither will my Adversary be ever
able to prove, that it is necessary to the salvation of souls, or to the
government of the Church, as it was instituted by Christ to be a spiritual,
and not a temporal Commonwealth, to have power to dispose of temporals, and
to deprive temporal Princes of their kingdoms and lives.

12 Secondly, that proposition, he that has the greater power has the less,
which my Adversary untruly says to be a rule of the Law, for that it is not
to be found among the rules either of the Canon, or Civil Law, is very
untrue, if it be taken in those general words, and without due limitations,
which my Adversary does not declare, as might be convinced by infinite
examples, whereof some may be seen in the next Chapter, where we shall treat
of this Maxim more at large: and for the present this only shall suffice,
that if it were universally true, it would clearly convince, that the Pope,
who by the institution of Christ has spiritual power, which is the greater
power, should also have temporal power, which is the less, which my
Adversary, as I think, will hardly grant, unless he will now become a
Canonist, and affirm, that the Pope as Pope has both temporal and spiritual
power, and is both a temporal and spiritual Prince, which is repugnant to the
common doctrine of the Divines of his own Society.

13 True it is, that if the less be taken for that, which is contained in the
greater either actually and formally, or vertually, he that has the greater
power has formally, or vertually, also the less, as because a hundred crowns
is actually contained in a hundred pounds, and four degrees of heat is
actually contained in eight, and heat is vertually contained in light,
therefore from those rules of the law, (which rather may be called rules of
natural reason for that they are grounded upon the light of nature) De regulis
iuris in 6. regula 35. and 80.
Plus semper continet in se quod est minus, and into to partem non est dubium
contineri, The greater does always contain in it the less, and there is no
doubt but that a part is contained in the whole, we may rightly infer, that
he, who can give a hundred pounds, can give a hundred crowns, and the fire,
which can produce eight degrees of heat, can produce four, and the Sun,
that has power to produce light, has also power to produce heat. But
temporal power is neither formally, nor vertually contained in the spiritual
power of the Pope, although it be vertually and supereminently, contained in
the spiritual power of God almighty, in whom all create powers are vertually
in an infinite and superexcellent manner contained. That which is objected,
says Ioannes Parisiensis, he that has power to do the greater, Joan. Paris.
de potest. Regia and Papali cap. 17. ad 17.
has power to do the less therefore the Pope, who has power in spiritualls,
has also power in temporalls, it is true in the greater and lesser which are
per se subordained, as because a Bishop has power to ordain a Priest,
therefore he has also power to ordain a Deacon: but it does not hold in
those things which are of a diverse order or kind; as because my father could
beget a man, therefore he can also beget a dog: or because a Priest can
absolve from sin, therefore he can also absolve from the debt of money.

14 Thirdly, neither is that true, which my Adversary affirms, that S. Paul
by that proposition, he that has the greater power has the less, did
justify his dealing with temporal affairs, when he advised the Corinthians
to constitute and appoint Judges amongst themselves to decide their
controversies, rather then to have recourse to the tribunalls of Infidells,
which Judges S. Chrysostom upon this place calls Arbiters, and accorders, or
reconcilers. For S. Paul foreseeing, that some might easily object, as S.
Chrysostom observes, that those Corinthians, who were newly become
Christians, were for the most part rude, ignorant, and unnoble, and therefore
might seem to be men unfit and unworthy to intermeddle in secular
controversies, therefore to prevent this objection, he uses an argument which
the Logicians call a maiori ad minus, from the greater to the less, which
argument is not grounded in that maxim, he that has the greater power has
the less, but in this, he that is worthy to have the greater power, is not
unworthy to have the less. To prevent therefore that objection S. Paul
argues in this manner: Know you not that the Saints shall judge of the world?
and if the world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge
(especially as Arbitratours) of the least things? Know you not that we shall
judge Angels, how much more secular things?

15 This therefore is the force of the Apostles argument, as Benedictus
Iustinianus a learned Jesuit upon this place does well declare. The Apostle,
says he, argues a maiori from the greater: Be^ed. Justin: in 1. Cor. 6.
For if the Saints are accounted worthy to be appointed Judges of the whole
world, who can think them unworthy to be over the meanest and least
judgments? If to your judgment the world shall be subject, are you to be
accounted unworthy to decide and compose the least controversies and strifes
of your brethren? If we shall judge the Angels (these be the words of Photius
related by Justinian) how much more shall we be fit to compose the strifes
and controversies which arise concerning things necessary to man's life?
whereupon the Apostles argument does well conclude says Justinian, that those
who are appointed Judges of the world, cannot be accounted unworthy to have
charge of humane judgments, if they be appointed by them who have this
authority, or who may by right subject themselves to their judgments, as
those, who are in suite may to Arbitratours. Neither is this repugnant, says
Justinian, to the public authority of Judges and Magistrates, for no man is
compelled to go to the Magistrate, if by other ways he may peaceably
maintain his own right.

16 Neither were those Judges, whom the Apostle commanded, or advised the
Corinthians to appoint any other then Arbiters, or Arbitratours in power,
although we should grant, that they were to be chosen by common consent, and
not by the parties only, who were in suite, which nevertheless cannot be
convinced by the Apostles words. For albeit the Apostle does not say (which is
the only reason that D. Schulckenius brings to prove, D. Schulck. in Apol.
ad nu. 269 page 445.
that they were to be chosen by common consent) that every man must choose to
himself an Arbiter, for Arbiters are not to be chosen by the consent of one
only party, but by the consent of both, yet the Apostle does not say, that
the whole Church of the Corinthians is by common consent of all to choose the
Judges of such causes, as D. Schulckenius without any sufficient ground
affirms, but rather Saint Paul says the clean contrary. For these be his
words: If therefore you shall have secular judgments, the contemptible that
are in the Church set them to judge; wherefore the Apostle speaks only to
those Corinthians who shall have secular judgments, that is, as Justinian well
expounds, who shall have controversies and strifes to be debated, and not to
the whole Church, unless we suppose that the whole Church shall be at strife
among themselves, and also he speaks with a condition, that if the
Corinthians shall be at strife, they shall appoint men to decide their
controversy, so that the parties, who shall be at strife, and not the whole
Church, unless the whole Church shall be at strife, are, according to the
Apostles command or advise, to appoint men to judge or decide their
controversy.

17 But be it so, that the Apostle should not say, if you shall have secular
judgments, appoint contemptible persons to judge and decide your
controversies, but he should say, because it may be, and it is very like to
fall out, that you shall have now and then secular judgments, therefore I will
have you to choose before hand by common consent same contemptible persons to
judge and decide those controversies, which shall hereafter arise among you,
which nevertheless were to wrest the words of the Apostle, which of themselves
are very plain, yet it is clear, that these Judges were in power mere
Arbiters, or Arbitratours, and had no public and lawful authority of
themselves to give judgment, to which the parties were in justice bound to
stand, but they received their power and authority to give judgment, and to
make a final end of controversies from the parties, who were at strife, and
who for the avoiding of scandal, which the infidels might take, seeing their
strifes and contentions, submitted themselves to their decision and arbitrament.

18 That they were Arbiters, or Arbitratours, S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 6 Almain. de potest. Eccle. and Laica. q. 1. cap. 10. Abulens. q 96. in
cap. 20. Mat. Salmeron tom. 14. disp. 9.
Iacobus Almainus, Abulensis, and Salmeron, a learned Jesuit do in express
words affirm. And also that they had no public power, but only private, and,
if we may so call it, compromissorie, which they received from those private
persons, who werein suite, and by their mutual promise and consent gave power
to those Arbiters to judge, and make a final end of their controversies, in
Apol. nu. 271.
I proved by the authority of S. Thomas, and the gloss of Nicolaus de Lyra
upon that place, for that, according to their doctrine, the appointing of those
arbitrarie Judges did nothing derogate from the subjection and obedience, which
the Christians did owe to Heathen Princes, and that they were bound to appear
before the Heathen Magistrate, and consequently to stand to his judgment, when
they should be called to his tribunal, and that the Apostle does only forbid
the faithful Corinthians to go willingly, and have recourse to Heathen Judges
in those causes, which may be determined by the faithful.

19 From whence it evidently follows, that the power of these Judges was
only private, arbitrarie, or compromissorie, and not public, for if they had
public authority to decide Secular causes without the express or tacit
consent of the Secular Prince, it must needs derogate from the subjection,
which they did owe to the Secular Prince, neither could the Heathen Iugdes have
lawful power to reuerse that sentence, which was given by those Christian
Judges, if the cause had b^ne before decided by sufficient and public
authority of a more eminent power and tribunal: which must also be a
derogation to their authority, and to the subjection which in Secular causes
is due to Secular Princes. And this also Benedictus Justinian does very plainly
insinuate, when he affirms, that by this any man may easily understand, that
the Apostle does not speak of lawful judgments, which are exercised by
Magistrates, and public Judges by public authority, but of those, who by the
common consent (to wit of those who are at strife) are appointed deba^^rs of
civil controversies: and that this right and authority of the Apostle to
command humane and civil things does not repugne to the public authority of
Judges and Magistrates, for that no man is compelled to go to the Magistrate,
if by other ways he may peaceably maintain his own right.

20 By which it is evident, that this manner of judging, which the Apostle
commands, was not legal, or done by public authority, and that these Judges
were not Magistrates, and who had public authority. And therefore although
these arbitrarie Judges were appointed by the declaratiue commandment of the
Apostle for the avoiding of scandal, yet their power was only private and
compromissorie, and was given them by the mutual consent of both parties, in
so much, that if either of the parties who were in suite, would not have obeyed
the Apostles commandment, and admitted of those Arbiters, but would have had
recourse to the tribunal of the Heathen Magistrate, although by disobeying the
Apostles commandment, and by scandalizing Christian Religion he should have
greatly offended, yet he should not have offended against justice, in wronging
either of those Christian Judges, or the other party that would not willingly
go to the Heathen Magistrate, against which without doubt he should have
offended, if he had refused to obey the sentence of his lawful and legal
Judge, and who had full power and authority, to decide and end the cause.

21 And by this it is very clear, that my Adversaries conclusion is very
untrue, to wit, that the Apostle did intermeddle in the temporal and politic
government, which then belonged to the Pagan Emperor, for this had been to
derogate from the civil subjection due to temporal Princes, but he did only
intermeddle with the private and peaceable composition of secular controversies
among the faithful Corinthians, which every Christian without any public
authority, or any prejudice to the same might do, and which the Apostle by
his Apostolical and spiritual power might command the Christians to do, and
by spiritual Censures compel them so to do, when otherwise they should
scandalize the Christian faith and religion. And this very answer did I give
in my Apology to this text of holy Scripture, which was urged by Card.
Bellarmine to prove, that the Pope had power to depose and put down Secular
Princes, as the Apostle had power to appoint and set up new Judges in Secular
causes: for I denied his consequence, because the appointing and setting up of
those Judges did nothing derogate from the subjection due to Secular Princes,
for that they were only Arbiters, or peaceable composers of secular causes
with the consent of the parties who were at strife, but the putting down of
Princes, or depriving them of their Royal authority, does greatly derogate,
or rather quite overthrow and abolish their temporal sovereignty.

22 To which answer of mine, D. Schulckenius only replieth, In Apolog. page
444.
That although these Judges whom the Apostle commanded the Corinthians to
appoint, had not indeed vim coactiuam in foro externo, a coactiue power in the
external Court, and that if either party would not obey the Apostle, and go
to the Judges appointed by the Church, but would bring his cause to the public
tribunals of the heathen Magistrates, the other party was bound there to
appear, and there to debate his cause, yet they were not mere Arbiters or
voluntary Judges: For Arbiters are chosen by the parties, but these were chosen
by the common consent of the Church, and were appointed by public authority,
by the command of the Apostle, who was a spiritual Prince. Besides, none are
bound to admit Arbiters, unless they will, but Christians were bound to admit
these Judges, and were forbidden to go to the tribunals of Infidel Princes.
Moreover the Saints are not to judge the world and Angels, as Arbiters chosen
by them, but as true Judges, and as sitting with Christ the supreme Judge.

23 But all this is easily satisfied by that which I said before: For although
the faithful Corinthians were by the public spiritual authority of the
Apostle commanded to choose those Judges, or Arbiters, yet it does not from
thence follow, either that those arbitrarie Judges were to be chosen by the
whole Church, and not only by the parties that were at strife, or that the
Apostle, for that he was a spiritual Prince, had either himself public
authority to decide secular causes, or could give the same to any other. But
because the Christians were bound by the Law of God to compound their
controversies among themselves, by way of arbitriment, and not to bring their
causes to the hearing of Heathen Judges, in case they should thereby scandalize
the Christian Religion, therefore the Apostle might by his public spiritual
and Pastoral power command them, and also with spiritual Censures compel
them so to do.

24 And although these arbitrarie Judges, were to be chosen by the whole
Church, and by the common consent of all the faithful Corinthians, which
nevertheless can not be sufficiently gathered from the Apostles words, yet
it does not therefore follow, that they were not mere Arbiters, or voluntary
Judges in power, or, which is all one that they had more then arbitrarie,
private or compromissorie power. For it is not material by whom a public, or
legal Judge, or else an Arbitratour, or compromissorie Judge be chosen, but
from whom they receive their authority to judge: as a true, proper, and
public Judge may sometimes be chosen by the people, as is the Recorder of
London by the City, and the Chancellours of Oxford and Cambridge by the
Universities, but it is the Kings Majesty that gives them public authority
to judge: And Achiters, or voluntary Judges may be chosen by the common consent
of the people to decide by way of arbitrament, or voluntary submission all
civil controversies, which shall arise among them, yet seeing that they are
only Arbiters, or have only arbitrarie, voluntary, private, or
compromissorie power, the parties only who are at strife do give power to
judge, and to make a final end of their controversies. And although
abstracting from scandal none are bound to admit Arbiters, unless they will,
yet if by not admitting them they should scandalize the Christian Religion, as
the Corinthians did, they are bound to admit them, or which is all one, to give
them arbitrarie, voluntrary, or compromissorie power to decide and determine
their controversies.

25 True also it is, that the Saints are not to judge the world, or the bad
Angels, as Arbiters, yet in what manner they are to judge, whether by only
assisting our Savior, and approouing or applauding his sentence, or by being
Assessores supremi Iudicis Christi, by sitting in seats of honor with Christ
the supreme Judge, as Noble men, and Justices of peace do sit upon the bench,
with the chief Judge of Assizes, or in any other more peculiar manner, it is a
controversy among Catholic Divines, although it be certain, that the Saints
shall not be true and proper Judges, as Judges are properly taken, howsoever D.
Schulckenius does seem here to affirm the same, for that to judge, and to
give judgment, does properly signify an act of Jurisdiction, and superiority
of power to give the definitive sentence pro, or contra, which Jurisdiction in
respect of the last judgment of souls, is only communicated to Christ. Se^.
Suarez tom. 2. disp. 57. sect. 4.
But howsoever it be, the argument of Saint Paul, whereby he intended to
prove, that Christians were not unworthy to judge Secular causes, which he
calls the least things, is of force, as I declared before, for if they be not
unworthy to judge the world and Angels, much less are they to be accounted
unworthy to decide by way of arbitrament Secular causes, or the least things.

26 And whereas D. Schulckenius affirms, that those Judges had no coactiue
power in the external Court, and that if one of the parties should call the
other to the tribunal of the Infidel Magistrate, he were bound to appear,
and debate his cause before the Heathen Judge, this does make nothing against
that which I have said, but is rather a confirmation, that these Judges were
only Arbitratours, and voluntary Judges in power to decide Secular causes. For
if they had been true and proper Judges, and had not only private and
arbitrary power, but also public authority to judge, why should they not have
(as all other true and proper Judges have) both a commanding and also a
coactiue power either temporal or spiritual, according as D. Schulckenius
will have them to be temporal or spiritual Judges? And if they were true
Judges, and not only Arbitratours, how could the faithful Corinthians be
bound in conscience to leave their tribunalls, and go to a Heathen Judge to
have their cause decided by him, if they should be called thither although
against then wills, seeing that they should thereby offend, not only by reason
of scandal, but also against obedience, and against legal and moral justice,
by declining the judgment of their lawful Superiors and Judges, and by
wronging their Adversary in drawing him against his will from the tribunal of
his lawful Judge, and who had good and sufficient authority to make a small
end of his suite?

27 But considering that these Judges, whom the Apostle commanded the
Corinthians to appoint, were not lawful and proper Superiors and Judges, but
only Arbaratours, and consequently to whose judgment they were not bound to
stand by virtue of any subjection and obedience due to them, but only by reason
of scandal, whereon the declaratiue precept of the Apostle was only grounded,
and which scandal being taken away the commandment of the Apostle does also
cease, this difficulty is easily cleared. For albeit it was very scandalous,
and therefore justly reprehended by the Apostle, that the faithful Corinthians
should of their own accord without any necessity (for in that case, Disp.
Theol. c. 10. s. 3. nu. 10. Salmer. tom. 8. tract. 29. in Euang.
as I observed in my Theological Disputation out of Alphonsus Salmeron the
active scandal does cease, and if it be any scandal it is not given, but
taken) go to the tribunalls of Heathen Magistrates, yet it is not scandalous
to appear before them when they are called, for in this case they must of
necessity by virtue of their subjection appear, and so the scandal cease,
which would still remain by their appearing, if those Judges, whom the Apostle
commanded the Corinthians to appoint, had been true and lawful Superiors and
Judges, for then they had also been bound by virtue of their subjection, not
to forgo the judgment of their lawful Superiors and Judges, and
consequently not to appear before the tribunal of the Heathen Magistrate in
derogation of the authority of their Christian Superior and Judge. And this
may suffice for this point.

28 Moreover we read in the old Testament, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Nu. 4. pa. 31
3 Reg. 18.
that Elias the Prophet had power to inflict temporal punishment, yea death
upon the false Prophets of Achab, whom he commanded the people to kill in his
presence: as also he caused fire to fall from heaven, and consume the two
Captains of King Ochozias and their troops. 4 Reg. 1.
In like manner we read in the new Testament, that the Apostles S. Peter and
S. Paul extended their spiritual authority to the temporal punishment of the
body, when it seemed to them convenient for the glory of God, and good of
souls: and therefore S. Peter stro^ke Ananias and Saphyra with sudden death,
Act. 6.
and S. Paul deprived Elymas the Magician of his sight, Act. 13. 1. Cor. 5.
and delivered the incestuous Corinthian to the devil to be bodily (...) and
tormented for the example and terror of others, vt spiritus saluus fiat, that
his soul might be saved: and the same judgments, and corporal punishments
these Apostles might (no doubt) as lawfully have executed upon any Prince in
the world, if he had then been a Christian, and given the like occasion.

29 But who would not wonder, that any man of ordinary judgment should from an
extraordinary, and miraculous power of the Apostles, yea and of the Prophets
who were no Priests, or from a special command or inspiration of God to kill
men, and to do other miracles, infer that the Pope has an ordinary
Pastoral and Episcopal power to do the like: as are those examples, which my
Adversary brings of Elias the Prophet, who was no Priest and by the
commandment of God, 3. Reg. 18. ver. 36. Abul. in 3. Reg. 18. q. 35
and not by any ordinary authority or jurisdiction caused the false prophets
of Ashab to be slain, and by miracle caused fire to fall from heaven to
consume the two captains of King Ochozias and their troops; and of S. Peter,
who by miracle either killed Ananias and Saphyra, or foretold their death, and
of S. Paul, who also by miracle deprived Elymas of his sight, or foretold his
blindness, and delivered the incestuous Corinthian to the devil to be bodily
vexed, and tormented, which manner of delivering men to Satan did proceed from
an extraordinary and miraculous power given to the Apostles, and not from any
ordinary power which was to descend to all their Successors: But of these
examples I shall have occasion to speak again beneath Cap. 6.


30 And the same judgments and corporal punishments says Mr. Fitzherbert,
might (no doubt) these Apostles as lawfully have executed upon any Prince in
the world, if he had been a Christian, and given the like occasion. But
first, I marvel, why he adds that condition [if he had then been a
Christian] for the example of Elymas, who was no Christian, does prove, that
the same judgments and corporal punishments they might have executed not only
upon Christians, but also upon infidels. Besides, if any one will reduce those
examples to a dialecticall form of arguing, he will easily perceive, that
they are very weak, and insufficient, not to use those his foul and unseemly
words of absurd, impertinent, foolish and ridiculous, to prove, that the Pope
by his ordinary Pastoral power can do the like. As that because Elias, who
was no Priest, had an extraordinary commission and power given him by God to
kill the false Prophets, and to cause fire to fall from heaven to consume those
two Captains, and their troops therefore the Pope by his ordinary Episcopal
and Pastoral office has power to do the same in the like cases, and so of
the rest, that because S. Peter and S. Paul had an extraordinary power given
them, etc.

31 And all this, says my Adversary, Nu. 5.
may be confirmed by the common custom, and practice of the Primitive Church
to enjoin bodily penance to public penitents, as to attend to continual
fasting and prayer, Tertull. de penitent. Ambros. ad virg. lap. sam. cap. 28.
and to lie upon sackcloth and ashes (as it may be seen in Tertullian, S.
Ambrose and others) whereupon it follows, that if the Church may chastise a
man in his body for the good of his soul, much more may she chastise him in
his goods, and temporal state, which are ordained by the law of nature to
serve both the body and the soul, as the Philosophers touch, and namely Plato,
Plato epist. 8. ad Dionys.
who therefore advised a Lawmakers to procure by his laws, that the three
kinds of goods (to wit, of the mind) the body, and fortune) be sought and
possessed in due and ordinate manner, that is to say, that the goods of the
mind be preferred before the other two, and the goods of the body esteemed only
so far forth, as they may serve the mind, and lastly that the goods of
fortune (which are honor, dignity, wealth and temporal states) be accounted
no better then ministers and servants of both the other.

32 But first I do willingly grant, that it may be confirmed by the common
custom and practice of the Primitive Church, that not only the Pope, but also
inferior Bishops, yea and Priests had power to command, or enjoin bodily
penances to their penitents, as fasting, prayer, lying upon sackcloth and
ashes, yea and giving of alms in satisfaction of their sins, as the building
of Churches, Colleges, Hospitals or Religious Houses, according to the
greatness of their offense, and the quality, condition, and ability of the
penitent, or to use the term of Divines, cla^e non errante, the key not
erring: For if such penances should be enjoined without discretion and due
regard of the greatness of the offense, or of the state and condition of the
penitent, the key should err, and would not have force to bind. Secondly, I
do also grant, that there is an order and subordination in worth and dignity
betwixt spiritual, corporal and temporal goods, or of the soul, of the body
and of fortune, and that, according to the light of nature, the goods of the
soul being most worthy are to be preferred and esteemed before the other two,
and that the goods of the body, bodily life, health, liberty, and such like
bodily contentments are to be preferred before the goods of fortune, which are
honor, dignity, wealth and temporal states, and that all of them are with
due order to be referred to the service and glory of God, and to the eternal
salvation both of body and soul. But what follows from all this?

33 Whereupon I infer, says my Adversary, page 33. nu. 5.6.
( according to the axiom of the law, accessorium sequitur principale) that
seeing not only the body, but also temporal good, and states are inferior
to the soul, and ordained for the service thereof; a must needs follow, that
the Church having power and authority over the body for the benefit of the
soul, has also power over temporal goods and states, when it is necessary
for the good of the soul, and for the glory of God, for the which (...)
bodies, goods; states and all things else were created and ordained. And this
me thinks our adversaries should not deny, seeing that their Ecclesiastical
discipline admits not only corporal chastisements by imprisonment, but
also pecuniaris mulcto and penalties. Therefore upon this I infer, that
Christian Princes being sheep of Christ's flock, and consequently to be fed
and governed by the supreme Pastor of the Church, may also be chastised by him
in their temporal states, when it shall be necessary for the glory and
service of God, the benefit of souls, and good of the whole Church, whereto
all Christian Kingdoms, Isa 60.
and Empyres are subordinate, and subject, as I have proved before out of the
holy Scripture, and will prove also after a while by the very law of nature,
and light of reason.

34 But first touching the consequent, or conclusion of his inference or
argument, to wit, that the Pope having power over the soul, has power also
over the body and goods, when it is necessary for the good of the soul and
glory of God, I do willingly grant the same, if it be understood of a power
not to dispose of corporal and temporal goods, but to command and enjoin
them in order to spiritual good, albeit my Adversary did understand it of
both, as I showed before. But as concerning the consequence, inference or
argument, which he draws from that rule of the law, De Regulis Iuris in 6.
regula. 42.
The accessorie follows the principal, or as it is in the Canon law,
Accessorium naturam sequi congruit principalis: It is fit, or convenient that
the accessorie follow the nature of the principal: which rule, as the Gloss
there affirms, is taken from that rule of the Civil law, ff. de Regulis
Iuris regula 138.
Cum principalis causa etc. When the principal cause is not consisting, for
the most part neither those things that follow have place, there can be no
conuincing, or demonstratiue argument (as all my Adversaries arguments must be,
if he will prove by them, that the oath cannot with a safe and probable
conscience be taken by any Catholic, and that the doctrine for the Popes power
to depose Princes is a point of faith) be drawn from that general rule of the
law, which has so many exceptions, restrictions, and limitations, and which
are not as yet made sufficiently known by the Lawiers, as neither what is
universally meant by Accessorie, and what by Principal, and what is to follow
the nature of the principal.

35 And therefore not without cause does the rule of the Civil law, from which
this rule of the Canon law is taken, adioyne that word [plaerunque, for the
most part] and the rule it self of the Canon law, does not absolutely say,
that the Accessorie must follow, or does follow the nature of the principal,
but it is fit or convenient, that the accessorie do follow the nature of the
principal, to signify, that it does not always, and of necessity but for
the most part, and of congruitie follow the principal, and that Judges ought
for the most part follow this rule in their judgments, if they have no
special reasoned meaning (...) to the contraries And therefore, as the
marginall Gloss upon the Civil law does well observe, Leg. Et si is quem Cod.
de praedijs and alijs. etc.
The accessorie does not follow his principal, when in the accessorie there is
not the same reason, which is in the principal.

36 Secondly therefore, I would gladly know of my Adversary, whether he will
have this rule to be grounded only in humane law, and has it force and
strength only from thence, so that if the Civil, or Canon law had not made
and ordained that rule, it would not be of force and validity, or else it is
grounded also in the law of God, or nature. If he grant the first, as commonly
the Lawiers do, and therefore some things, which seem of their own nature to
be accessorie, as a saddle, and bridle are to a horse, are not accessorie
according to humane law, and therefore he that sells a horse, does not
consequently sell the bridle and faddle, and somethings, which are not
accessorie of their own nature, as a dowry is not necessarily annexed to
marriage; are made accessorie according to humane law, and therefore he that
marries a woman with the consent of her parents, has right to a dowry, and
the parents are bound by the Civil Law to give a dowry, if they be able:
wherefore the Gloss upon the aforesaid rule of the Civil law does observe,
that the word [plaerunque, for the most part] was purposely added to that rule
of the law, for that sometimes that rule does fail, to which purpose he
alleges many texts of the Civil law. If my Adversary, I say, will grant
the first, he can not but easily perceive, that there can no forcible argument
be drawn from the aforesaid rule to prove, that the Pope by the institution
of Christ has a disposing power over the body, and over corporal and
temporal goods, because he has power over the soul; both for that the
aforesaid rule is not generally true, and especially, as I observed out of the
Gloss, when in the accessorie there is not the same reason which is in the
principal, as there is not the same reason, that a spiritual Pastor can
dispose of the body, and of corporal or temporal goods, because he can
dispose of the soul and of spiritual goods, but chiefly for that our Savior
Christ gave to S. Peter and his Apostles all their spiritual and Pastoral
power long before that rule of humane law was ordained, and whether it were
ordained before or after, it is manifest, that our Savior was not tied to give
any power to S. Peter and the Apostles by force and virtue of any humane law,
neither can the institution of Christ depend upon any rule, which is grounded
only in humane law.

37 But if my Adversaries meaning be, that the aforesaid rule, The accessory
follows the principal, is grounded in the Law of God, or nature, so that
abstracting from all humane laws, yet either by the institution of Christ, or
by a necessary sequel or consequence drawn from the light of natural reason,
it is always true (I say always true, for otherwise if the rule be not
generally true, there can no invincible argument be concluded from that rule to
prove, that he who has the principal, must of necessity have the accessory,
or who has power over the principal, must of necessity have power over the
accessory) then this rule may rather be called a rule, or Maxim of Logike,
then a rule of Law, and it is taken from that Topike place, which the Logicians
call, The place of Antecedents, and in sense it is all one with this
dialecticall axiom, Posito antecedenti necesse est poni consequens, the
Antecedent being put, the consequent must of necessity be put, or follow; or
if we call the antecedent the principal, and the consequent, the accessory,
the principal being put, the accessory must of necessity follow, or which is
all one, the accessorie does necessarily follow the principal.

38 But in this sense neither can bridles be said to be accessory to horses,
for that horses, can consist without bridles, neither can any separable
accident (to use the Logicians term) be said to be accessory to the
substance, and so neither music, physic, or any other Art can be said to be
accessory to the soul, for that the soul can consist without any of these
Arts, neither can the mortal body it self be said to be accessorie to the
immortal soul, for the soul can consist without the body, neither can the
goods of fortune, as honor, dignity, riches, earthly kingdoms, etc. nor the
goods of the body, as health, liberty, and other bodily contentments be said,
as my Adversary would have them, to be accessory in any man to the good of his
soul and his eternal salvation, which is the last end, to which he ought to
refer all his corporal and temporal goods and miseries, for that any man
may attain to eternal salvation, and have spiritual and justifying grace,
which is the only means to attain thereunto, without any worldly riches or
preferments, and without any bodily comforts, and contentments, albeit in
another sense all the former inferior things may be called accessory, for
that they are ordained and referred to the other more worthy, noble, and
principal things.

39 Nevertheless I do not deny, as I have often said, that Christ our Savior
has given to Saint Peter and his Successors sufficient power to govern his
Church by spiritual means, and consequently power to command both spiritual
and temporal things in order to spiritual good, and to chastise the
transgressors of his just command with spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Censures, for that all these are spiritual means, and comprehended in
spiritual government: And because the commanding of spiritual and temporal
things in order to spiritual good is by the institution of Christ annexed to
spiritual government, or the power to command temporal things, which is the
less noble, and therefore may be called accessorie, is by the institution of
Christ annexed to the power of commanding spiritual things, which being the
more noble, may be called the principal: therefore from that maxim of the
Logicians there may be drawn a good argument, supposing the institution of
Christ, that if the Pope has power to command spiritual things in order to
spiritual good, he has power also to command temporal things in order to the
same spiritual good, not for that temporal things are per se, and of their
own nature subject and subordained to spiritual things, except only in worth
and nobility, or that temporal things are the accessorie, and spiritual
things the principal, taking accessorie, and principal, as I have before
declared, but for that the power to command spiritual things is the
principal, or antecedent, and the power to command temporal things in order
to spiritual good is the accessorie or consequent, and by the institution of
Christ annexed to the power of commanding spiritual things.

40 But for all this I utterly deny, that the power to dispose of temporal
goods is by the institution of Christ annexed to spiritual government, or to
the Popes power of commanding either spiritual or temporal things, for that
the disposing of temporal things, for what end soever it be, is not a
spiritual but a temporal action, and does belong to a temporal or civil
power, which by the institution of Christ has it acts, offices, dignities,
means, and ends distinguished from the spiritual power: both which, as they
are supreme in their degree and order, and consequently independent one of the
other in those things, which are proper to either of them, so they cannot
intermeddle with the actions of each either: and as the supreme spiritual
power does reside in spiritual Pastors, so the supreme temporal power does
reside in temporal Princes: and as spiritual Pastors are by spiritual
power, spiritual laws, spiritual actions, and spiritual means and
punishments bound to bring all men, as much as lies in them, to everlasting
happiness, so also Christian Princes, are bound, as much as lies in them, by
temporal power, temporal laws, temporal actions, and temporal means and
punishments to bring their subjects to the kingdom of heaven, which is the
last end, to which all Christians ought to refer all that they have, or are.

41 Wherefore if that, which Mr. Fitzherbert does lastly infer, that
Christian Princes being sheep of Christ's flock may be chastised by the
supreme Pastor of the Church in their temporal states, be so understood,
that he may by way of direction or command enjoin them temporal penalties or
punishments, as to fast, to pray, to give alms or the like in satisfaction of
their sins, or for some other great spiritual good, this is very true, and I
have affirmed the same too too often; and this only he has proved by this
Discourse which he has here repeated out of his Supplement, albeit this be
not the mark, at which he aims, and which he pretended to prove: for as I
have showed before, Nu. 6.
his chief drift and purpose was to prove, that the Pope has power not only
to command temporals in order to spiritual good, but also to dispose of
temporals, not only to command christians, that in satisfaction of their sins
or in defense of the Church they will dispose of their temporal goods
according to the quality of their offense, and the necessity of the Church
shall require, and their ability does extend, but also to deprive them of the
right, power, and dominion, which they have over their temporal goods and
states, if they shall refuse to obey his just command, which my Adversary by
this Discourse in his Supplement has not, as you have seen, so much, as
probably confirmed, and nevertheless, as I have often said, not only probable
arguments, but conuincing authorities, or demonstrations are required to prove
his doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, and to dispose of their
temporals, to be certain, and a point of faith, and that the oath cannot
lawfully, and with a safe conscience be taken by any Catholic. And thus much
concerning the Discourse which Mr. Fitzherbert has made in his Supplement. Now
you shall see what from thence he does infer.

42 Thus did I discourse, says he, Page 34. nu 7
and argue in my Supplement, whereby my Adversary Widdrington may perceive
first, what I mean by the accessorie, and by the principal; as that the soul
of man, and the service, and glory of God are the principal, and that the
accessory is the body, goods, and all temporal states whatsoever, because they
are subordinate to the soul, and ordained for the service thereof, and for
Gods glory.

43 And my Adversary also by that, which I have here answered to his
Discourse may perceive, that although the soul of man, and the spiritual good
thereof, and the service and glory of God may in some sense be called the
principal, and bodily and temporal goods the accessorie, for that they are
the less worthy, and less noble, and therefore though not of their own
nature referred, yet by the intention and will of man ought to be referred to
the eternal good and salvation of the soul, as to the last end of man, in
which sense temporal good may be said to be subject and ordained to the
supernatural good of the soul, whereof I have treated more at large above in
the second part: Yet in that sense, as antecedent and consequent, principal
and accessorie are taken in that maxim, the spiritual good of the soul,
eternal salvation, and the supernatural service and glory of God cannot be
called the principal or antecedent, nor corporal goods and temporal states,
as health, wealth, honor, etc. the accessorie or consequent, for that God may
be served and glorified, and the soul saved, without having any such
corporal, or temporal contentments, yea rather they do hinder then promote
the good of the soul, for that according to our Saviors own words, Matthew.
19.
A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven: For they 1. Tim. 6.
that will be made rich, fall into tentation and the snare of the Devil, and
many desires unprofitable and hurtful, which drown men into destruction and
perdition; and By many tribulations Act. 14.
we must enter into the kingdom of God.

44 Neither did I desire my Adversary to declare, what he understood in
particular by the names of principal and accessory, for I knew right well,
that he took the good of the soul for principal, and the goods of the body
and of fortune to be the accessory, for that they are referred and ordained to
the good of the soul, in which sense the words principal and accessory are
not taken in that maxim, as I showed before, and it will more clearly appear
beneath, but I desired him to declare, what the Lawyers understood in general
by the names of principal and accessory in that rule of the Law, for that the
nature and definition of principal and accessory being once known, we might
the better descend to particulars, and more easily perceive whether the good of
the soul was to be taken for principal, and all other corporal and
temporal goods for accessory in that rule of the Law, and withal he should
also have explained, if he had meant to clear and satisfy the understanding
of his Reader, what the Lawyers understood by those words, [to follow the
nature of the principall] all which my Adversary has, as you have seen,
neglected to declare.

45 Secondly, Widdrington may see, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 34. nu. 8
the force and validity of my consequence, to wit, because the Church has
power over the soul, (which is the principal) therefore it has power also
over the accessorie, that is to say, over the body, temporal goods, and
states, when it is necessary for the good of the soul, and the glory of God,
for which our souls, bodies, goods, states, and all things else were ordained.

46 And he also may see, in what manner his consequence is of force, if it be
only understood of a power to command temporal things in order to spiritual
good, to wit, not for that the Church having power over the soul (which he
calls the principal) must also have power over the body and temporal goods,
(which he calls the accessorie) when it is necessary for the good of the
soul, and the glory of God, because temporal goods and states are not
necessary for the good of the soul, and the glory of God, but rather lets,
and hindrances thereof, seeing that souls may be saved, and God glorified
without the enjoying of such corporal or temporal goods, and therefore
temporal goods, and states can not rightly be called the accessory or
consequent, as accessory or consequent ought to be taken in that maxim: But
the force of his consequence can only consist in this, that because Christ our
Savior has given to Saint Peter and his Successors, sufficient authority to
govern the Church by spiritual means, and in order to spiritual good to
command not only spiritual things, which is the more noble and principal,
but also temporal things, which power is the less noble, and so by the
institution of Christ annexed to the spiritual power of governing the Church,
and of commanding spiritual things, for which cause it may well be called the
accessory or consequent, therefore from that rule, or maxim not of the law,
but of the Logicians, The accessory, or consequent does necessarily follow the
principal or antecedent, it may be well inferred, that the Pope having power
to command spiritual things, has also power to command temporal things in
order to spiritual good, for that this power to command temporal things, is
by the institution of Christ annexed and adjoined to the spiritual power of
governing the Church and of commanding spiritual things: I say, by the
institution of Christ, for that there is no absolute, necessary, or natural
connection betwixt the power to command spiritual things and temporal things:
and therefore it was in our Saviors absolute power and choice to have granted
to Saint Peter and his Successors a power to command only spiritual things
and not temporal, even in order to spiritual good, as he has granted him a
power to dispose only of spiritual things and not of temporal, but the
disposing of temporal things for what end soever it be, he has left to the
temporal power of Secular Princes, who in temporals acknowledge no Superior
on earth.

47 Thirdly, Widdrington may note his absurdity, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Nu. 9.
page 34
in denying the consequence, and yet granting it in effect. For granting, as
he does, that the body, and temporal goods are ordained to serve spiritual
things, Supra nu. 1.
and that therefore the Pope has authority to command corporal and temporal
things in order to spiritual, he grants consequently, as much as I require,
to wit, that the Pope has power to punish corporally and temporally, when it
shall be convenient for the good of souls, and Gods glory: for he can give no
sufficient nor probable reason why the Pope can do the one, and not the other,
seeing that it can not be denied, but that the Church has always used to
enjoin bodily penance to her penitents, as fasting prayer, and lying upon
sackcloth and ashes, which was usually imposed even in the primitive Church,
Supra. nu. 5.
as I showed in the place alleged a little before out of my Supplement.

48 Whereupon I infer, says he, nu. 10.
that if the Church may punish a man in his body for the good of his soul, it
may punish him in his goods to the same end, seeing that temporal goods are
inferior to the body, and ordained for the service of the body and soul,
Supra. nu. 5.
as I have before declared by the opinion of the Philosophers themselves. But
because he will give me a better occasion hereafter infra cap. 5. nu. 1. 2.
etc. 39. Item cap. 6. nu. 13. 14. 15. 16. and seq.
to treat more amply of this point, and to confute a friuoulous distinction of
his, of the power to command corporal things, and to punish corporally, I will
now say somewhat to the instances, that he brings against my consequence
which he impugneth, by drawing two other consequences from the same principle,
and confronting them with mine to show some absurdity therein.

49 But Mr. Fitzherbert may also note, that I have committed no absurdity in
denying absolutely the consequence, and also granting it with a condition, for
so I do not grant it in that sense wherein I do deny it. I grant that the
consequence is not in vain if it be understood of the Popes power to command
temporalls in order to spiritual good, but because my Adversary did
understand it not only of the Popes power to command temporals, but also to
dispose of temporals, and to inflict temporal punishments, or punish
temporally, not only by the way of command, but also by the way of temporal
constraint, therefore I did absolutely deny his consequence. And therefore
albeit I did grant this consequence, The accessorie or consequent follows the
principal or antecedent, (being so understood, as I declared before) therefore
the Pope having power to govern the Church by spiritual means, and to
command spiritual things in order to spiritual good, has consequently
(supposing the institution of Christ) power also to command corporal, and
temporal things in order to the same spiritual good, yet I did not grant
these consequences; The accessory or consequent follows the principal or
antecedent, therefore the Pope having, by the institution of Christ, power to
command spiritual things in order to spiritual good, has consequently power
to dispose of temporal things in order to the same spiritual good, nor this:
The accessorie or consequent follows the principal or antecedent, therefore
the Pope having power to dispose of spiritual things in order to spiritual
good has consequently power to dispose of temporal things in order to the
same spiritual good.

50 Observe therefore, good Reader, how cunningly Mr. Fitzherbert, to make thee
imagine, that my answer is absurd and repugnant to my self, endeavors to
delude thee, and to cast a mist before thine eyes, whilst he affirms, that I
granting, that the body and temporal goods are ordained to serve spiritual
things, and that therefore the Pope has authority to command corporal and
temporal things in order to spiritual good, do consequently grant so much,
as he requires, to wit, that the Pope has power to punish corporally and
temporal when it shall be convenient (a large extension of the Popes spiritual
power to deprive Princes of their kingdoms) for the good of souls, and Gods
glory: as though, forsooth, he requires nothing else, but that the Pope may
only command temporal things and not dispose of temporal things, may punish
corporally and temporally by way only of commanding or enioyning temporal and
corporal penalties, and not also by inflicting them, or by way of temporal
coercion, and by depriving Christian Princes and subjects of their temporal
states and corporal lives, whereas the whole scope of his Discourse, as I
showed before, and concerning depriving them of their lives you shall see
beneath, Nu. 65.
tends to prove the clean contrary: and in this very place he plainly
signifies as much, in promising to confute beneath a frivolous distinction of
mine, as he terms it, of the power to command corporal things, and
consequently corporal punishments, and of the power to punish corporally, not
by the way of command, for this power I have granted above an hundred times,
but by way of corporal coercion and constraint: Which distinction does break
the neck of a great part of his Discourse, and also declares the true state
of the maine question betwixt him and me, and therefore he might have done well
having so fit an occasion offered him to have confuted in this place that
distinction, and not to leave his Reader in suspense touching this point, which
is the maine controversy betwixt him and me, and which distinction being once
overthrown, and proved to be frivolous, this whole question concerning the
Popes power to depose Princes and to inflict temporal and corporal
punishments would presently be ended.

51 But the plain truth is, that neither in the fifth chapter (for there he
barely repeateth what he said here concerning this distinction) nor in the
sixth chapter does he bring any one probable proof to confute this distinction,
as I will clearly show in that place. In the mean time without interrupting
the order, which he observes in his Chapters, and withal not to leave thee,
good Reader, altogether in suspense, thou may easily gather some ground and
reason of this distinction, partly from that, which has been said a little
before, partly from the words which I related out of S. Bernard, See above,
part. 2. cap. 8.
that the Pope may command, but not use the material sword, and partly by the
comparison, which Cardinal Bellarmine out of See above, part. cap. 9.
S. Gregory Nazianzene did make betwixt the soul and body, and betwixt the
spiritual and temporal power or common wealth. For as the soul has power to
command coporall actions for the good both of the body and soul, but she has
not power of her self without the concurrance of the body to do or exercise
corporal actions even for the good of the soul, so also the spiritual power
or common wealth may command temporal actions in order to spiritual good, but
she cannot of herself without the concurrance of the temporal power exercise
any temporal action belonging to temporal government, although it be never
so much with order or reference to spiritual good: neither does the reference
of a temporal or bodily action to a spiritual end alter, or change the
nature of the action, for as a bodily action, although it be done for the good
of the soul, is still a bodily action, and does not by that reference become a
spiritual action, so a temporal action, although it be done for a spiritual
end, does still remain a temporal ^^tion, and virtue and vice may be found
as well in temporal, as in ^^irituall actions.

52 Now you shall see, how soundly Mr. Fitzherbert impugneth the two instances
I brought against his consequence, which were these: The accessorie follows
the principal, therefore he who is Lord of all horses is Lord of all bridles:
The Pope has power over the soul of a Prince, and therefore over his life. To
which he replieth in this manner. Page 35. nu. 11.12.
But of these two instances I must needs say, that the former is ridiculous,
and the later malicious; for by the former he impugneth himself, and not me:
You have heard him before admit my consequence, so that it be understood of
power to command corporal things in order to spiritual; for he says that my
consequence is vain except it be understood in this manner, and therefore
being understood so, he allows it for good. And if we understand it so then
it must needs follow according to his own ground, that he who is Lord of all
horses (which are the principal) may command all bridles, because they are the
accessorie.

53 Now then he must either grant his own argument or deny it; if be grant
it, he proves nothing thereby against me, but rather fortifieth my
consequence (which is, as he himself relates it, that the Church having
power over the soul, has power also over the body and goods, because the
accessorie follows the principal) If he deny it, he denies his former
grant, which was, as you have heard, that whosoever has power to command the
principal, may command the accessorie, for seeing that all horses are the
principal, and all bridles the accessorie (according to his own supposition
in his argument) he that denies the Lord of all horses to be the Lord of all
bridles, denies that he who has power to command the principal may command
the accessorie, which is the same that he has granted already, as you have
heard; so as I see not to what purpose this his argument serves, but to
discover his own folly, and yet forsooth he will have us to believe in any
case, that all his arguments are probable at least.

54 But I must needs say, good Reader, that my Adversary has small reason,
for these two instances, which I brought against that rule, or maxim, The
accessorie follows the principal, as it was understood by him, to use such
indecent terms, for whose folly is discovered, and who is the ridiculous and
malicious, you shall forth with perceive. It is true, that I granted the
consequence not to be vain, if it were only understood of a power in the Pope
to command spiritual things, and to punish temporally by way of command in
order to spitituall good: but from hence it does not follow according to my
ground, but according to his own, that he who is Lord of all horses, may
consequently command all bridles, yea and it follows according to his ground,
that he who can dispose of all horses, can dispose of all bridles, and that
he who buyeth all horses, does consequently buy all bridles: For first, by
his consequence he does intend not only to prove, that the Pope has power to
command temporal things, or to punish temporally by way of command, but also
to dispose of temporalls, to depose temporal Princes, and to inflict temporal
punishments, as I showed before Nu 6.
and he in the next paragraphes does expressly affirm Nu. 13.14.15.16.
. Secondly, according also to his own ground, and not mine, a bridle is
accessorie to a horse, for that it is ordained to serve a horse, for which
cause he affirms, that temporal things are accessorie to spiritual things,
for that they are ordained to serve spiritual things. And therefore according
to his own ground these consequences are good: The accessorie follows the
principal, therefore he who is Lord of all horses is Lord of all bridles,
therefore he who can command all horses can command all bridles, therefore he
who can dispose of all horses can dispose of all bridles, therefore he who
buyeth all horses, which are the principal, must consequently buy all bridles,
which are the accessorie.

55 But I do not grant, that a bridle is accessorie, or consequent to a
horse, or that corporal and temporal goods are accessorie or consequent to
the spiritual good of the soul, in that sense as accessorie is and ought to
be taken in that maxim, The accessorie or consequent must follow the
principal or antecedent, or which is all one, if the principal or antecedent
be supposed or granted, the accessorie or consequent must of necessity
follow: and my reason is, for that a horse can be without a bridle, and the
spiritual good or life of the soul can be without corporal goods, or
temporal honor and riches, yea and better without them, then with them.
Nevertheless I do grant, that the power to command temporal things in order
to spiritual good is, according to the institution of Christ, accessorie or
consequent to the power to command spiritual things in order to spiritual
good, for that both of them are, by the institution of Christ, connected and
conjoined in the spiritual Pastor of the Church: and because the power to
command spiritual things is the more noble and worthy, and the power to
command temporal things the less noble and worthy, as spiritual things are
more noble then temporal, therefore the power to command spiritual things
may be well called the principal, and the power to command temporal things
the accessorie, and which, by the institution of Christ, does follow the first
and more noble power as the principal.

56 And by this, that Dilemma, which he makes, is easily answered. For I
grant the consequence in that form of words, as he sets it down, in one
sense, and I deny it in an other. I grant it, if it be understood of the
Popes power to command temporals, and to enjoin temporal penalties in order
to spiritual good, and if he had intended nothing else then this, I should
indeed have proved nothing against him, but should have fortified his
consequence; But because in his consequence he spoke of a power in the Church
in general over the soul, body and goods, therefore the Church, says he,
having power over the soul, has power consequently over the body and goods,
which power may be understood not only of a power to command, but also to
dispose, not only to enjoin spiritual and temporal punishments, but also to
inflict them, and because the Pope in order to spiritual good has a power not
only to command spiritual punishments, but also to inflict them, and by a
iuridicall sentence to deprive men of certain spiritual goods and benefits,
therefore by his consequence it might seem to be rightly inferred, that the
Pope has also in order to spiritual good a power to dispose of the body and
of temporal goods, even as temporal Princes have in order to temporal good a
power not only to command, but also to dispose thereof, and to deprive by a
iuridicall sentence their subjects of their temporal goods, and also of their
corporal lives, and because my Adversaries drift and meaning was to prove
thus much by his consequence, therefore in this sense, which his words did
bear, and he also intend, I did absolutely deny his consequence. Now what
repugnance or contradiction, trow you, can all his skill in Logike (although it
were far greater then most men that know him suppose it to be) find in
granting his consequence in one sense, and denying it in an other, and whose
folly is discovered, and whether my instance or his Reply be ridiculous I dare
adventure to remit even to his own judgment.

57 But my Adversary perceiving, as it seems, that according to the vulgar
axiom, ducere ad inconueniens non est soluere argumentum, to draw one to an
inconvenience is not to solue the argument, endeavors to answer my
instance, abstracting from my grant: But let us set aside, says he, nu, 13.
page 36*
Widdringtons grant, and consider how probable is the instance that he makes
against me by this argument considered in it self, and compared with mine. The
accessorie, says he, follows the principal, and therefore he who is Lord of
all horses is Lord of all bridles, which no doubt is true, if he speak of such
a one, as has a supreme dominion, or power, as I do in my argument, when I
speak of the Pope, who being supreme head of the Church, and in that respect
having the direct charge of men's souls, has also indirectly the care and
charge of whatsoever is accessorie to the soul, and subordinate thereto, so
far forth, I mean as is requisite for the good of souls: as also in like
manner a supreme temporal Prince, albeit he be not directly the Lord of all
horses and bridles in his kingdom or State, yet having directly the charge and
care of the whole common wealth, he may dispose not only of all the horses,
but also of all the bridles in the commonwealth, when it shall undoubtedly be
convenient, and necessary for the public good thereof.

58 True it is, that this consequence, The accessorie, or consequent does
necessarily follow the principal or antecedent, therefore a supreme temporal
Prince, who is Lord of all horses is also Lord of all bridles, or which is all
one, who may for the common good dispose of all the horses in his kingdom, may
also for the same good dispose of all the bridles, is a true and good
consequence, but not for that a bridle is accessorie or necessarily annexed,
and consequent to a horse, as my Adversary affirms; for then it must be true
not only in a Prince, but also in all other men, who have power to dispose of
the principal: and moreover this consequence would also be good, The
accessorie follows the principal, therefore a supreme temporal Prince, who
buyeth all horses, which according to my Adversaries doctrine are the
principal, must consequently buy all bridles, which are the accessorie: But
the aforesaid consequence is therefore good, for that to be a supreme temporal
Lord of all bridles is accessorie or consequent to be a supreme temporal Lord
of all horses, which is the more noble, principal, or antecedent, and so the
power in a temporal Prince to dispose of all horses is necessarily connected
with his power to dispose of all bridles.

59 Wherefore, according to my opinion, who do not make bridles to be
accessory to horses in that sense, as accessory is taken in that maxim, but a
supreme power to dispose of all bridles to be accessory, or consequent to a
supreme power to dispose of all horses, for that a supreme power to dispose
both of horses and bridles, is necessarily included in a supreme power to
dispose of all temporal things, as a part in the whole, the aforesaid
argument, speaking of a supreme temporal Prince is good, not only vi
consequentis (to use the terms of Logicians) by virtue of the consequent, but
also vi consequentiae, by virtue of the consequence, or, which is all one, not
only the consequent is true, but also the consequence is good. But he that
will grant the argument to be good in regard that bridles are accessorie to
horses, as my Adversary does, he can not maintain that argument to be good in
a supreme temporal Prince by virtue of the consequence, or, which is all one,
by virtue of that maxim, The accessorie follows the principal, but by
virtue of an other maxim, which is, that every part is contained in the whole,
and therefore a temporal Prince, who for the common temporal good has power
to dispose of all temporal things, has power to dispose of all horses,
bridles, and all other temporal things.

60 Now although I did grant this consequence in the Pope, that because the
accessory or consequent does follow the principal or antecedent, therefore the
Pope having power to command spirituals, has also power to command temporals
in order to spiritual good, not for that temporals are accessory, or
consequent to spirituals, in that sense as accessory and consequent are taken
in that maxim, but for that a power in the Pope to command temporals in order
to spiritual good, is, by the institution of Christ, accessory and consequent
to his power of commanding spirituals, yet I utterly denied this consequence,
The accessory follows the principal, therefore the Pope having power to
command, and to dispose of spirituals, or to inflict spiritual punishments,
has also power to dispose of temporals, and not only to command or inioyne,
but also to inflict temporal punishments, or to punish temporally by way of
constraint. For although temporals are ordained to spirituals in that sense, as
I have often declared, and for that cause may be called accessory to
spirituals, yet as accessory is taken in that maxim, they are neither
accessory to spirituals, for that spiritual good may in any man be very well
without them, neither is the Popes pretended power to dispose of temporalls in
order to spiritual good, and to punish with temporal punishments by way of
constraint, accessory or consequent to his power to dispose of spirituals, or
to punish with spiritual punishments, or Ecclesiastical censures.

61 And by this is easily answered that, which Mr. Fitzherbert says in the
next Paragraph concerning private men. And if we consider, says he, Nu. 14.
p. 3^.
also Widdringtons argument even in particular and private men, it may have a
very true sense, and will fortify mine; for whosoever is Lord of any horse, is
Lord also of the bridles that belong to that horse, because (according to
Widdringtons supposition) they are accessory of the said horse, and therefore
according to my axiom, do follow their principal: and the same must needs
be granted in this our case, seeing that the Pope does no otherwise dispose of
temporal goods then the same do belong to particular men, whom he has
occasion to chastise for the benefit of their souls, and the public good of
the Church; and therefore when he punishes any Prince temporally, he neither
does, nor can do it in other men's goods, but only in those goods, or states,
which belong to that Prince, as a Lord of a horse disposes not of other men's
bridles, but of the bridles that belong to his own horse; for as other men's
bridles are not accessory of that horse, so neither are other men's goods
accessory to the Prince, who is to be punished, but such goods or states only
as belong to him, and may consequently be disposed of by his supreme Pastor,
when his and the public good of the Church shall necessarily require it: So as
you see how well Widdrington argues for me, and therefore the probability
that I see in this his argument, is no other, but that he plays, as I may
say, booty with me, and helps under hand to defend my cause. Thus much for
the first argument.

62 But first it is untrue, that I according to my own doctrine do suppose
that bridles are accessory to horses, as accessory is taken in the aforesaid
maxim, but I do suppose, and that truly, according to my Adversaries
doctrine, that bridles are accessory to horses, for that they are made and
ordained for horses, in which sense he takes accessorie in that maxim, and
therefore he affirms, that corporal and temporal goods are accessory to the
spiritual good of the soul, for that they are ordained and referred to the
said spiritual good.

63 Secondly, it is also untrue, that the argument, which I made against his
consequence, if it be considered in particular and private men, can have a very
true sense, as it is grounded in that rule or maxim, the accessory follows
the principal, and that it does fortify his consequence. For whosoever, says
he, is Lord of any horse, is Lord also of the bridles that belong to that
horse, because (according to his own supposition, and not mine) they are the
accessory of the said horse. Observe now, good Reader, how cunningly this man
would shift off the argument, or instance, which I made against his
consequence, and delude thee with ambiguous words. For what can any man imagine
my Adversary to understand by these words [the bridles that belong to that
horse] for surely no man can be so simple, as to think, that any bridle can be
said to belong to a horse, as to the true owner thereof, or so proper to a
horse, that the horse can not be without that bridle, for so indeed it would
very well follow from that maxim, that he, who is Lord of that horse, is also
Lord of that bridle, and he that should buy that horse, should also buy that
bridle which belongs to that horse. And therefore either it must be said,
that such a bridle does belong to such a horse for that the bridlemaker did
make it serve such a horse, and for this respect it can not be truly said,
that he, who is Lord of that horse, is Lord also of that bridle, for the
bridlemaker, and not he who is owner of that horse, may be Lord and owner of
the bridle: or else for that such a bridle is, for the most part, or always
used for such a horse; neither for this respect, or any such like can it be
truly said, that he who is Lord of that horse is consequently Lord of that
bridle, and can dispose thereof, because that bridle may be lent for the use of
that horse by some other man, who is the true Lord and owner of that bridle,
and consequently may dispose thereof, and not of the horse.

64 It remains therefore, that for this cause only, as my Adversary himself
here insinuates, such a bridle can be said to belong to such a horse, for
that the same man, who is the true Lord, and owner both of the horse and
bridle, and consequently has power to dispose of them both, does appoint that
bridle to serve that horse; and although in this sense that consequent be
true, to wit, that he who is Lord of any horse, is also Lord, and can dispose
of the bridles, which belong to such a horse, or to speak more properly, which
belong to the Lord of such a horse, for that the same man is Lord of them both,
yet it is not true by virtue of the consequence, or by virtue of that maxim,
The accessory follows the principal, or for that the horse is the
principal, and the bridle the accessorie, in that sense as principal and
accessorie ought to be taken in that maxim, for then it must also follow, that
he who buyeth that horse, and consequently can dispose thereof, as being the
true owner of that horse, has also power to dispose of that bridle, for that
the accessorie must follow the principal, which consequence is false, but the
consequent is true not by virtue of that maxim, The accessorie follows the
principal, but by virtue of another maxim, which is, that he who is the true
Lord, or owner of any horse, bridle, or of any such like temporal thing has
power to dispose thereof.

65 Wherefore it is apparent, that my aforesaid instance, argument, or
consequence, The accessorie follows the principal, therefore he who is Lord
of all horses, is consequently Lord, and can dispose of all bridles, is neither
true in Sovereign Princes, nor in private men, understanding, as my Adversary
does, that bridles are accessorie to horses, neither does that consequent,
although it be true, not by virtue of that maxim, The accessorie follows
the principal, but by virtue of this, that he who is Lord of any bridle has
power to dispose thereof, or he that is Lord and can dispose of all temporal
things, has consequently power to dispose both of all horses, and all bridles,
fortify my Adversaries argument concerning the Popes power to dispose of all
temporal things, unless it be first proved, as hitherto it has not been,
that the Pope is Lord both in temporalls and spiritualls, in such sort, that
for the common spiritual good he may dispose of all temporal things, as it
is certain, that absolute Princes may for the common temporal good dispose of
all temporalls, and private men may dispose of those goods, which are their
own. And therefore the comparison, which my Adversary here makes, betwixt
the Lord of a horse, who only disposes of his own bridles, and not of another
man's, and the Pope, who to punish a Prince disposes only of the Princes goods
and states, and not of other men's, is to little purpose, for that it does
suppose that which is in question, and which hitherto he has not proved, to
wit, that the Pope has power to dispose of the temporal goods, states, and
bodies of all Christians, and that the public good of the Church does
necessarily require, that the Pope have power to dispose of all temporalls. And
thus much concerning my first instance, wherein whether I have played booty
with them, and helped underhand to defend his cause, and whether it be
foolish, ridiculous, and repugnant to my own doctrine, I remit to the
judgment of any learned man.

66 Now you shall see, how well Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth to my second instance:
His other argument, or instance says he, Page 38. nu. 15. 16. 17.
is, as I have said no less malicious then his last was foolish and
ridiculous. The Pope, says he, has power over the Princes soul, ergo, over
his life, because the accessorie follows the principal: wherein you see he
seeks to draw us to an odious question touching the lives of Princes.
Nevertheless to say somewhat unto his argument, and yet not to enter into such
an odious matter, let him make the case his own, and I will not deny, but that
the Pope having power over his soul, and being withal supreme Governor of
the whole Church, has power also over his life, so far forth as it may be
convenient for the good of the Church, I mean not, that the Pope has power to
take his life without just cause, or by unjust, or unlawful means (which
neither the temporal Prince, who has direct power over his body can do) but
upon just occasion given by him, and according to the ordinary manner
prescribed by the Ecclesiastical Canons, that is to say, by delivering him
over to the secular Justice, S. Leo epist. ad Turbium Ast^ricens. Episc.
because the Church, as S. Leo says, refugit cruentas vltiones, does fly
bloody punishment, and therefore the Church uses not by her own ministers to
give, and much less to execute the sentence of death upon any, though she
might do it, if she would; for seeing there is nothing that hinders it, but
Ecclesiastical Canons, the Pope being head of the Church, might dispense
therewith, and make it lawful, if just occasion required.

67 And how true it is, that the Pope has power over the life of any Christian
(with the circumstances and limitations before mentioned) I fear me my
Adversary Widdrington might find to his cost, if he were here, and would not
recant his doctrine, even in this point, to wit, that the Church cannot inflict
temporal and corporal punishments, whereby he impugneth not only the
ancient, and universal practice and custom of the Church, but also the
Ecclesiastical Canons, Cap. ab abolendam cap. vergentis. cap. excommunicamus
extra de haeretic. and cap. licet de voto, and cap. 1. de homicidio in 6. and
Council. Trid. sess. 24. c. 8. and 25. cap. 3.
and decrees of many Counsels and Popes, and finally of the Council of Trent,
as I shall have good occasion to show more particularly hereafter Inf. c. 11.
nu. 3. and 9. item c. 12. nu. 6. 7. and s.
.

68 In the mean time he is to understand, that granting as he does, that
the body is subordinate and subject to the soul, and that all corporal and
temporal things are to serve spiritual things, yea and to be commanded by
the supreme spiritual Pastor to that end (and consequently that they are
accessorie in the respect of the soul and good of the Church) he cannot with
reason deny the consequence of my argument, to wit, that forasmuch as the
accessorie follows the principal, therefore he that has power over the
soul, and all other spiritual things, has power also over all things that
are accessorie thereto, namely the temporal goods, states, and bodies of all
Christians, when the good of souls, and of the whole Church does necessarily
require it, as shall be further declared after a while Cap. 5. nu. 37. and 38.
item c. 6. nu. 12. 13. 14. and seq.
upon further occasion given by my Adversary.

69 Here you see, that Mr. Fitzherbert does not deny my consequence, but
allows it for good in those his words. And how true it is, that the Pope
has power over the life of any Christian, (and consequently of Christian
Kings) with the circumstances and limitations before mentioned, to wit, so
far forth as it may be convenient for the good of the Church (a large and
intolerable extension of the Popes spiritual power to take away the lives of
Christian Princes and subjects) and upon just occasion given by him: and
again, that the Pope has power over the temporal goods, states and bodies of
all Christians, (and consequently of Christian Princes) when the good of
souls, and of the whole Church does necessarily require it. So that you see he
grants my argument to be good, but yet to be malicious, that I speak the
truth, but of malice. But truly it is strange to what virulent and slanderous
speeches some intemperate spirit has drawn the liberty of this man's pen. If
he imagine, that with any colorable reply he can except against my answer,
then it is frivolous, impertinent, foolish and ridiculous: if he can not, then
it is malicious. God almighty, who is the only searcher of all men's hearts,
knows herein my innocence, and that zeal to the Catholic religion, desire
to know the truth, love to my Prince and country, and not any spleen or
malice has moved me to write both this, and all the rest: and therefore I
humbly beseech his Divine Majesty to forgive him, and to grant him true
repentance for that which is past, and that hereafter he may have a more mild
and temperate spirit.

70 But wherefore, trow you, is my argument malicious? because it draws him,
says he, to an odious question: as though, forsooth, the propounding of every
odious argument, although it be never so good and conuincing, must needs
proceed from malice. I confess indeed, that this doctrine concerning the
killing of Christian Princes is odious, abominable, false, scandalous, never
taught in the Church of God before these later years; and which all good
subjects ought with all their hearts to detest and abhor, and Princes more
narrowly to look unto, and whether this doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Christian Princes be a point of faith, from whence such an odious, scandalous
and detestable doctrine does necessarily follow, I hope all good Catholics,
and true hearted subjects will hereafter more diligently consider.

71 And how true it is, says my Adversary, that the Pope has power over the
life of any Christian (with the circumstances and limitations before mentioned)
I fear me, my Adversary Widdrington might find to his cost, if he were here
at Rome, and would not recant his doctrine even in this point, to wit, that the
Church can not inflict corporal and temporal punishment, whereby he impugneth
etc. But first, that the Pope has power at Rome over the lives of those who
are his temporal subjects, no man calls in question, for that he is now the
temporal Prince of Rome. But this proves not, that the Pope as he is Pope,
and by virtue of his spiritual power has authority to put any man to death.
If my Adversary could bring but one example, that the Pope before he was a
temporal Prince, and when the City of Rome was subject in temporals to the
Roman, Grecian, French or German Emperors did by virtue of his spiritual
power put any man to death, then he should say something to the purpose, if the
facts and examples of Popes were a sufficient argument to prove their right
and authority.

72 Secondly, although it be true, that the Church by virtue of her spiritual
power has authority to command, impose or enjoin corporal and temporal
punishments, as I have often said, and the ancient and general practice of the
Church does confirm the same, yet that Ecclesiastical authority is, by the
institution of Christ, extended to the disposing of temporals, or to the
inflicting of corporal and temporal punishments, as death, exile, privation
of goods, imprisonment, very many Doctors with Iacobus Almaine, Almainus in
libro de Dominio naturali, civilly and Ecclesiastico in probatione secundae
conclusionis.
as I have often said, do expressly deny; neither has the contrary as yet by
any approved practice and custom of the Church, or by any other conuincing
argument been sufficiently proved, and what my Adversary does particularly
bring to that purpose from the Ecclesiastical Canons, and decrees of any
Council or Pope, and from the late Council of Trent, you shall see in those
places, where he promises to show it more particularly.

73 In the mean time to conclude this Chapter with my Adversary, he is also
to understand, that albeit I do grant, the body to be subordinate and subject
to the soul, and that all corporal and temporal things are to serve
spiritual things in that manner, as I have at large declared in the second
part, and in the beginning of the next chapter will briefly insinuate again,
and therefore to be commanded by the supreme spiritual Pastor in order to
spiritual good, yet with good reason I did deny the consequence of his
argument, to wit, that for as much as the accessorie follows the principal,
therefore he that has power over the soul and all other spiritual things,
has power also over the temporal goods, states, and bodies of all Christians,
when the good of souls and of the whole Church does necessarily require it, if
he understand, as it is clear he does, of a power not only to command,
enjoin, or impose, but also to dispose of temporals, and to inflict temporal
punishments: for that temporal states and bodily goods are not accessorie to
the spiritual good of the soul, and of the Church, as accessorie is and ought
to be taken in that maxim, because the spiritual good of souls and of the
Church may be without such temporal goods and states, yea and in every
particular man perchance better without them, then with them: Neither is it
necessarily required to the good of souls or of the whole Church, that the
Pope have power to dispose of the temporal goods, states or bodies either of
Christian Princes or subjects; and therefore the Reader may also well
conjecture, what he is to expect from my Adversary in the rest of his Replies,
when in this, where he makes a show to have so great advantage against my
answer, that he fears not to call it frivolous, impertinent, foolish,
ridiculous, and contrary to my own doctrine, yet all his exceptions are so
improbable, that his virulent speeches might very truly, if Christian
modesty, and charity would permit, be retorted back upon himself.

CHAP. III.
Wherein Widdringtons answer to Fa. Lessius argument taken from that maxim,
he that can do the greater can do the less, is confirmed; and the four
instances, which he brought to confute the said argument and maxim, are
examined, and proved to be neither frivolous, nor impertinent, but sound,
sufficient, and to the purpose: Also Cardinal Bellarmines example touching the
translation of the Roman Empire, and the argument, which D. Schulckenius
brings to confirm the same, with two other examples of Clodoueus King of
France, and of Boleslaus King of Polonie, are confuted.

Mr. Fitzherbert in his third Chapter proceeds with the like bitterness, and
yet with as little probability as he did in the former; For after I had made
two instances against his argument, drawn from that rule of the Law, The
accessory follows the principal, I brought four instances against another
like consequence of Fa. L^ssius, taken from another maxim. The like argument,
said I, In Admonia. nu. 15.
Fa. Lessius does urge. The Pope, says he, has power to excommunicate Kings,
and therefore he has also power to depose them, because he that has power to
inflict a greater punishment, has also power to inflict a less. We might also
conclude thus, if it were lawful to transcend from one thing to another of a
diverse kind and nature, The Pope has power to excommunicate Kings, therefore
also to kill them, because he that can do the greater, can do the less. A
man has power to understand, therefore also to fly. A private Priest has
power to absolve from sins, therefore also from debts. He has power by force
of the Sacraments to give the kingdom of heaven, therefore also to give an
earthly kingdom. Are not these and such like goodly arguments to persuade
English Catholics to cast away prodigally all their goods, and to deny their
allegiance to their Prince? Thus I argued in that place.

2 Now my Adversary, after he had repeated my words, replieth against these
instances in this manner. Nu. 1. 2. and seq.
Thus says Widdrington, scoffing and cogging, as you see, and showing his
malicene less then before. But how sincerely and truly he alleges the
argument of Lessius, I know not, for I have not his book, neither did I ever
read it, and I make no doubt, but if it had been laid down, together with
the circumstances thereof, it would have been clear enough of it self, and
not have needed any defense or explication of mine: And truly although it were
as bare, and naked as he makes it, yet the consequence would be good and sound
for ought he says against it, seeing he says nothing in effect, but that
which may be urged in like manner against the Apostle Saint Paul for the like
argument, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, where commanding them to
constitute, and appoint Judges amongst themselves to decide their
controversies, he said, Nescitis quoniam angelos iudicabimus, quanto magis
secularia? Do you not know, that we shall judge Angels, and much more secular
things? as who would say, seeing we have the greater and more eminent power,
have we not also the less? if we have power over spiritual things, have we
not also power over temporal or secular things? Thus argued the Apostle upon
the same ground that Lessius does, to wit, upon this principle, qui potest
maius, potestetiam minus.

3 And now will this grave Sophister scoff at the Apostles argument, and say,
that he might as well have concluded, that Qui potest intelligere, potest
volare, He which can understand can fly? for what can be more different in
kind and nature, then Angels, and secular things? and yet nevertheless the
Apostle proved soundly by an argument a maiori ad minus, that the Church might
ordain, and dispose of secular judgments, because it had a greater power to
judge of Angels: and the reason, that moved him thereto, was the same that
moved Lessius, to wit, the subordination of secular and temporal things to
spiritual: for albeit spiritual and temporal things are of different kind
and order, being considered in their own natures, yet if they be respected and
conjoined in one Ecclesiastical, or mystical body, and referred to one last
end (which is Gods service and glory) they are subordinate the one to the
other, and therefore are not of diverse orders in that respect.

4 And if he grant not this, how will he make good his own former grant, that
the Pope has power to command corporal and temporal things, quatenus
spiritualibus deseruiunt, so far forth as they serve spiritual things? does
he not therein acknowledge this subordination, and thereupon grant that power
in the Pope, as a consequent of his spiritual power? why then does he deny the
argument of Lessius, grounded upon the same consideration, seeing he argues a
maiori ad minus, concerning things subordinate one to another? as who would
say, that for as much as spiritual things are superior in order and dignity
to temporal things, and all of them principally ordained and referred to Gods
glory and service, therefore he that has supreme power over the spiritual
(which is the greater and higher) has power also over the temporal (which is
the less and inferior) to dispose thereof, as shall be requisite for Gods
glory and service, where to both spiritual and temporal things are ordained.

5 Whereupon it also follows, that the Pope having power to excommunicate
Kings, may depose them, as well because the power to excommunicate is greater
then the power to depose, as also because the temporal state, whereof the Pope
depriueth the Prince, is ordained to serve the spiritual, and therefore to be
disposed by the supreme spiritual Pastor, so far forth as shall be
necessary for Gods service, and the good of the Church. So that you see the
argument of Lessius (if he made any such) has a good consequence. Thus Mr.
Fitzherbert.

6 But to omit his bitter and slanderous words, the maine substance of his
reply in this chapter is, as it was also in the former chapter, grounded upon
the subordination of the temporal power to the spiritual, and of temporal
things to the eternal salvation of souls, whereof I treated at large above in
the second part, which if the Reader will be pleased to peruse, he will easily
perceive, that all my Adversaries reply in this chapter is of little worth, and
that from this subordination no sound argument can be drawn to prove, that
the Pope has power to dispose of temporal things. For albeit the temporal
power may be said to be subject to the spiritual, or rather temporal Princes
are in spirituals, and in temporals as they are reduced to spirituals, subject
to the direction or command, and to the spiritual coercion, or correction of
the supreme spiritual Pastor: And albeit temporal goods and states both of
the body, and of fortune may be said to be subordained, or rather ordained to
the eternal salvation of souls, although not of their own nature, as I
declared in that place, but in this sense, that all Christians, as well Laikes,
as Clerks, Kings, as Popes, are bound to refer all their powers and actions to
the eternal salvation of their souls, in so much that as spiritual Pastors
are bound to refer and ordain their spiritual power, and the use thereof to
the eternal salvation of their own souls, and of those who are subject to
them, so Christian Princes are bound to refer their temporal power, and the
use thereof to the eternal salvation of their own souls and of their
subjects: Nevertheless, considering that Christ has left in the Christian
world, or commonwealth, as it contains both temporal and spiritual power,
earthly kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, two
distinct and supreme powers, and consequently independent one upon the other,
and therefore neither subordained, or subject one to the other in those things
which are proper to each other, as the disposing of spiritual things, and
spiritual coercion or correction are proper and do belong to the spiritual
power, so the disposing of temporal things, and temporal coercion or
correction are proper, and do only belong to the temporal power.

7 So that although it belongs to the supreme spiritual Pastor to direct
and instruct a temporal Prince in his temporal power, as it is Christian,
that is, to instruct him in what manner he ought to use his temporal power
according to the grounds of Christian Religion, and to command him to use his
temporal power, and to dispose of temporalls in that manner as Christ has
ordained, to the benefit of his own soul, and of his Subjects, and also to
command him that he do compel his Subjects by means of his temporal power,
or with temporal punishments to the observing of the laws of Christ, and of
his Church, and if the Prince refuse to obey the just commandment of his
spiritual Pastor, it belongs also to the spiritual Pastor, to compel him
thereunto by means of his spiritual power, or with spiritual punishments and
Ecclesiastical Censures, in that manner as the inflicting of Ecclesiastical
Censures may be called a compulsion, yet the using of temporal power, the
disposing of temporal things, the compelling with temporal punishments, or
the inflicting of temporal punishments, and punishing temporally by way of
constraint, are only proper, and do belong to the temporal power, for which
cause S. Bernard, as I showed before, did affirm, that the material sword is,
according to our Saviors command, to be used for the Church, but not by the
Church, with the hand of the Soldier, not of the Priest, at the book, or
direction of the Pope, but at the command of the Emperor.

8 Now to come to my Adversary; although he has not, as he says, Lessius
book, nor ever read it, yet I have both seen it, and read it, and I have
alleged truly his express words as they lie, and I doubt not but that my
Adversary may easily get a sight thereof. But howsoever, that which he says,
is very untrue, that I say nothing in effect against Lessius argument, but that
which may be urged in like manner against the Apostle Saint Paul: for that
Saint Paul's argument, as I showed before in the former chapter, was not
grounded upon this maxim, he that can do the greater can do the less,
whereon Lessius groundeth his argument, for this maxim is very untrue, unless
the greater does actually, or vertually include and imply the less, or which
I take for all one, unless the greater and the less be of the same kind or
order. But S. Paul's argument was grounded upon this maxim, he that is not
unworthy to do the greater, is not unworthy to do the less. For S. Paul
intended only to prove, as I showed before, that Christians were not unworthy
to judge of secular things, because they were to judge the world, and the
Angels, and therefore by the argument a maiori ad minus they were not to be
accounted unworthy to decide secular causes. Neither has every man that
power, whereof he is not unworthy, but he has only that power, which he,
who has authority to give that power, has granted, although perchance he be
not unworthy to have a greater power; as to be Lord Chancellor is a more
great and eminent authority, then to be Lord Chamberlain, and yet it is not
lawful thus to argue from that maxim, he that has the greater authority
has the less, therefore he who is Lord Chancellor is also Lord Chamberlain,
albeit we might rightly thus conclude, as the Apostle did, a maiori ad minus,
he that is not unworthy to be Lord Chancellor is not unworthy to be Lord
Chamberlain, for that he, who is not unworthy to have the greater authority,
is not unworthy to have the less.

9 If therefore I had denied the Pope to have authority to dispose of
temporal things, because he had been unworthy to have that authority, then I
had indeed disprooued the Apostles argument, but seeing that I do only for
this cause deny the Pope to have authority to dispose of temporal things, for
that Christ our Savior has not granted this authority to him, but only to
temporal Princes, I do not go against the Apostles argument. Neither did the
Apostle go about to prove, that the Church might ordain and dispose of
secular judgments, taking secular judgments for such, as do proceed from
public authority, and can not be done by private power, but he only
commanded the Corinthians for avoiding of scandal to appoint arbitrarie Judges
among themselves, which they might do by their own private power, and without
any derogation to the temporal Magistrate, and in case of scandal they ought
also so to do, and he only intended to prove, that because they were not
unworthy to judge the Angels and the world, much more were they not unworthy
to be Arbitrarie Judges in secular causes. Wherefore Saint Paul did not intend
to prove, either by the subordination of the temporal power to the
spiritual, or by any other argument, that the Church might ordain or dispose
of those secular judgments, which belong to temporal authority, neither can
there be drawn any good argument from this subordination to prove the same,
as I have showed more amply in the second part.

10 Neither did I grant, that the spiritual Pastor has power to command
corporal and temporal things, quatenus spiritualibus deseruiunt, so far
forth as they serve spiritual things, for that corporal and temporal things
are ordained to spiritual things, and to the eternal salvation of souls, as
my Adversary untruly affirms, for then indeed I must also have granted,
that the Pope having power to dispose of spiritual things, has consequently
power to dispose of temporal things, so far soorth as they are to serve
spiritual things, but my reason was, as you have seen in the former chapter,
because the power to command temporal things in order to spiritual good is a
spiritual power, and agreeable to a spiritual Pastor and Governor, as he is
instituted by Christ, but the power to dispose of temporal things, whether it
be in order to temporal, or to spiritual good, is a temporal power, and
therefore not agreeable to a spiritual Pastor, according at our Savior has
in the Christian world or common wealth instituted, ordained, and distinguished
these two supreme powers temporal and spiritual by their proper acts,
functions and dignities.

11 And albeit both spiritual and temporal things are referred to one last
end (which is Gods honor and glory) as to the center, to which both of them
ought to tend, yet from hence it can not be rightly concluded, that the
temporal power is subordained to the spiritual, or that temporal things, as
temporal laws, temporal actions, temporal punishments and the like, are
subordained to spiritual things, as to spiritual laws, spiritual actions,
spiritual punishments and the like, but that both of them are, I do not say,
subordained one to the other, but ordained to one and the self same end, which
is the glory and service of God, and the salvation of souls, which is as it
were the center, to which the temporal power by temporal laws, and by
disposing of temporals, and the spiritual power by spiritual laws, and by
disposing, or dispencing of spiriruall things ought to tend. By which it is
apparent, that although it were supposed, that the disposing of temporal
things, and the using of temporal power, were in some cases necessary to the
honor and service of God, to the good of the Church, and to the salvation of
souls, yet it can not be performed but by the temporal power, for that our
Savior Christ has given to spiritual Pastors only spiritual power to
promote and maintain by spiritual means the good of the Church, and to bring
souls to heaven, and temporal means, and temporal power he has left to the
disposition of temporal Princes, whom he forsaw, and preordained to be Nurses,
Patrons and Protectours of his Church.

12 Wherefore although my Adversary did endeavor, as you have seen in the
former chapter, to prove by the subordination of temporal things to
spiritual, that the Pope, because he has power to command, and to dispose of
spiritual things (which as he said are the principal and to which temporal
things are subordained) has power also to dispose of temporals, and thereupon
grounded his argument upon that rule of the law, The accessorie follows the
principal, which argument nevertheless how weak and insufficient it is, I
have showed in that place, yet Lessius does not ground his argument upon that
rule, The accessorie follows the principal, but upon this maxim, He that
can do the greater can do the less, from whence he concludes, that the
Pope, because he can excommunicate a King, which is the greater punishment, can
also depose a King, which is the less. But this argument also is very
insufficient, for that the aforesaid maxim is not generally true, as I proved
by four instances, except the less be actually or vertually included in the
greater, as deposition, or the power to depose a King, is neither actually nor
vertually included in excommunication, or in the power to excommunicate.
Therefore unless it be first proved, as hitherto it has not been, that
deposition is actually or vertually included in excommunication, or the power
to depose in the power to excommunicate, it is evident, that no good argument
can be drawn from that maxim, He that can do the greater can do the less,
to prove that the Pope, because he has power to excommunicate a King, which is
the greater, has power also to depose him, which is the less.

13 Now you shall see, how well Mr. Fitz. confuteth the four instances I
brought against Lessius argument. This being so, says he, Nu. 67. page page 33.
let us examine a little what goodly arguments Widdring. has made to confront
with the former, to discover the absurdity, which he supposes therein. The
first is; Potest Papa Reges excommunicare, ergo occidere, The Pope may
excommunicate Kings, and therefore he may kill them: whereto I answer, as I did
in the like before, that he bewrays herein his malice, seeking to draw us to
a most odious question supposing, as it seems, and maliciously insinuating,
that we hold and teach that the Pope having excommunicated, and deposed a
King, may murder him or cause him to be murdered and that some Popes have
practiced the same (as some shameless Sectaries have impudently affirmed)
wherein he shows his good affection to Catholic Religion, and the reverend
respect he bears to the Sea Apostolic.

14 But if he understand nothing else by the word, occidere, but to take away
the life of a delinquent by lawful means, I have answered him already, that
if he make the case his own (for with Princes lives I will not meddle) I make
no doubt but the Pope has power over his life: and therefore I also say
further now concerning the argument whereof we treat, that the consequence
thereof is good in him and such a he: for seeing that it is a greater power to
take away the life of the soul by excommunication, then of the body by
temporal death, it follows that the supreme Pastor having the greater
power, has the less, by reason of the subordination of the body to the soul,
and his supreme power to dispose of the body for the good of the soul, and
the public benefit of the Church. And thus much for this point.

15 But to this Reply I will at this time answer no otherwise then I did
before, that in very deed it is a most odious question, and the doctrine is
worthy to be hated and detested by all good Catholics, and whether such an
odious and detestable doctrine can be a most plain and necessary cosequence
of an undoubted point of the Catholic faith, as my Adversaries will needs
have the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, and consequently to
kill them, which by an evident, and necessary consequence follows from the
former, to be an infallible point of Catholic faith, I remit to the
consideration of any judicious man. Neither is it true, that I did urge this
argument of malice, God is my witness and therefore in this my Adversary does
greatly wrong me, neither do I suppose, or maliciously insinuate, that some
Popes have practiced the murdering of Kings, as this uncharitable man untruly
affirms, thinking thereby to persuade his Reader, that I bear no good
affection to Catholic Religion, nor any reverend respect to the Sea
Apostolic; but that, which I suppose and insinuate is, that he, and the rest
of his Society, who hold that the Pope has power to dispose of all the
temporals both of Princes and subjects in order to spiritual good, in as ample
a manner as temporal Princes have power to dispose of all the temporals of their
subjects in order to temporal good, must consequently hold, that the Pope
having excommunicated and deposed by his sentence an heretical King, yea also
without exco^municatio^ or deposition, if the Pope shall think that neither of
them will prevail, but cause the said King to be more watchful, may, which I
speak with horror, murder him, or cause him to be murdered, that is, may kill
him, or cause him to be slain by all those means public or secret, by which
a temporal Prince has power to murder, or cause to be murdered, that is, to
kill, or cause to be slain any traitorous subject, or manifest rebel, that
cannot easily be apprehended

16 And this I did demonstrate in my Nu. 43 and s.
Apology against Cardinal Bellarmine, to which my demonstration D.
Schulckenius In Apol ad nu. 43 p. 144.
answers no otherwise then with a transeat, let it pass. For whither all
this does tend, says he, every man sees: neither is it hard to solue the
arguments: Let them pass, as making nothing to the matter: and then he makes
a long discourse to show, that never any Pope has been the cause of the death
of any King, which is nothing to the purpose: so that in effect he grants my
argument, and Suarez In Defens. etc. l. 9. c. 4. n. 10 See my Appen. against
Suarez part. 1. sec. 9.
has now more expressly taught the same, and my Adversary also does here
plainly confirm as much: for although, forsooth, with the lives of Princes he
will not intermeddle, because it is an odious question, yet he makes no doubt,
but that the Pope has power over my life, and over the life of any Christian
(mark these general words) for that he has power to take away the life of my
soul by excommunication, and consequently the life of my body by corporal
death; which his reason proves also the same of Christian Princes, who,
according to his own grounds, can be excommunicated by the Pope: But I'meruaile
where this man has learned this new divinity, that the Pope has power to take
away the life of the soul by excommunication. The ancient, and true Catholic
doctrine is, that excommunication does not take away the life of the soul, but
supposes, that it is before taken away, and therefore it cannot be inflicted
but for a mortal sin, and it is applied as a wholesome medicine to restore the
life of the soul again, neither is it in the Popes power to take away the
life of the soul from any Christian; concerning which life, that vulgar saying
of S. Chrysostom. Is most true, nemo laeditur nisi a semetipso, no man is hurt
but by himself. S. Chrysostom. tom. 5. in libro, Quod qui seipsum non laedit,
nemo laedere possit.
If I should have uttered so gross and palpable an error, which no heretic,
for ought I know, ever taught, what outcries would my Adversary have made
against me, what nicknames would he have given me?

17 To my second instance, which was this: whosoever has power to do the
greater, has power to do the less, therefore a man who has power to
understand, has power also to fly; Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth thus Nu. 8. page
44.
. But who sees not the disparitie, and Widdringtons absurdity therein? for
what dependence, subordinatio^, or connection can be imagined betwixt
understanding, and flying? whereas he him self grants a subordination of
temporal things to spiritual, and therefore is also forced, as you have
heard, to acknowledge a power in the Pope to command temporal things in order
to spiritual whereby he conuinceth him self of extreme folly in framing this
argument, which has no affinity with the other.

18 But who sees not, that there is no formal disparity, nor any absurdity
committed by me in this argument? For first, what dependence, subordination,
and connection is betwixt excommunication, and deposition. It is one thing,
says Becanus, In Controuersia Anglicana cap. 3. q. 2. nu. 1.
to excommunicate a King, and an other thing to depose him, or deprive him of
his kingdom; neither is the one necessarily connected with the other. But
mark the fraudulent dealing of this man: Widdrington grants, says he, a
subordination of temporal things to spiritual, and therefore is forced to
acknowledge a power in the Pope to command temporal things in order to
spiritual. It is true, that I do grant an ordination both of temporal, and
of spiritual things to the honor of God, and the salvation of souls, in that
manner as I have before declared, but it is not true, that I do either grant a
subordination, or ordination of deposition to excommunication, or that by
reason of the ordination of temporal things to the honor and service of God,
and the salvation of souls, I do grant a power in the Pope to command
temporal things in order to spiritual, (as my Adversary says I do) but for
that reason, which I have more at large declared in the former chapter.

19 Seeing therefore that there is no dependence, subordination, or connection
betwixt excommunication, and deposition, what connection, or affinity can my
Adversary require betwixt understanding and flying, to show a formal
disparitie betwixt Lessius argument, and the instance, which I made against it?
And if he say, that, albeit excommunication and deposition, temporal things
and spiritual are of a distinct kind and order being considered in their
own natures, yet if they be respected as they are referred to one last end
(which is Gods service and glory) they are not of diverse orders, but are
connected in that respect: it may also be replied, that understanding and
flying, and all things whatsoever are referred to Gods service and glory, as
to the last end, and therefore in this respect they are not of diverse orders,
but they have herein a coherence and connection. If therefore by reason of the
ordination and reference of excommunication and deposition to Gods service and
glory, it may be rightly inferred, that because the Pope for Gods service, and
glory, can excommunicate, which is the greater, he can also for the same end
depose which is the less, for the same ordination and reference of
understanding and flying to Gods service and glory, it may also be rightly
inferred, that because the Pope for Gods service and glory has power to
understand, which is the greater, he has also for the same end, power to fly,
which is the less.

20 But secondly and principally, observe, good Reader, how cunningly Mr.
Fitzherbert would shun the difficulty, and change the state of the question,
and the force of Lessius his argument: For the question between me and Lessius
only is, whether this consequence, The Pope can excommunicate, therefore he can
depose, be good by virtue of that maxim, he that can do the greater can do the
less, for this is Lessius argument: Now my Adversary alters this question,
and would make Lessius argument to be, that the Pope can excommunicate,
therefore he can depose, because temporal things are subordained to spiritual
things, whereas this is not Lessius argument, which I did there impugn, but it
is an other framed by my Adversary and taken from an other medium, to wit, the
subordination of tempotall things to spiritual, and grounded in that maxim,
the accessorie follows the principal, whereof I have spoken enough in the
former chapter. For Lessius his argument has an other medium, to wit, that
maxim, he that can do the greater can do the less, which I contend to be no
good argument, for that it would likewise follow from that maxim, that the
Pope, because he can understand, which is the greater, can also she which is
the less. For as excommunication, and deposition, although they do materially
disagree, for that they are of a diverse kind and order, yet they do formally
agree in that maxim, he that can do the greater can do the less, because
excommunication is the greater and deposition is the less, so also although
there be a material disparitie betwixt understanding and flying, for that they
are of a diverse kind and order, yet they do formally agree in that maxim of
Lessius, because understanding is the greater, and flying is the less. And
therefore the extreme folly, wherewith my Adversary charge me, may more
truly, if it were decent for me to use such indecent words, be returned upon
himself, in that he taking upon him to defend Lessius argument, clean
changes the argument, and frames an another out of his own brain, which
has a distinct medium, and is grounded upon another maxim from that which
Lessius used.

21 To my third instance, which was this: He that can do the greater can do
the less, theref^re a private Priest, who can absolve from sins, can also
absolve from debts, Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth Nu. 9. 10. 11. page 45.
that Widdrington alters the case in making his instance in private Priests,
whose power is much limited, when the argument, which he impugneth speaks of
the Pope, who is the supreme spiritual Pastor, and has plenitudinem
potestatis, a plenitude, or fullness of power; and therefore albeit we teach,
that the Pope may excommunicate and depose a Prince, yet no man holds, that a
private Priest can do either of them both, yea and we see, that in the great
Council of Lateran (where the deposition of Princes was ordained to be
practiced in some cases) the sentence of their deposition was reserved to the
Pope himself, though the Metropolitan might excommunicate him.

22 Besides that, it is to be considered concerning the absolution of sins,
and debts, that as neither Priest, nor Pope can absolve from sins in all
cases (as when the sinner is not penitent, or will not make restitution of
fame, or goods, when he may conveniently do it) so may the Pope absolve from
debts in some cases for the very same reason, and in the very same case that he
may depose a Prince, to wit for the just punishment of an offender, when the
same shall be very necessary for the benefit of the whole Church; for in such
a case all private respects of temporal good or harm ought to yield to the
common good of souls, and the public weal of the Church; as in like manner
all civil obligations cease, when they are encountered, and ouerweighed with
the consideration of some great benefit, or inconvenience to the whole common
wealth, for which respect the temporal Prince might in such a case justly
ordain, that a debtor should be discharged in law from the payment of his
debt, whereby the said debtor should be also discharged in conscience.

23 And much more may the supreme spiritual Pastor of the Church discharge a
man from all obligation in conscience to pay a debt, when the same shall be
necessary for the spiritual good, and public benefit of the Church, whereto
all temporal things ought to yield; so as the Pope may in some cases absolve
from debts, as well as from sins; and when he cannot, the reason is such, as
does nothing derogate from his supreme authority, and power to depose
Princes; and therefore this argument of my Adversary is as impertinent as the
former.

24 But it is too too apparent, that I have not any way altered the case or
question. For the case and question between me and Lessius is not at this
present, whether the Pope can excommunicate, or whether he can depose, or
whether this consequence; The Pope can excommunicate, therefore he can depose,
be good by reason of the Popes plenitude of power, but whether it be good by
virtue of that maxim, He that can do the greater can do the less: and I
affirm his consequence not to be good, because that maxim is not true in
those general words, as it is set down. So that the only case and question
between me and Lessius now is, whether that maxim, He that can do the
greater can do the less, be true, and that therefore he does from thence
rightly infer, that because the Pope can excommunicate, which is the greater,
he can also depose, which is the less. And that this general maxim of
Lessius is not true, I proved by the two former instances, and also by this,
for that if it be true, that whosoever can do the greater can do the less,
as Lessius affirms, it does consequently follow, that a private Priest, who
can absolve from sins, which is the greater, can also absolve from debts,
which is the less. If Lessius maxim had been, every Pope that can do the
greater can do the less, and I would have impugned this maxim by private
Priests, for that private Priests who can do the greater, as to absolve from
sins, cannot do the less, as to absolve from debts, then indeed I should
have altered the case, in transferring the question from Popes to private
Priests, who are not contained in the subject of that maxim, every Pope, etc.
but seeing that Lessius maxim is general, qui potest maius, potest minus, he
that can (which includes Clerks, and Laikes, Kings, and Subjects, Pope and
Priests, and all other men whatsoever) do the greater can do the less, it is
sufficient to prove this maxim to be false, without altering the case, if I
can bring but one particular insta^ce, whether it be of Pope or Priest, King or
subject, wherein this maxim is not true.

25 And if I should have argued in this manner, he that can do the greater
can do the less, therefore a private Priest who can build a Church can build
a Chapel, would my Adversary, trow you have said, that I had altered the
case, for that he speaks of the Pope, and I speak of private Priests? and I
would wish also my Adversary to call to mind, what he said a little before,
that S. Paul argued from that maxim, which Lessius did, he that can do the
greater can do the less, and yet I think he will not say that either S.
Paul, or Lessius altered the case, although Lessius spoke only of the Pope in
his consequent, and S. Paul of private men. Also I would gladly learn of my
Adversary in what manner the mayor proposition, or antecedent of any argument,
and consequently the argument or consequence it self may, according to his
skill in Logic, be impugned without altering the case, as whether to impugn
the mayor proposition of this syllogism he that was never taught Logic,
cannot be a good Logician, but F. T. was never taught Logic, therefore F. T.
cannot be a good Logician, it be not sufficient, without altering the case to
bring this instance, Mr. T. F. was never taught Logic, and yet he is a good
Logician, and therefore that Mayor proposition, he that was never taught
Logic cannot be a good Logician, is not true, and so the consequence deduced
from it cannot be good, which Mayor proposition whether it be sufficiently
impugned or no, without altering the case, albeit I transfer the subject of
the minor proposition from F. T. to T. F. Mr. Thomas Fitzherbert knows full
well.

26 Wherefore it is sufficient without altering the case to impugn any
universal proposition, which is the antecedent of any consequence, and thereby
to impugn the consequence it self, which is grounded upon that antecedent, by
bringing any one instance, wherein that antecedent proposition is not found to
be true, although that instance be different either in subject, or in
praedicate, or in both from the consequent of the former argument or
consequence, so that the instance be contained in that antecedent proposition
as a particular in the universal. And herein Mr. Fitzherbert does bewray his
want of of Logic, as before he bewrayed his want of Divinity, in affirming,
that the Pope by Excommunication does take away the life of the soul. For if
his skill in Logic had been but mean, he would quickly have perceived, that
if one impugn the antecedent proposition of any consequence, or argument, by
altering the consequent, he does not alter the case, so that the praedicate and
subject of the consequent, which is brought to impugn the antecedent, be
contained in the praedicate and subject of the antecedent, as a particular in
the universal.

27 And therefore I have sufficiently without altering the case confuted that
maxim, he that can do the greater can do the less, by this instance of a
private Priest, who is contained in that subject (he that can) as a particular
in the universal, for that a private Priest can do the greater, to wit, can
absolve from sins, and yet he can not do the less, to wit, absolve from
debts: from whence it follows, that the aforesaid general maxim is not
true, and therefore neither the consequence of that argument concerning the
Popes power to excommunicate, and consequently to depose, which consequence is
grounded upon that general maxim, can be good. By which it is apparent, that
from that maxim it can not be rightly concluded, that because the Pope has
power to excommunicate, which is the greater, he has power either to deprive
Princes of their kingdoms, or to absolve subjects from their debts, which are
the less.

28 Neither is the deposing of Princes, or the discharging of subjects from
paying their debts necessary for the spiritual good, and public benefit of
the Church, or which is all one to the salvation of souls; and although they
were necessary yet seeing they are temporal, and not spiritual actions, they
must be performed for the same spiritual end by temporal and not spiritual
power: And therefore that argument, which my Adversary uses a maiori ad
minus, that because a temporal Prince may absolve his subject from the payment
of his debt, therefore much more the supreme spiritual Pastor of the Church
may do the same, is of little worth, for that the disposing of temporal
things, and the inflicting of temporal punishments, as is the discharging of
subjects from paying their debts, do belong only to the temporal power of
Secular Princes, and not to Ecclesiastical authority, which, by the
institution of Christ, is not extended to the inflicting of temporal
punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods, etc. but only of
Ecclesiastical or spiritual censures, as I have showed more at large in the
first part.

29 To my fourth and last instance, which was this, He that can do the greater
can do the less, therefore a private Priest who has power to give the
kingdom of heaven, to wit, by virtue of the Sacraments, has power to give an
earthly kingdom, Mr. Fitzherbert answers as before, Nu. 12. 13. page 46.
that Widdrington changes the state of the question, transferring it from the
Pope to a private Priest; for albeit this argument holds not in private
Priests, yet it is good in the Pope, if we change the consideration of the
force of the Sacraments (whereto my Adversary Widdrington ascribes the Popes
power) to the plenitude of power, by the virtue whereof the Pope has a
supreme authority; and therefore the argument would be good thus: Potest Papa
per plenitudinem potestatis, etc: The Pope may by the plenitude of his power
give the heavenly kingdom, and therefore he may give an earthly, for the later
being a necessary consequent of the former, is necessarily comprehended in it,
because the Pope by the plenitude of his power has as much authority and
jurisdiction, as is necessary for the government and good of the Church.
Whereupon it follows, that whenever it shall be absolutely necessary and
behoouefull for the Church, that he change or transfer a kingdom or Empire,
he may do it, and give not only the Kingly or Imperial title, but also the
right to the crown, as Leo the third, etc.

30 But Mr Fitzherbert does also in this answer bewray his ignorance and want
of Logic, as he did in the former: for it is clear, that he himself, and
not I, does alter the case, and change the state of the question. For the
question is not concerning the consequent of Lessius argument, but concerning
the consequence, or that antecedent proposition, and maxim, he that can do
the greater can do the less, whereon his consequence or argument is grounded:
and therefore by changing the consequent, the case or state of the question is
not altered, when the consequent is included in the antecedent proposition as a
particular in the universal: as in the former part of this argument, a Priest
can give the kingdom of heaven, is included in the former part of that maxim,
he that can do the greater, and the second part, therefore he can give an
earthly kingdom, is included in the second part of that maxim, therefore he
can do the less; for that to give the kingdom of heaven is greater then to
give an earthly kingdom. And to make the case more plain to the vulgar sort,
put the case that I should argue thus, Every white thing is pleasant to the
taste, therefore sugar is pleasant to the taste, the consequent you see is
true, yet the consequence is not good, for that the antecedent proposition is
false: And if my Adversary should impugn my consequence, and prove my
antecedent proposition to be false by this instance, Every white thing is
pleasant to the taste, therefore chalk is pleasant to the taste, and I should
reply to this instance, and say, that he alters the case, and changes the
state of the question, in transferring it from sugar, which is sweet, to
chalk, which is unsavory, would not my Adversary, trow you, according to his
accustomed manner affirm, that my reply is impertinent, absurd, foolish, and
ridiculous, and send me back to learn Logic again?

32 Now you shall see, how plainly Mr. Fitzherbert, whiles he untruly
charge me, as you have seen, with altering the case, and changing the state
of the question, he does alter, and change it himself. For albeit, says he,
this argument holds not in private Priests, yet it is good in the Pope, if
we changet he consideration of the force of the Sacraments (whereto
Widdrington ascribes the Popes power) to the plenitude of power, by the virtue
whereof the Pope has a supreme authority, etc. But first it is untrue, and I
wonder that Mr. Fitzherbert blusheth not to say, that I ascribe the Popes power
to the force of the Sacraments, seeing that I speak not one word in my
instance of the Pope, but only of private Priests. And if I had ascribed the
Popes power to remit sins, and to give justifying grace, whereby we are made
children of God, and heirs to the kingdom of heaven, to the force and virtue
of the Sacraments, had this been, forsooth, any unsound or bad doctrine? Will
my Adversary ascribe the Popes power to remit sins, and to give justifying
grace not to the force and virtue of the Sacraments, but to the plenitude of
his power, as though the Pope by the plenitude of his power could without the
Sacraments remit sins, and give justifying grace? If this be his meaning, all
Catholics know, what Censure this doctrine deserves, and it is in some sort
agreeable to that, which he said a little before, that the Pope by
excommunication does take away the life of the soul, which is justifying
grace.

32 Secondly, observe, good Reader, how my Adversary himself alters the
case, and changes the state of the question, and the reason, or principle,
whereon Lessius consequence or argument which I did impugn, was grounded. For
Lessius his argument was this: The Pope can excommunicate Kings, therefore he
can depose them, because he that can inflict the greater punishment can
inflict the less, which proposition supposes that general maxim, he that
can do the greater, can do the less, and this maxim was the reason and
ground of his consequence or argument. Now my Adversary changes this reason
and ground, and flies to another. The Pope, says he, may give the heavenly
kingdom, and therefore he may give an earthly, but for what reason think
you? I expected, that he would have yielded Lessius reason, because he that
can do the greater can do the less, which reason by those four instances I
did impugn, but he flies from this reason to another, because the Pope, says
he, has a plenitude of power, by which he may give the heavenly, and
consequently an earthly kingdom. Before he affirmed, as you have seen, that
the Pope having power to excommunicate Kings may depose them, as well because
the power to excommunicate is greater then the power to depose, and this was
Lessius his reason, which I impugned in this Chapter, as also because the
temporal state, whereof the Pope depriueth the Prince, is ordained to serve
the spiritual, and therefore to be disposed by the supreme spiritual
Pastor, so far soorth as shall be necessary for Gods service, and the good
of the Church, and this is the reason, which my Adversary brought in the former
Chapter, and was grounded in that rule of the Law, The accessory follows the
principal, which I impugned in that place: Now he yields another reason,
which is taken from the plenitude of power, which the supreme spiritual
Pastor has.

33 So that you see how he himself now changes the state of the question, and
flies from Lessius reason, which I impugned, to wit, that he that can do the
greater can do the less, to the plenitude of the Popes power, which reason
nevertheless is of small force, and it is rather petitio principij, or, a
giving that for a reason, which is the question: For albeit I do not deny,
that the supreme spiritual Pastor has in spirituals a plenitude of power,
that is, a full spiritual power to govern the Church, which is the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, as likewise all Sovereign Princes have in temporalls a
plenitude of power, that is, a full temporal power to govern their temporal
kingdoms, yet how far this plenitude, or fullness of spiritual power is
extended, whether to the disposing of temporal things, and to the giving, or
depriving of temporal kingdoms in order to spiritual good, as my Adversaries
imagine, or only to the disposing or dispensing of spiritual things, as many
other learned Catholics are of opinion, this is that, which is now in
controversy betwixt me, and Mr. Fitzherbert, and which he takes upon him by
all laws humane, and divine clearly to convince, and therefore to give that
for a reason, which is the question, is to commit that fault, which the
Logicians call petitio principij.

34 If Mr. Fitzherbert had argued in that manner, as Lessius did, to wit, that
the Pope by the plenitude of his power may give the heavenly kingdom, and
therefore he may give an earthly, because he that can do the greater can do
the less, then he had not altered the state of the question, or changed
Lessius medium or reason, but then I would also have denied his consequence,
and have impugned that reason of maxim, by those four instances, and infinite
other, which might be brought, which do clearly and directly confute and
overthrow that maxim. But seeing that he flies from that maxim, which
Lessius brought for his medium or reason, to the plenitude of the Popes power,
he both alters the state of the question, and also gives that for a reason,
which is the question: For I utterly deny, that the Pope by that plenitude of
power, which Christ has granted to his Church, can, I do not say command,
impose, or enjoin temporal things, as temporal penalties, but dispose of
temporal things, or inflict temporal punishments, although it be imagined,
that they are necessary, as they are not, to the good of the Church and the
salvation of souls, it belonging only to the temporal power of Secular
Princes, whom Christ has appointed to be Protectours of his Church, to use the
temporal sword, to inflict temporal punishments, and to dispose of temporal
things.

35 Wherefore, neither the plenitude of spiritual power in the supreme
spiritual Pastor to give the heavenly kingdom does necessarily infer a
power in him to give an earthly kingdom, as a necessary consequent of the
former, as my Adversary here affirms, although the supreme spiritual
Pastor by the plenitude of his spiritual power has as much spiritual
authority, and jurisdiction, as is necessary for the government and good of
the Church, as it is instituted by Christ our Savior, neither is the changing,
transferring, or giving of an earthly kingdom, and the disposing of all
temporal things absolutely necessary for the spiritual good of the Church,
or, which is all one, for the saving of souls, as also my Adversary here
supposes, from which necessity, for the most part, he draws an argument to
prove, the aforesaid power to dispose of all temporal things to be in the
Pope, (although sometimes he grants, cap. 2. nu. 3.
that the Pope has the aforesaid power over temporal goods and States, yea
and of the bodies of all Christians, so far forth, at least, as it shall be
convenient for the good of the soul, and of the Church, which is a too too
large and exorbitant extension of the Popes plenitude of power to take away the
kingdoms and lives of Christian Princes, and to dispose of all temporals) for
that, as Card. Bellarmine himself confesses, it is not absolutely necessary,
for the good of the Church to resist the common enemy, as is the Turk. For if
the Church, says he, lib. 1. de. Council. cap. 10
could converse conuersari.
under the most cruel persecutions of Nero, Domitian, Decius and Diocletian,
why may it not also under the persecution of the Turks? And although the
disposing of temporal things, the changing, transferring, giving and taking
away of temporal kingdoms were necessary for the spiritual good of souls, or
of the Church, yet they being temporal actions, and proper to the temporal
power, as God almighty has distinguished in the Christian world, or
commonwealth, the temporal and spiritual power by their proper actions,
functions and dignities, they can not be performed by the spiritual, but only
by the temporal and civil power, which Christian Princes are by the law of
Christ bound to use in defense of the Church, and for the necessary good of
their own souls, and of their subjects.

36 Neither do those examples, or facts or Popes, which my Adversary here
brings, or any such like, sufficiently prove a power in the Pope, as he is a
spiritual Pastor, to change, transfer, give, or take away earthly
kingdoms, for that it is one thing, says Card. Bellarmine, in Resp. ad
Apolog. page 157. Edit. Colon.
to relate the facts of Kings, (and so likewise of Popes) and an other thing to
prove their power, right and authority. As Leo the third Pope of that name,
page 47. nu 13 Egmarth. in vita Caroli. Annals Francof. anno 801. Paul.
Diacon. lib. 23. Zonaras tom. 3. Annal. Cedrenus in vita Constant. and Irene.
says my Adversary, gave to Charles the great the Empire of the West, which
was acknowledged by the Greek Emperors themselves to be the Popes gift, etc.

37 But to this example I did fully and clecrely answer in my Apology, nu.
414. and seq.
to wit, that the Roman Empire was not translated from the Grecians to the
Germans by the only authority of the Pope, but also by the common consent,
suffrages, ordinance, decree, and authority of the Senate, and people of Rome,
both Clerks, and Laikes, with the tacit consent at least wise of all others,
to whom it did belong, amongst whom the chiefest of all was the Bishop of Rome,
who did not by his spiritual or Pontifical authority, which he as Pope
received from Christ, cause that translation, but as he being the principal
member, and citizen of Rome, and of the Roman Empire, did by his advise,
consent, soliciting, procurement, suffrage and authority chiefly set forward
that translation, and as he was Pope did by his Pontifical authority approve
it to be lawful, and no way repugnant to the law of God or nature, for which
causes he is said by many writers to have transferred that Empire, as the
chief and principal Author, procurer, and approouer thereof.

38 And this I did sufficiently prove in that place both by the grounds of
Card. Bellarmine himself, and also by the testimonies of those Authors, whom
he alleged. For nothing can be concluded, says he, lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap.
8.
by arguments taken from authority negatiuely. For it does not follow, Luke,
Paul and Seneca do not say, that S. Peter was at Rome, therefore S. Peter was
not at Rome; For these three were not bound to say all things, and more credit
is to be given to three witnesses affirming, then to a thousand saying nothing,
so that these do not deny, what the others do affirm. Seeing therefore that
none at all of those thirty two Authors, whom Card. Bellarmine brought for
witnesses of the translation of the Empire made by the Pope, does deny, that
the aforesaid translation was done by the authority of the Senate and people
of Rome, and not only three of Card. Bellarmines Authors, but also many more
whom I cited there, do most plainly affirm, that both the authority of the
Pope, and also the consent, decree, ordinance, suffrage and authority of the
Senate and people of Rome did concur to that translation, more credit is to
be given to them, who do affirm, that the Empire was translated by the Pope,
Senate, and people of Rome, then to all the rest, although they were a
thousand, who albeit they say that this translation was done by the Pope, yet
they do not deny, that it was also done by the Senate, and people of Rome.
Thus and much more to the same purpose did I answer in my Apology See
Apology 427. and seq.
.

39 Now you shall see how cunningly and insufficiently D. Schulckenius does
shift of this my answer. For whereas he is very diligent for the most part to
set down my words, and text in particular, when he imagines, that with any
colorable Reply he can confute them, yet here he relates Cardinal
Bellarmines argument drawn from the translation of the Roman Empire to the
French men, but he altogether concealeth my answer thereunto, and so passes
over twenty pages of my Apology, wherein both by his own grounds, and by his
own Authors, and many others I clearly proved, that this translation was done
not only by the authority of the Pope, but also of the Senate, and people of
Rome: and only with a flourish of words he endeavors to prove by a
Dilemma, which, as you shall see, is neither to the question betwixt me, and
Cardinal Bellarmine, and which I also answered in that place, That I must
either approve Card. Bellarmines opinion, or else clearly contradict my self
in my answer. Wherefore although D. Schulckenius makes this title of his
foureteenth Chapter, The answer of Widdrington to the rest of the examples,
which are taken from the facts of Leo the third etc. is examined, yet he
neither examineth my answer to that fact of Leo, nor sets it down at all,
albeit he confesses, that I have at large disputed thereof: But this is all
that he replieth Schulck. in Apol. cap. ^ page 597. 598.
.

40 And of the translation of the Empire, Cardinal Bellarmine has exactly,
soundly, and diligently written three books of a just bigness, in so much
that nothing does seem can be added thereunto. Only at this time I do make
this argument against my Adversary Widdrington. Either that translation was
true, or feigned: If he say it was feigned, he will be overwhelmed with the
voices of all Historiographers, and he will take away all humane faith out of
the world. But if he say it was truly done, I ask again, whether it was
done justly, or unjustly? if he say it was done unjustly, first he will
contradict almost all Catholic Writers: for only the Magdeburgian Heretics
do blame it as one of the miracles of Antichrist: Besides that he will wrong
all the Latin Emperors, who from that time have been, and shall be, as though
their Empire is not grounded upon a sound foundation: Lastly, he will reprehend
all the people of the West, yea all the world, who have hitherto honored the
Latin Emperor, as a true and lawful possessour of the Empire. For also the
Grecians themselves with their Emperor, and the Persians, as we have related
out of Bellarmine in the former Chapter, Ad nu. 390.
have acknowledged the Latin Emperors, as true and lawful Emperors.

41 But if Widdrington say that it was done justly, I demand whether it was
done by the authority of the Roman Bishop, the Citizens of Rome assenting, or
also requesting it, or whether it was done by the authority of the people of
Rome, the Pope assenting, and crowning, and blessing the Emperor chosen by the
people, or whether it was done by the authority of the Pope and of the people
of Rome together. If he will say that it was done by the authority of the
Bishop of Rome, the Citizens of Rome assenting and requesting it, he will agree
both with the truth of the fact, and with Bellarmine, and with almost all
Historiographers, and he will confirm the argument drawn from this example,
which he endeavors to weaken. For Bellarmine does not reject the Authors
which my Adversary cites, who do adioyne the people of Rome to the Pope of
Rome in the work of the translation of the Empire, so that the true power, and
authority of transferring the Empire be given to the Pope alone, and assent,
desire, request, and acclamation be given to the people. But if he will say,
that it was done by the authority only of the people, the Pope only
assenting, and crowning the Emperor chosen by the people, or also by the
authority of the people, and of the Pope together, he will most manifestly
contradict himself, for that in this whole book he has repeated a thousand
times, that the people are bound by the Law of God to obey their Prince, and
that neither in the case of Heresy, nor in any other case, civil obedience
can by the people be deuied to the Prince, whom once they have had and
therefore that the people, who by the Law of God are subject, cannot depose
their Prince. Let my Adversary Widdrington choose what part he will, and he
will be compelled either to agree with us, or to contradict himself.

42 Thus you see, what a brave flourish D. Schulckenius has made, especially
to those who have not read my Apology, as though forsooth he had said
something to the question which was betwixt me, and Cardinal Bellarmine, or
had brought some new argument, which was not answered by me in that place,
whereas it is as clear as the Sun, that this his Dilemma is a mere evasion,
and shift, and altogether impertinent to the question, and that I did fully
satisfy it in that very place, both by the grounds of Cardinal Bellarmine,
and also by those authorities, which he alleged without contradicting my
self at all. For the maine question between me and Cardinal Bellarmine was,
whether this translation of the Empire was done by the authority only of the
Pope, or by the authority both of the Pope, and also of the people, and I
proved clearly by Cardinal Bellarmines own grounds, and also by his own
Authors, that it was done both by the Pope, and also by the Senate and people
of Rome. Now D. Schulckenius says little or nothing to this question, but
flies to another by-question, to wit, whether it was done justly or unjustly,
whereas the principal question was only of the fact, to wit, by whom the fact
was done, whether by the Pope alone, or also by the people, and not whether the
fact was just or unjust. So that you see here be two questions, the first is
of the fact, to wit, whether there was any such fact, and by whom, and in what
manner it was done, with all other circumstances, which belong to that
particular fact: the second is of the justice or injustice of the fact, to wit,
whether that particular fact considered with all particular circumstances
belonging thereunto was justly or unjustly done.

43 The first question, as D. Schulckenius himself affirms, Page 591.
is to be decided by the testimonies of Historiographers, to whom it
appertains to write barely, simply and truly the facts of men; and the
second, which does necessarily suppose the first, by Divines or Lawyers, to
whom it appertains to decide what is right or wrong. Mark now how cunningly
D. Schulckenius to confound his Readers understanding inuerteth the order of
these questions, and putting, as it were, the Cart before the horse, demands
that first, which he should do last, and that last, which he should first. For
first he demands, whether that fact, to wit, the translation of the Roman
Empire from the Grecians to the French, was justly or unjustly done; and
secondly he demands, whether it was done by the authority of the Pope alone,
or of the people alone, or of the Pope and people together; as though one
should decide a case of conscience before it be known and agreed upon what the
case is, and what be all the praticular circumstances, which do alter the
case, belonging thereunto. For it is one case or question, to put the
translation of the Empire to be done by the Pope alone, an other by the people
alone, a third by the Pope and people together. Also it is one case, if it be
done by the Pope and people together, when the Empire is forsaken and abandoned
by the Emperor, or which is all one, with the express or tacit consent of
the Emperor, for that he refuses to rule or reign over the people any
longer, and an other case, when the Empire is not forsaken by the Emperor, or
which is all one, against the Emperors will and consent, for that he will still
remain to be their Emperor. Now if D. Schulckenius had either put down the
case or question plainly with all particular circumstances belonging thereunto,
it would easily have been answered, or else if it had pleased him to have set
down my words, and the case as I did put it, and prove it to be lawful, the
Reader would presently have seen, that D. Schulckenius might well have spared
to make his aforesaid argument, or Dilemma, for that I did fully answer it in
that place, and that neither I contradicted my self, nor that he did answer
at all my argument, but that rather by his silence, he did sufficiently
acknowledge, that he could not answer it at all.

44 For first I did affirm, that the Roman Empire was translated from the
Grecians to the French by the authority, decree, ordinance, consent and
suffrage both of the Pope, and also of the people, and not of the Pope alone;
and this I proved by Card. Bellarmines own grounds, and also by his own
Authors and diverse others; to whom also may be added Lib. 1. hist.
Guylielmus Malmesburiensis, In vita Leonis tertij.
A^astasius Bibliothecarius, lib. ad annum 781.
Siffridus, In libro Augustali anno 801.
Beneuutus de Rambaldis, Ennead. 8. lib. 8. in fine.
Sabellicus In Annalibus Galliae.
Nicolaus Gillius, Lib. 4. de regno Italiae.
Carolus Sigonius, and many more. Secondly, I affirmed, that the Emperors of
Greece had the Roman Empire as forsaken and abandoned by them, and that they
refused to rule, govern and protect them any longer, and consequently that the
translation done with those circumstances was just, and without any wrong done
to the Grecian Emperors; Neither in affirming this did I contradict my self.
For albeit I did oftentimes affirm, that subjects are bound by the law of God,
to obey in civil causes their temporal Prince, and that in no case they have
power to judge him, or to withdraw their temporal allegiance from him, for
that in no case an inferior can judge his Superior, as Card. Bellarmine
himself confesses, lib. 2. de Council. cap. 18.
for which cause he affirms, that the Church in no case can judge an
undoubted Pope, so long as he is Pope, Nevertheless I never affirmed, that
when the Emperor does abandon and forsake his Empire and people, and refuses
to be their Emperor any longer, but leaves them to themselves, it is not in
their power to choose them an other Emperor, or to change the Imperial
Monarchy into Aristocratie or Democratie, for that then the supreme temporal
power and authority is immediately in the people, and this also I proved in
that place out of Card. Bellarmines own principles.

45 Wherefore when D. Schulckenius a little above affirmed, that I do
oftentimes grant, that the people cannot in any case deny civil obedience to
that Prince whom once they have had, if his meaning be, that I do grant, that
he who is once a Prince, can not of his own accord leave to be a Prince, and
can not resign his kingdom to the next heir, and that the people are bound
to yield civil obedience to him, who was once their Prince, but now of his
own accord, has resigned his kingdom to the next heir, he does greatly
wrong me, and abuse his Reader; for to affirm this were foolish and
ridiculous, and contrary to all reason and practice: but that which I affirmed
was, that it is very probable, and defended by many grave and learned
Catholics, that the people, who are subject, can in no case, nor for any cause
judge or depose their Sovereign Prince against his will, and my reason was the
same, which Card. Bellarmine oftentimes uses, to prove that the Church, or a
General Council can not judge or depose the Pope, for that it is contrary to
all reason for an inferior or subject to judge his Superior, and therefore
those Catholics that hold a General Council may in some cases judge the
Pope, do also hold that it is superior, and above the Pope.

46 That the Grecian Emperors had the Roman Empire as forsaken and abandoned
by them, I affirmed in these words: Seeing therefore that (as Lupoldus, or
Ludolphus writes, and diverse other Authors, as Nauclerus, Aeneas Siluius, and
Michael Coccinius do insinuate) the Emperors of Greece in the time of Charles
the great, and also before his time, to wit, in the time of his father Pipine
and of his grandfather Charles Martellus, did reign in the West Empire only in
name, neither could the Church of Rome, nor other Churches of Christ, or also
any others, being by the Longobards unjustly oppressed in the same Empire have
justice by them, or by their authority, and so the aforesaid Emperors had the
West-Empire in a manner forsaken, by governing therein only in name, as it
appears by diverse Chronicles, the Pope, Senate, and people of Rome, at
leastwise by the tacit consent of all other Western men, who were subject to
the Empire, had even according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine but now
related, full right and power (which they could loose by no custom or
translation of the Imperial Seat, as being to them connaturall, and due by
the law of nature) to choose themselves a new Emprour, and consequently to
transfer the Empire, which the Grecians kept in the Western parts only in
name, to Charles the great, and his Successors, the Imperial Seat being in
those parts at that time, as it were vacant, or without an Emperor. Thus I
wrote in my Apology Nu. 438.
.

47 And moreover, that the Greek Emperors had the Western Empire and people
for forsaken, and abandoned, and gave, at leastwise, their tacit consent,
according to that rule of the law, qui tacet consentire videtur, that they
might choose to themselves another Empeperour, at leastwise in power and
authority, it is apparent, for that they did never repugne, contradict, or
gainesay, that Charles the great should rule over them, although perchance it
displeased them that he should have the name of Emperor. Yea, and as
Cardinal Bellarmine himself writes, when the Empress Irene heard, that
Charles was called, and crowed Emperor by Pope Leo, she did not only
gainesay, but also she would have married Charles, and had done, if certain
perfidious Eunuchs had not hindered her, as Zonaras and Cedrenus do write in
the life of the said Irene. Afterward, Irene being dead, Nicephorus the
Emperor, who did succeed her, sent Ambassadors to Charles as to an Emperor,
as writes Ado in this Chronicle of the year 803. And a little after
Nicephorus being dead, Michael suceeding him sent Ambassadors to Charles, who
likewise did publicly honor him as an Emperor, as writes Ado in his
Chronicle of the year 810. All which do sufficiently confirm, that the
Greek Emperors did not gainesay this translation, nor conceive it to be a
wrong done to them, and in prejudice of their Imperial right and Sovereignty.

48 By all which it is manifest first, that I do not any wrong at all to the
Latin Emperors, who have been, and shall be from the time of that
translation, as though their Empire were not grounded upon any sound title or
foundation; for that all writers, and Cardinal Bellarmine himself do agree
in this, that the Pope together with the rest of the people have power to
choose them another Emperor, in case the Emperor will no longer reign over
them, because in that case the supreme temporal power and authority is only
in the people, or whole multitude, but rather Card. Bellarmine as also I
observed in that place, Nu. 462.
does call in question, and make doubtful the right and title, which the Latin
Emperors have to the Empire, in that he affirms, that they have all their
right and title from the Pope alone, seeing that there be many learned and
grave Authors, who make a great doubt, whether the Pope alone has, by the
institution of Christ, any such power and authority to transfer Empires, but
no Author, not so much as Card. Bellarmine himself according to his doctrine,
which I related in that place, does deny, that the whole multitude has full
power, and authority to transfer the Empire in the aforesaid case, to wit,
when the Emperor does abandon the Empire, and will no longer reign over the
people.

49 Secondly, it is also manifest, that I have not any way contradicted my
self in my answer, and that I have clearly proved by Card. Bellarmines own
grounds, and by his own Authors, that the aforesaid translation was done by
the authority, decree, ordinance, and suffrages both of the Pope and of the
people, and consequently that the people did more then only request, applaude,
and assent to that translation: to which D. Schulckenius makes no answer at
all: and therefore his silence herein is both an evident sign, that he was
not able to impugn my answer, and that although he does so highly commend
his own book of the translation of the Empire, as exactly, soundly, and
diligently written, yet his own conscience, for as much as concerns this
question, sees now the contrary, for that he being so plainly convinced both
by his own principles, and also by his own Authors, and diverse others, that
this translation was not done by the authority only of the Pope, as he
pretended to prove in that his book of the translation, but also of the
people, he was engaged for the saving of his credit to have in some sort
confuted my answer, but to pass it over cunningly with a Dilemma not
belonging to the principal question, and which was also fully satisfied by me
in that place, without setting down any one word of my answer, and so
omitting contrary to his accustomed manner above twenty pages of my text
together, does argue no good and sincere proceeding. And lastly it is also
manifest what the Reader may think of my Adversaries sincerity, who in this
place does so barely, and nakedly repeat again this argument, without taking
any notice of the answer, which in my Apology I gave to the same.

50 But the Empire of the West, says Mr. Fitzherbert Nu. 13. p. 47
was acknowledged by the Greek Emperors themselves to be the Popes gift; and
therefore Emanuel Commenus Blond. dec. 2. l. 5. Platina in Alex. 3. Nauclerus
generat. 39. page 848.
Emperor of Constantinople in the time of Fridereke the first, understanding
of the dissension betwixt him, and Pope Alexander the third, sent Ambassadors
to the Pope, and offered him not only a great army with great sums of money,
but also to reunite the Greek Church with the Latin, if he would restore that
Empire of the West to the Emperors of Constantinople.

51 But neither Emanuel Commenus, nor any other Greek Emperor (although from
the particular fact of some one Emperor, especially who was desirous to
enlarge his Empire, no good argument can be drawn to prove a right) did
acknowledge the Empire of the West to be the Popes gift, in any other manner,
then they had read, or heard from Historiographers, to wit, that the Pope was
indeed the chief and principal, but not the only Author of that
translation. And therefore Blondus one of Cardinal Bellarmines own Authors
does well affirm it to be manifest, Blond decad. 1. l. 3. in principle.
that the first translation of the Roman Empire from the Constantinopolitans to
the French Princes was done by the authority and consent, not only of the
Pope, Clergy, and people of Rome, but also by the suffrages of the people, and
principal men of all Italy. Neither did Emanuel Commenus desire of Pope
Alexander the third, that he alone without the consent, and suffrages of the
Princes and people would restore the Empire of the West to the Emperors of
Constantinople, but that he would be a means that it might be restored, or
translated to them again, as he was a chief means, and principal Author
that it was translated from the Grecians to the French.

52 In like manner, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Nu. 13. p. 47.
the second translation of the West Empire from the French (that is to say from
the family of Charles the great unto the Germans) was made especially by the
authority of the Sea Apostolic, Bell. l. 2. c. 2. and 3.
as Card. Bellarmine proves clearly in his Treatise of the translation of
the Empire. If my Adversary had said, only by the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, he had spoken to the purpose, but that word [especially] clean
overthrows his argument: For I will not contend with him at this present,
whether it was done especially by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, in that
manner as I granted before, that the first translation from the Grecians to the
French was done especially, chiefly, or principally by the Popes authority,
but that either the first, or second translation was done only by the
authority of the Sea Apostolic, and not also of the people, this I utterly
deny: neither has Card. Bellarmine in the aforesaid Treatise by any one
sufficient argument proved, or is able to prove the same.

53 We read also, says Mr. Fitzherbert, that Clodoueus, Papyrius Maso in vita
Henrici primi See Bozius de signis Ecclesiae lib. 10. cap. 12.
the first Christian King of France, being desirous after his Baptism, to make
good, and establish his right and title to that kingdom, professed to receive
the same from the hands of the Archbishop of Rhemes by authority and
commission of the Sea Apostolic. But truly it is strange, to see what strange
arguments, and void of all probability my Adversaries dare bring for proof
of so great a matter, as is the giving, taking away, translating of Kingdoms
and Empires. For what Historiographer ever wrote, that Clodoueus, the first
Christian King of France, had no good right and title to his kingdom before he
became Christian; or that he received his title, right, and authority to
reign from S. Remigius by commission of the Sea Apostolic, and that he
himself professed as much, or that it belongs to the Archbishop of Rhemes to
choose the King of France, if we will speak properly of choosing, as though
the Kings of France, were Kings by election, and not by hereditatie succession,
or that the right and title which the Kings of France have to their kingdom
depended upon the election of the Archbishop of Rhemes, or the Sea Apostolic?
If my Adversary were in France, and would affirm thus much, I fear me, he
would be glad to recant his doctrine in this point, or to interpret his words
in a better sense, or else he might perchance, to use his own words, find it
to his cost.

54 Neither does Papirius Maso affirm, as my Adversary and Bozius say, that
King Clodoueus, or Lewis the first, did profess to receive his kingdom, or
his right and title thereunto from the hands of S. Remigius Archbishop of
Rhemes by authority and commission of the Sea Apostolic, neither could he
with truth profess the same, for that he was long before King of France, and
had true right, and lawful title to that kingdom, before he was baptized by
S. Remigius; neither does baptism make good rights and titles to temporal
kingdoms, but as it depriueth no man of his temporal right and dominion, so
it gives no man any temporal right or dominion, but gives him only a
spiritual right, and makes him heir to the kingdom of heaven. But all that
Papirius Maso does affirm is, that when Philip the first of that name being
but seven years old was by the Archbishop of Rhemes consecrated and elected
future King of France, and to succeed his Father Henry then living, and
present at his consecration, the Archbishop, after he had declared the
Catholic faith unto him, and Philip had professed the same, and taken his oath
to defend the Church, and his kingdom, taking S. Remigius staff into his
hands, did quietly and peaceably discourse, how the election and consecration
of the King did belong chiefly to him, from the time, that S. Remigius did
Baptize and consecrate King Lewis. He did also discourse, how by that staff
Pope Hormisda gave to S. Remigius this power consecrating, and the whole
principality, or Primacie of France, and how Pope Victor did grant it to him,
and his Church. Then his Father Henry beckoning he chose him to be King after
him.

55 This is all that Papirius Maso writes: So that all the difficulty of
these words consists in that word [election] which cannot be understood
properly, and for that election, whereby one is made King, or heir apparent to
the crown, who was not King, or heir apparent before the election: For the
Kings of France before that time, and ever since have their right, and title to
the crown not by election, but by hereditarie succession, but it is taken for
the religious ceremony of consecration, and a solemn declaration of the
Archbishop, that the person, whom he consecrateth, is chosen, or rather
acknowledged, and accepted by the whole kingdom for King, or heir apparent to
the crown. Neither does the consecration and declaration, or if we will
improperly call it election of the Archbishop, give any more right, authority,
or Soueraignitie to the King of France, then he had before, neither if he were
not consecrated, elected, or declared to be King by the Archbishop, should he
want any temporal right, authority, or Soueraignitie, for that the Kings
authority and Soueraignitie does not necessarily depend on the Archbishops
consecration, election, or declaration, although some of the vulgar sort of
people may perchance imagine, that he is not a perfect King, before he be
consecrated and anointed.

56 As likewise the Pope, after he is chosen by the Cardinals, is true Pope,
and has all Papal power, and jurisdiction, before he is consecrated or
crowned Pope: neither does his Papal authority necessarily depend upon his
coronation, which belongs only to a religious ceremony, and a complementall,
but not needful, solemnity. But this I understand for this present only of
those Kings, who have their right, and title by hereditarie succession, and not
of those, who are Kings by election, as is the Roman Emperor, and the King of
Polonia. For it is a question among the Lawyers, whether the Emperor before he
be crowned by the Pope, or by his commission is truly Emperor, and has full
Imperial power, or no, whereof and from whence this may proceed I will not
now dispute, and so it may perchance be a custom among the Polonians, that the
King elect, is not accounted a complete and perfect King, before he be crowned,
and consecrated by the Metropolitan; but this may proceed originally, and
chiefly from the people or Kingdom, in whom the supreme. Regal authority
does reside, until they have chosen a King, in which time of vacancie they may
extend, or limite his authority, or make him with what conditions they please,
yea and if they will change the Monarchy into Aristocratie, or Democratie,
which cannot be likewise said of those Kingdoms, which have their Kings not by
election, but by hereditarie succession, of whom that vulgar saying is
verified, that the King does never die.

57 Also when Boleslaus King of Polonia, says Mr. Fitzherbert, had killed the
holy Bishop Stanislaus, Pope Gregory the seventh did not only excommunicate
and depose him, but also commanded the Bishops of that Realm, that they should
not anoint and crown any King of Polonia without his express leave, and
order, whereby he that succeeded Boleslaus had but the title of Duke, which
remained also to his Successors for the space of two hundred and fifty
years. So as this matter is clear not only in reason, but also in practice
and so has been for many ages, whereby it appears, that the Pope may give as
well the earthly, as the heavenly kingdom for the good of the Church, by the
same reason, and power, that he may deprive Princes of their states, when they
deserve it, and the good of the Church requires it.

58 And thus thou see, good Reader, how probably this man Widdrington has
impugned the argument of Lessius, seeing that of four arguments that he has
scoffingly framed to counterfeit the same, and to prove a bad consequence
therein, there is not any one to his purpose, and some of them being truly
understood, and urged according to the true state of the question (which he
has changed in them) do make directly for us; so that his scoffs do fall
upon one but himself, and his own ridiculous arguments; and therefore whereas
he concludes them with a gybing demand, asking, whether these, and the like
are not goodly arguments to persuade the English Catholics to cast away
prodigally their goods, and to deny their fidelity to their Prince? I may with
much more reason demand of him, whether these and such other answers and
arguments of his, are not goodly ones to move the English Catholics to be so
prodigal of their souls as to cast them away upon his word, by denying
fidelity, and obedience to their spiritual Pastor, who has the charge of
their souls.

59 But it seems that his mind and hand is altogether upon his half penny
(as the proverb speaks) seeing that he has so great care of the Catholics
goods, and so little of their souls, that he would have them venture and hazard
their eternal salvation to save their temporal goods: but I hope God will
inspire them to be wiser, and always to remember the golden sentence of our
Savior, Marc. 8. Luc. 9.
quid prodest homini, etc. What does it profit a man to gain all the world if
he loose his soul? Thus Mr. Fitzherbert ends this chapter.

60 But as for the example and practice of Pope Gregory the seventh, I do
freely acknowledge, that he was the first Author and Writer that did in
express words teach, that the Pope has authority to depose temporal
Princes, and also that he was the first Pope, who contrary to the custom of
his Ancestors, as Onuphrius witnesses, Li. 4. de varsa creat. Romans Pont.
did practice the same, but first he did practice it, and then he endeavored to
prove, that he might lawfully do it: since which time it has indeed been
practiced by many Popes: Nevertheless both the doctrine, and the practice was
not known to the ancient Fathers, and also it has ever been resisted, and
contradicted by Catholic Princes, and people both Divines and Lawyers, and
therefore it cannot rightly be called the practice of the Church. And although
the Pope might for sufficient cause command the Bishops of Polonia, that they
should not consecrate any King without his express leave, and order, it being
only a religious ceremony, yet it cannot be sufficiently proved, either that
the Pope has authority to deprive by way of sentence, (for of his power to
deprive by way of command I do not now dispute) any Country of the title and
name of a Kingdom, without the consent of the Country, or of him to whom the
Country is subject in temporalls, it being no spiritual, but a mere
temporal title, and therefore belonging to temporal, and not to spiritual
power; or that the Successors of Boleslaus had only the title of Dukes, for
that the Pope deprived them by way of a iuridicall sentence of the title of
Kings; but this might proceed either from the people themselves, who by reason
of that heinous fact of Boleslaus (in killing that holy Bishop Stanislaus with
his own hands in the Church whiles he was saying Mass, and after he had
miraculously cleared himself, by raising a man from death in open Parliament
to give testimony, whether he had iniutiously taken from that dead man certain
lands, or no, whereof he was falsely accused by the King in a public assembly
of the Realm) would not give any longer that title of Kings; or for that the
Emperor, to whom that kingdom was perchance Dubranius l. 5. and Aeneas
Siluius, cap. 19. Bohemiae, who relates that in the time of Otho the first
Emperor, the kingdom of Polonia was subject to the Roman Empire.
then feudarie, would not suffer them by reason of the execrable crime, to have
any longer that title of Kings, but only of Dukes.

61 Wherefore neither by any sufficient reason, or approved practice it can
be proved, that the Pope as Pope has power to give earthly kingdoms for the
good of the Church, or to deprive Princes of their states, although they should
deserve it, and the good also of the Church should require it, which last
supposition nevertheless is untrue, for that to deprive Princes of their
temporal States is not necessary for the good of the Church, and the salvation
of souls, as I have showed before; and although it were necessary, yet
considering that it is a temporal or civil, and not a spiritual action, for
what end soever we suppose it to be done, it cannot be performed by a
spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, but by temporal, or civil power.

62 And thus thou see, good Reader, (to conclude this Chapter with my
Adversary) how soundly, and without any scoffing I have confuted Lessius
argument, and that general maxim, whereon his consequence was grounded, by
those four instances, which I have here examined, and clearly proved that
they are all to the purpose, and do not any whit alter the state of the
question, but that my Adversary himself in impugning them does alter the
case, and change the state of the question, or medius terminus, which Lessius
used, and flies from his argument to others of his own inuenting, wherein he
discovers his great ignorance in Logic, and that therefore all those
unseemly nickenames of absurd, impertinent, foolish, ridiculous, and
malicious, agree to none so much as to himself. All which being duly
considered, I refer to the judgment of any indifferent man, whether I had
not reason, without any cogging, scoffing, gibing, or malice, (as my Adversary
is pleased to unburden his foul and bitter stomach) but with a sincere
compassion of the miserable state of poor English Catholics in soul, body,
goods, and credit, (into which this man seeks to draw them headlong) and with
an earnest desire, that they should, according to our Saviors commandment,
Render to God and Caesar that which is their due, to affirm by way of
interrogation, that these and such like reasons are no good arguments to move
the English Catholics prodigally to cast away their goods, and to deny their
allegiance to his Majesty.

63 Neither is it my desire, that Catholics should be prodigal of their
souls, or should deny their fidelity and due obedience to their spiritual
Pastor: neither is it true, that I have greater care of their goods, then of
their souls, or that I would have them vente^ and hazard their eternal
salvation to save their temporal goods, as Mr. Fitzherbert (little caring what
he says, so that by his saying he may any way disgrace me) very untruly, God
forgive him, affirms; For I do chiefly respect, God is my witness, their
eternal salvation, and I would have them to render all due obedience both to
their spiritual Pastor, and also to their temporal Prince, but my desire is,
that they will sincerely consider, that not only in denying spiritual
obedience to their spiritual Pastor, but also in denying temporal allegiance
to their temporal Prince, they do venture and hazard their eternal salvation,
for that they are bound by the express commandment of our Savior, and under
pain of eternal damnation, to render both to God and Caesar that which is
their due. But it seems that my Adversaries mind is all upon the Pope, and
little upon his Prince, seeing that he has so great care to enlarge the Popes
Monarchy, and so little to maintain his Kings Sovereignty, but I hope God
will inspire English Catholics to be wiser, and not to run headlong on
either side, but to examine and weigh their temporal and spiritual fidelity
with an equal balance, and to consider, that they may as well offend and
hazard their salvation in giving too much as too little to their spiritual
Pastor, as also in giving too little, as too much to their temporal Prince.

64 Wherefore my humble request to English Catholics is, that seeing this
controversy of their temporal and spiritual obedience between their
temporal Prince, and spiritual Pastor does so nearly concern their
eternal salvation, they will not venture their souls upon any man's bare word,
nor give credit either to my sayings, or the sayings of my Adversaries without
examining sincerely the reasons on both sides, and the substance and manner of
both our writings, and diligently considering how far forth they are bound to
obey the command of their spiritual Pastor, when it is only declaratiue and
grounded upon no sure definition, against the commandment of their temporal
Prince, who is in lawful possession of his kingdom, from which the Pope, the
matter being as yet in controversy, and not decided, pretends to have power
to exclude him. For neither ignorance, nor pretense of zeal to the Sea
Apostolic, can now in my opinion excuse them from not examining what duty they
owe both to their spiritual Pastor, and also to their temporal Prince, and to
what things both their temporal and also spiritual obedience does extend; for
now they having so many and so sufficient causes prudently to doubt (both in
regard of so many books that have been written, and also of the strange
carriage of my Adversaries in commanding me to purge my self under pain of
Censures, and not telling of what, and forbidding my books, and not declaring
for why, although I have often desired to know some one particular thing
whereof I should purge my self, or which is blame worthy in my books,
faithfully promising to purge whatsoever is to be purged, and to recall
whatsoever I have written amiss) they are bound according to the doctrine of
all Divines to examine the truth, so far forth as the learning and capacity
of every man will permit, otherwise their ignorance will be wilful and
damnable, and their zeal, albeit they shall think to do God good service,
will be Pharisaicall, sinful, and inexcusable; and therefore I hope they will
be wiser, and not suffer themselves to be carried away hoodwinkt with blind
obedience, which is most dangerous, when their obedience to man may be a
disobedience to God, but that they will always remember that golden sentence
of our Savior, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and the things
that are Gods, to God.

CHAP. IIII.
Wherein Widdringtons Interpretation of that clause of the oath, wherein the
doctrine [that Princes who are excommunicated or deprived by the Pope may be
deposed, or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoeuer] is abiured as
impious and heretical, is proved to be sound and sufficient, and is cleared
from all absurdity and contradiction even by Mr. Fitzherberts own examples,
and that it may without perjury be sworn by any Catholic.

ALl that Mr Fitzherbert obiecteth in this Chapter I have above in the end of
the second part of this Treatise fully, and verbatim already confuted, and
therefore I think it superfluous to repeat here the same again.

CHAP. V.
Wherein Widdringtons answers to all Mr. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the
law of God, both in the old Testament, and also in the new are proved to be
truly probable and sincere, and no way fraudulent, or contrary to his own
doctrine.

BEcause this Chapter will be somewhat longer then the rest, for that my
Adversary has scraped here together many authorities out of the law of God,
especially in the old Testament to prove, that the spiritual power not only
in the new law, but also in the old has ever been the supreme power on earth
and might chastise Princes temporally, and not only command, impose and
enjoin temporal penalties, but also dispose of temporals, and inflict
temporal punishments, I think it not amiss to divide it into three parts or
sections. In the first I will treat especially of those authorities, which he
has brought out of the old law before the institution of the Kings of Israel;
In the second I will confute those examples, which he alleges out of the said
old Testament since the institution of those Kings; and in the third I will
examine those texts of holy Scripture, which he has taken out of the new
Testament.

SECT. I.
Wherein all the authorities which are brought out of the old law are confuted
in general by the doctrine of Card. Bellarmine and other learned Divines, also
the arguments taken from that place of Deuteron. 17. Si difficile and ambiguum
etc. and the examples of Eleazar and Iosue, and from the difference of the
sacrifices to be offered for Priests and Princes, together with the testimonies
of Philo, Theodoret and Procopius are answered in particular.

FIrst therefore Mr. Fitzherbert in his fifth chapter pretends to prove, that
Widdringtons answer to his arguments deduced from the law of God is confuted
by the express words, and text of the Supplement, and proved to be not only
improbable, but also fraudulent, in that he dissembleth the whole substance,
and pith of Mr. Fitzherberts discourse, for so is the title of his fifth
Chapter, and then he proceeds thus: My Adversary Widdrington having trifled,
as you have heard, in the precedent Chapters, goes forward no less
impertinently in these words, Quarto si quis etc. Fourthly, if a man do
attentively read over Mr. Fitzherberts discourse, he shall most clearly see,
that he has effectually proved nothing else out of the Law either of God, or
of Nature, but that the temporal power in spiritual things, and in temporal
(as they are reduced to spiritual) is subject to the spiritual power, so
far forth as concerns commandment, and a spiritual manner of correction,
and not temporal. So Widdrington.

2 Wherein he seems to acknowledge, as you see, that I have effectually
proved by the law of God and Nature, that the temporal power is subject to
the spiritual, so far forth as concerns the authority to command, though
not to punish temporally; meaning, that the spiritual power may command
temporal and corporal things so far forth as they are to serve the
spiritual (for so you have heard him also confess before S^e before chap. 2.
nu. 1. and 2.
) and that it may punish spiritually (that is to say, by the way of spiritual
censures) but no way temporally; wherein I wish to be observed what he
grants, and what he denies, for of his grant will easily follow the
confutation of his denial, as I have partly signified before Chap. 2. nu.
1.2.9. and 10.
, and will show more amply Chap. 6. nu. 14 15 and seq. See Supplem. chap. 1.
nu. 10.
, when I shall have first examined how true it is, that I have proved
effectually nothing else, but that which he mentions. For to this purpose it
is to be considered what I have debated concerning the law of God in my
Supplement, where I said thus.

3 First, I will speak of the law of God, which if it be considered, as it is
a written law, is divided into the law of Moses, and the law of Grace
delivered by our Savior Jesus Christ; and albeit the law of Moses (for so
much as concerns the judicial and ceremonial part thereof) does not bind us
Christians, yet I will make it manifest, even by that law, that the spiritual
power was then the supreme power on earth, and commanded all temporal
authority, yea and that it might and did chastise Princes temporally when it
was necessary for the glory of God, and the good of the Church. This
appears by the law of God set down in Deuteronomy, etc. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

4 But whether he or I have trifled in the precedent Chapters, you have already
seen, and how improbably he has proved my answer to his arguments to be
improbable or fraudulent, and has confuted it by my own doctrine, as he
vainly braggeth, you shall presently perceive. And first Mr. Fitzherbert
endeavors to confute my answer as improbable, wherein I said, that he has
proved effectually nothing else by the law of God, but that the temporal
power in spiritual things, and in temporal, as they are reduced to
spiritual, is subject to the spiritual power, so far forth as concerns
commandment, and a spiritual manner of correction, and not temporal: to
which purpose he makes a long and tedious repetition of that discourse, which
he made in his Supplement concerning the law of God, especially in the old
Testament, prete^ding, forsooth, to make it manifest even by that law, that the
spiritual power was then the supreme power on earth, and commanded all
temporal authority, yea and that it might and did chastise Princes
temporally, when it was necessary for the glory of God, and the good of the
Church.

5 First therefore to all the arguments, which either my Adversary here has
brought, or any other can bring to convince, demonstrate, or prove
effectually, that the spiritual power in the old law was the supreme power on
earth, and might and did chastise Princes temporally in order to spiritual
good, it is sufficient to answer in general, that the contrary doctrine, to
wit, that in the old law the temporal power and not the spiritual was
supreme, and that the spiritual power was subject to the temporal, is
maintained by many famous, and most learned Catholic Divines, S. Bonauentura
lib. 2. de Eccles. hierarch. cap. 1. and in 4. did. 24. in litera. S. Thom.
lib. 1. de Regim. Prin. cap. 14.
whose opinion in this point Mr. Fitzherbert dare not presume to condemn as
temeratious and improbable, albeit my answer, which is agreeable to their
doctrine, he sticks not to call improbable. For so teaches S. Bonauenture, a
man otherwise addicted to the Popes temporal Monarchy, In the old Testament,
says he, the Priesthood was subject to the kingdom, and therefore Kings then
had power to remove the high Priests from their office, as Solomon removed
Abiathar. The same teaches S. Thomas, or whosoever is the Author of that book
de regimine Principum. Whereupon Card. Bellarmine himself writes thus, It is
not improbable, Bell. l. i. c. 14. in Tract. de potest. Sum. Pont. contra
Barcla.
that in the old Testament the King was absolutely greater then the high
Priest, both for that so teaches S. Thomas in his first book de Regimine
Principum cap. 14. and also for that in the old Testament the promises were
temporal, and the sacrifices carnal.

6 The same also do teach Alphonsus Tostatus Abulensis, Card. Bellar. de
Script. Eccles. page 410.
q. 28 in c. 2. l. 3. Regum and q. 48. c. 27. number.
a man most renowned, says Card. Bellarmine for holiness and learning,
Ioannes de Turrecremata In sum. de Eccles l. 2. c. 96. ad 4 etc. obedientiam.
dest. 93. q. 2. ad. 2
Franciscus Victoria; Relect. 1. de potest. Eccles. cited by Corduba and Sal s.
Antonius Corduba, l. 4 quaest. q. 5 ar. 2 ss. ad Vlti.
Ioannes Salas, q 95. de. leg. sec 21.
and Burgensis In Addit lid Nic. de Lyra in 1. Pet. cap. 2.
all of them most famous Divines. You must also know, says Abulensis, that
Solomon had power to kill Abiathar, although he was the High Priest, for that
in the old Testament the Ecclesiastical power was not distinct from the Secular
power (to wit in punishments for great crimes) but Priests were directly
subjects to the King as Lay men. Also there was not a distinction of
punishments for Priests and Lay men, but in enormious crimes the sentence of
death was common to all: and because Abiathar had committed treason, he was to
be put to death, unless Solomon would pardon him. And that Priests were
subject to Lay men it appears Numer. 27. where God said that Eleazar, who was
the high Priest, and the rest of the Israelites were subject to Iosue, as it
has been more declared Iosue 3. but Iosue was a secular Prince, to wit, of
the tribe of Ephraim. Thus Abu^ensis.

7 And by this the Reader may easily perceive, how ignorantly my unlearned
Adversary taxes my answer of improbabi^itie, and impertinencie, which
nevertheless is most conformeable to the doctrine of so many famous and
learned Catholic Divines, and which Cardinal Bellarmine himself holds for
not improbable, and how vainly he braggeth, that he will make it manifest
even by the law of Moses, that the spiritual power was then the supreme
power on earth, and commanded all temporal authority, yea and that it might
and did chastise Princes temporally, whereas so many famous, and learned
Divines, whose doctrine this ignorant man fears not to call improbable, do
resolutely hold, that in the old Testament the high Priests were subject to
Kings, and that the temporal power was superior to the spiritual, and might
remove the high Priests from their office, and punish them temporally, if they
should deserve it.

8 But let us examine in particular the manifest proofs, which this man
deduceth from the Law of God in the old Testament. His first, and principal
proof is taken from that which is written in the 17. chapter of Deuteronomie.
This appears, says he, Page 70. nu 3.4.5.
by the law set down in Deuteronomie, wherein it is ordained expressly, that
the highest tribunal for judgment, not only for spiritual, but also for
political, and temporal causes, should be in the hands of the high Priest.
The words of the law are these. Si defficile, and ambiguum apud te iudicium
esse perspexeris, etc. If thou perceive that the judgment with thee be hard,
and doubfull, between blood, and blood, cause and cause, leprosy, and not
leprosy, and thou see that the words of the Judges within the gates do
vary, arise and go up to the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose, and
thou shall come up to the Priests of the Leuitical stock, and to the Judges
that shall be at that time, and thou shall ask of them, who shall show thee
the truth of the judgment, and thou shall do whatsoever they that are
Presidents of the place which our Lord shall choose, shall say, and teach thee
according to his Law; and thou shall follow their sentence, neither shall thou
decline to the right, nor to the left; but he that shall be proud refusing to
obey the commandment of the Priest, which at time ministers to our Lord thy
God, that man shall die by the decree of the Judge, and thou shall take away
the evil out of Israel, and the whole people shall fear, that none after
swell with pride.

9 These are the words of the Law of God in Deuteronomie, wherein it is to be
noted, that albeit there be here mention made of the Judge to be consulted
together with the Priests (which some of the Adversaries take to be a temporal
Judge, though he may very well be understood to be the high Priest, who was
supreme Judge in the Council of Priests) nevertheless I say, that albeit he
were a temporal Judge, yet it is evident, that the final decision of the
doubts, and controversies in that Consistory, and consequently the supreme
authority resided in the high Priest; seeing that the said Judge, if he were a
different person, was no other then Minister, either to see the high Priests
commandment executed, or to ordain, and decree the punishment of those, who
should disobey him, it being ordained in the Law, that he who should be so
proud, as to disobey the commandment of the high Priest, should die by the
decree of the Judge. So that it belonged to the high Priest absolutely to
command, and to the Judge to give sentence of death against the transgressors
of his commandment; besides that, etc.

10 But first observe, good Reader, the corrupt proceeding of this man, who to
prove his purpose does falsely, and otherwise then they are in the vulgate
Edition allege the words of holy Scripture. For although the Council of Trent
has denounced anathema Sess. 4.
against all them, who shall not receive for sacred and canonical the entire
books of holy Scripture with all their parts, as they are accustomed to be
read in the Catholic Church, and are extant in the ancient vulgate Latin
edition, and has ordained and declared, that this ancient and vulgate Edition,
which by long custom of so many ages has been approved in the Church shall
be received for Canonical in public lessons, disputations, sermons, and
expositions, and that no man shall dare, or presume to reject it under any
pretense: for which cause the said Council has moreover ordained, that
hereafter the holy Scripture, and especially this ancient and vulgar Edition
shall be printed very correctly; which Decree of the Council Pope Sixtus the
fifth undertook to execute, printing that vulgate Edition in the Vaticane, and
by a special Bull prefixed to the beginning thereof, commanded that all men
should take that and none other for holy Scripture, which Edition, because
sundry errors were found therein, Pope Clement the eight printed more
correctly: Nevertheless Mr. Fitzherbert is not afraid to cite contrary to the
said decrees this place of holy Scripture otherwise then it is found in the
vulgate Edition.

11 For whereas in the vulgate Edition we read thus; and thou shall come to
the Priests of the Leuiticall stock, and to the Judge that shall be at that
time, Mr. Fitzherbert translateth it, and to the Judges in the plural number.
But which imports more, whereas the words following a little after are thus
in the vulgate Edition: But he that shall be proud refusing to obey the
commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers to our Lord thy God,
and the decree of the Judge, that man shall die, and thou shall take away, etc.
Mr. Fitzherbert with small respect to the aforesaid Decrees, cites the words
thus: But he that shall be proud, refusing to obey the commandment of the
Priest, which at time ministers to our Lord thy God, that man shall die by the
decree of the Judge, and thou shall take away, etc. So that the sentence of
death is in this place denounced by the express appointment of God, not only
against him, who shall not obey the commandment of the Priest, but also
against him, that shall not obey the decree of the Judge.

12 Now whether this Judge was a temporal, or a spiritual Judge, and if he
was a temporal Judge, whether he was subordinate to the High Priest, or no, it
is a controversy among Catholic Divines, Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that this
Judge may very well be understood to be the High Priest himself, who was the
supreme Judge in the Council of Priests; and albeit he were a temporal Judge,
nevertheless, I say, says Mr. Fitzherbert, it is evident that the final
decision of doubts and controversies in that consistory, and consequently the
supreme authority resided in the High Priest, seeing that the said Judge, if
he were a different person, was no other then a Minister, etc.

13 But albeit this Judge may be understood to be an inferior spiritual Judge
subordinate to the high Priest, as Abulensis affirms upon that place, and not
the high Priest himself, by reason of the conjunction copulative [and] but he
that is proud refusing to obey the commandment of the high Priest, and the
decree of the Judge, which conjunction [and] says Abulensis denotes the Judge
to be a different person from the high Priest, nevertheless this Judge may
also be very well understood to be a temporal Judge, and in temporal causes
independent on the high Priest. And truly the reason, which Mr. Fitzherbert
brings to prove that this Judge if he were a temporal Judge, was only a
Minister of the high Priest, is of small force, for that to prove the same, he
alleges, as you have seen, the words of the holy Scripture otherwise then
they are in the vulgate Edition, seeing that it is only ordained in the law,
that he who should be so proud as to disobey the commandment of the high
Priest, and the decree of the Judge, should die, those words [ by the decree of
the Iudge] are neither in the Hebrew, nor in the vulgate Edition declared so to
be by Pope Sixtus and Clement: And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert must not take it
ill, if I give no credit to his bare, I say, and that I do prefer the
exposition of the Gloss of Nicolaus de Lyra upon that place, who affirms,
that this tribunal, to which in doubtful cases the Jews were bound to have
recourse, did consist both of spiritual, and of temporal power, and that the
one was independent on the other, before his bare I say which is only grounded
upon a false allegation of the words of the holy Scripture.

14 The words of the Gloss upon that place are these: Hic agitur etc. Here it
is treated, says he, of superior Judges, to whom there ought to be made
recourse in doubtful and difficult matters: and some things are put for
example: when it is said, between blood and blood, that is, when one part of
the Judges do say that the shedding of blood of such a man is to be punished
with death, because it is reduced to wilful murder, an other part says no,
because it is to be reduced to chance-medley: Cause and cause, to wit, when one
part of the Judges says, that the cause of the plaintiff is just, and an
other, the cause of the defendant: Leprosy and not leprosy, to wit when one
part says, that the disease of such a man is leprosy, and an other says it
is not. Arise and go up etc. In these cases and such like there must be had
recourse to superior Judges, to wit, to the high Priest, and to the Judge of
the people of Israel. And sometimes it happened, that both offices did concur
in one person, as it is manifest in Holy, who was Judge, and high Priest of the
people. 1. Reg. 4. but more commonly they were distinct persons, as also
offices. Therefore this recourse may be understood to both jointly; and this
was in causes, which could not be decided by one without the other, as in the
building of the temple, which could not be performed without Kingly authority,
nor ordered without the direction of the Priest; or severally to both, that in
spiritual causes there should be recourse to the high Priest, and in
temporalls to the Judge. And from this grew the custom, that from inferior
Ecclesiastical Judges there is made appeal to the chiefest Bishop, and from
inferior Princes, and Secular Judges to the King, or Emperor. Thus writes
the Gloss, whose doctrine in this point Mr. Fitzherbert will never be able to
prove to be improbable.

15 But secondly, although I should for Disputation sake grant Mr. Fitzherbert,
which he is never able to convince, that this tribunal, Consistory, or
Council, to which in doubts and difficulties of the law, when the Judges
within the gates do not agree, the Jews ought to have recourse, did consist
only of Priests, and not of temporal, but of spiritual Judges, and that the
Judge mentioned in this place they ought obey, was either the high Priest
himself, or rather some other inferior Priest subordinate to him,
nevertheless he cannot prove from hence, as he pretends, that the highest
tribunal for judgment, not only for spiritual, but also for political and
temporal causes, was in the hands of the high Priest. For all that is ordained
for the Priests, and Judges to do in this place of Deuteronomie, is only to
decide, determine, and declare the doubts and difficulties of the law, to whose
commandment and decree every man was bound by the express law of God under
pain of death to stand; but to decide and declare what is the law of God, and
to instruct the people therein, and to command the people to obey their
declaration, instruction and commandment, is not a temporal, but a pure
spiritual cause, as well observes Abulensis in cap. 11. Number. q. 23. and 24.
and in cap. 18. Exodi. q. 5.8. and 11.

16 And what Catholic man will deny, that the spiritual Pastors of the
Church of Christ have also authority to declare and determine what is the law
of God, when any doubt or difficulty shall arise, and to command all
Christians, even temporal Princes, who are subject to them in spirituals, to
obey their decree and determination: and yet from hence it can not be rightly
inferred, in that manner as my Adversary from those words of Deuteronomie
would conclude, that the highest tribunal for judgment in the new law, not
only for spiritual, but also for political, and temporal causes is in the
hands of the chief spiritual Pastor; for that to decide, and determine, what
is the law of Christ, and to command Christian Princes to obey their decision
and determination is not a temporal, but a mere spiritual cause.

17 But if my Adversary had proved, as he has not, that the Priests of the
old law had authority, not only to interpret the law, and to command the
people to follow their interpretation, but also to pronounce the sentence of
death, and to execute the same against those who should not obey their
declaration and decree, then he had said something to the purpose, for to
inflict temporal punishments, and to pronounce the sentence of death, and to
execute or inflict the same for what crime soever it be either temporal or
spiritual, is a temporal and not a spiritual actio^: I say to inflict temporal
punishments, etc. For, as I have often said, to impose, or enioine temporal
punishments, and to command temporal Judges to do justice according to the
law, by punishing malefactors with corporal death, if it be so ordained by
the law, may, if it be done for a spiritual end, be a spiritualactio^, and
belonging to the authority of spiritual Pastors. Neither can my Adversary
prove, that the Judge, who was to give sentence of death against those, who
either did not obey the commandment of the Priest and the decree of the Judge,
or committed any other crime worthy of death by the law, as blasphemy,
adultery, Sodomie, etc. was either a Priest, or a temporal Judge who had his
authority derived from the high Priest, as he was a Priest; I say, as he was a
Priest, for that sometimes the chief temporal Judge, as I observed before out
of the Gloss, was also a Priest, as in the time of Holy, Moses, and the
Machabees; and then he had authority to give sentence of death, not as he was
a Priest, but as he was a temporal Prince, or Judge.

18 Wherefore to little purpose is that which Mr. Fitzherbert immediately
adds; Besides that, says he, Pap. 71. nu. 6.
afterward God commanded the people exactly to obey the Priests, Deuteronomy. 24.
without mention of any other Judge threatening to punish them him self, in
case they should transgress the same, saying, Obserua diligenter, etc. Observe
diligently, that thou incur not the plague of Leprosy, but shall do
whatsoever the Priests of the Leuitical stock shall teach thee, according to
that which I commanded them, and do thou fulfill it carefully. So said
Almighty God. And to move them the rather to this exact obedience, which he
commanded, he added presently; Remember, what our Lord God did to Mary in the
way, when you came out of Egypt, that is to say, how severely God punished Mary
the Prophetess, and sister to Moses for her disobedience to him, and was
stricken with leprosy for the same; by which example Almighty God did notably
inculcate unto the people the necessity of their obedience to the Priest, and
the danger of his indignation, and severe punishment, which they should incur
by neglecting their duty therein. Thus said I in my Supplement, and having
proved afterward most Nu. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
amply, that God gave also to the high Priest not only a soueraignitie of
authority, but also an infallibility of doctrine and judgment in causes of
doubts and controversies, even of temporal matters, and having also showed the
great privileges of the Levites and Priests, who were separated wholly, etc.

19 But what follows from all this? No man makes any doubt, but that the
Priests of the old law were to be obeyed in those things, wherein they had
authority to command, as likewise neither Mr. Fitz. can make any doubt, but
that the commandment of the temporal Prince, or Judge was exactly to be
followed in those things, wherein they had authority to command. True it is,
that the Priests were the chief interpreters of the law of God in the old
Testament, according to those words of the Prophet Malachie, The lips of the
Priest shall keep knowledge, Malach. cap. 2.
and the law they shall require of his mouth, because he is the Angel, or
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; and that it belonged to the Priests to declare
whether one was infected with leprosy or no; But from hence it can not rightly
be concluded, that it belonged to the Priests, as they were Priests, but to the
temporal Judges of the people, or to the children of Israel, that is, the
whole multitude, from whom the temporarall Judges had commonly their election
and authority, to give sentence of death, and to inflict any temporal
punishment appointed by the law: And therefore, although God ordained Leuit.
13. that Aaron, or any one of his sons should declare and judge, who was
infected with leprosy; and after his declaration and judgment that he was a
leaper, he should be separated, yet it belonged to the children of Israel not
as they were ministers of the Priests, but of God, who was their King, and
ordained that punishment, to separate him, and cast him out of the camp
according to that of Number. 5. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Command the
children of Israel that they cast out of the camp every leaper, and whosoever
has a flux of seed, and is polluted upon the dead, as well man as woman, cast
ye out of the camp.

20 So likewise it belongs to the Priests of the new Law, to declare what is
the Law of Christ, and to judge what is heresy, usury, or any other crime
forbidden by the law of Christ, and to command temporal Princes to root out
heretics, usurers, and such like malefactors, by the means of temporal
punishments, for all this does not exceed the bounds of spiritual authority:
but it does not belong to the Priests of the new law, as they are Priests, to
give sentence of death, or to punish temporally heretics, usurers, or any
other malefactors by inflicting temporal punishments, but only to temporal
Princes, who have in their hands and power the sword of life and death, and who
therefore, as I observed Disputat. Theolog. ca. 7. sec. 2. nu. 17. Bannes 2.2.
q. 11. ar 4. q. 1. in fine.
out of Bannes, may pardon sometimes the punishment of death, and punish
heretics in some other manner.

21 And therefore to as little purpose also is that, which Mr. Fitzherbert next
adioyneth, that God gave also to the high Priest an infallibility of doctrine,
and judgment in causes of doubts, and controversies even of temporal matters.
For I willingly grant, that the high Priests of the old Testament had an
infallibility of doctrine, and judgment at least wise for many years
together in doubts, and controversies even of temporal matters, which could
not be determined by the law, yea and a greater infallibility of doctrine and
judgment, then is now in the new law, in doubts and controversies of
particular facts, as whether they should overcome in such a war how such an
inheritance of particular men was to be divided, etc. Either because, as well
observes Abulensis, Abulensis q. 3. in 17. Deuteronomy. in fine.

Abulensis q. i9 in cap. 22. lib. 1. Reg. and in Defensor. part. ^ cap. 41.


the high Priest did judge in the presence of some Prophet to whom the truth
was revealed by God, or because they did know the secrets of things by the
pla^es of the Priests vestement, which was called the rationale, wherein was
contained doctrine, and truth, whereof we have treated says Abulensis Exodus 28.

22 Or thirdly, as the same Abulensis observes, when the high Priest consulted
our Lord about any thing by entering into the Sanctuary in the day of
Expiation, which happened but once a year; for on that day the Priest did
speak unto our Lord within the Sanctuary, and did hear him speak in the
Propitiatory, as has been declared, Leuit. 16. For therefore it was
commanded, that at what time the high Priest did enter into the Sanctuary, no
man should be in the Tabernacle, to wit, least he should hear those things,
which were spoken in the Sanctuary. Thus Abulensis; none of which ways to
find out the truth infallibly in any doubtful matter is ordinarily granted to
the Priests of the new Law. Nevertheless it can not from hence be
sufficiently concluded, that the high Priests of the old Law had a sovereignty
of temporal authority, or in temporal things, but only in spiritual, for
that, as well observes the said Abulensis, Q. 23. in cap. 11. Number.
to instruct in the questions of the Law, and to consult almighty God, was a
spiritual thing.

23 But that, which Mr. Fitzherbert immediately adds, that the Levites, and
Priests were separated wholly from temporal and civil state in such sort,
that they had no dependence thereon, is very untrue, and Cardinal Bellarmine
himself acknowledges the contrary to be probable Supra. nu. 6.
. For, as I above observed out of S. Bonauenture, S. Thomas, Abulensis, and
many other learned Divines, in the Old Testament the Priesthood was subject to
the Kingdom, and Priests were directly subject to the King, as Laymen were, to
wit, in temporalls, as it appears, says Abulensis, Number. 17. where God said,
that Eleezar, who was the high Priest, and the rest of the Israelites were
subject to Iosue, who was a Secular Prince, to wit, of the tribe of Ephraim,
yea and in the time of Moses, Aaron, who was the high Priest, was in temporalls
subject to Moses, and for that cause called him his Lord, Exodus 32. although in
spiritualls Aaron was greater then Moses, Q. 10. in 9. Leuit.
Moses, says Abulensis (expounding those words of Leuit. 9. and Aaron
stretching forth his hands to the people he blessed them) was in temporalls
greater then Aaron, because he judged the whole people, as it is contained,
Exodus 18. Chap. and he commanded the people those things, which they ought to
do. But in spiritualls Aaron was simply greater then Moses. For Aaron was the
high Priest, but Moses one of the simple Levites. Also because Aaron had
directly a right to minister, but Moses had only this for want of Priests,
but this he had not by any order, or ordination. And if thou say, that Moses
was greater then Aaron, because he commanded him to do these sacrifices, and
whatsoever he did, I answer, says Abulensis, that it is not inferred from
this, because Moses did not therefore command these things, as having
authority to command by some Prelacie, or Order, but because he was the
messenger of God, relating those things, which God had commanded; whereupon it
is not properly said that Moses did command, but that he did declare the
things to be done.

24 But if thou yet object, that Moses was greater then Aaron, because Moses
did consecrate Aaron. It is answered, says Abulensis, that it is not deduced
from this: for therefore Moses did consecrate Aaron, because there was no high
Priest that could consecrate him, nor also then any inferior Priests, for that
as well the high Priest, as the inferior Priests were consecrated: and yet
nevertheless this consequence is not of force, this man does consecrate that
man, therefore he is greater then he. For the Pope is consecrated by a
Cardinal Bishop of Hostia, who is inferior to the Pope, and after his
consecration the Pope does command him that consecrated him. So also it
happened among the high Priests in the Old Testament. For except the
consecration of Aaron, which was done by Moses, who was no Priest (to wit by
ordination, but only by the special privilege of God, as the same Abulensis
declares q. 7. in cap. 17. Exodi) and except the consecration of Eleazar,
which was done without any ceremonies, as we showed at large, Exodus 19. all the
later consecrations of the high Priests were done by inferior Priests:
therefore Moses was not greater, for that he consecrated Aaron, but Aaron was
greater; and because, as the Apostle writes, Hebr. cap. 7. always the lesser
is blessed by the greater, it was fit that the blessing over the people should
be done by Aaron. Thus Abulensis. See him also q. 2. in cap. 2. Number.

25 Now Mr. Fitzherberts next argument is as insufficient as the former. I
added further, says he, Page 72. nu. 7
concerning the power and authority of the high Priest in temporal things,
that whereas both the dignities, spiritual, and temporal, were sometimes in
one person, as in Moses, Heli, and the Machabees, and sometimes disioyned in
distinct, and several persons, as in the time of Iosue, the Judges, and the
Kings, it is manifest, that when they were severed, the spiritual was always
superior, as it may appear by the commandment of almighty God to Moses,
when he bad h m take Iosue, Number. 17.
and lay his hands upon him before Eleazar the Priest, and all the multitude,
and give him part of his glory, and that Eleazar should consult with God all
the affairs of Iosue, concluding Ad verbum illius egredietur, etc. according
to his word ( that is to say, the word of Eleazar) Iosue shall go out, and
shall go in, and all the children of Israel with him, and the rest of the
multitude. Wherein Theodoret observes, Theoderet. q 48. in Number.
that God commanded Moses to distribute his honor, or dignity betwixt
Eleazar, and Iosue, yet so, that Iosue should always learn of Eleazar, what
he was to do; whereby it appears, that Iosue was to be directed by Eleazar
in all affairs touching the civil government, which is sufficiently expressed
by those words, Ad verbum illius egredietur, and ingredietur, Iosue shall go
out, and in at the word of Eleazar.

26 But truly I am ashamed to see the extreme boldness of this my unlearned
Adversary, when I call to mind what silly arguments he has scraped together
to make it, forsooth, manifest by the Law of God in the Old Testament, that
the spiritual power was then the supreme power on earth, and might and did
chastise Princes temporally. For this very text of holy Scripture, which Mr.
Fitzherbert brings to prove, that Eleazar was Superior to Iosue, learned
Abulensis does interpret clean contrary, Abulensis q. ^6. in c. 3. Iosue.
and brings it not once or twice, but many times to prove, that in the old
Testament the Priests were subject to the temporal Princes, for that Eleazar
was inferior and subject to Iosue; Iosue says Abulensis, expounding those
words, and do thou command the Priests, etc. was not only the Captain of the
people, but also of the Priests, although he was neither a Priest, nor a
Leuite, but of the Tribe of Ephraim, as it appears, Number. cap. 13. and he did
command not only the inferior Priests, of whom it is spoken in this place,
but also the high Priest, as it appears, Number. 27. where it is said, for him
if any thing be to be done, Eleazar the Priest shall consult the Lord: At his
word ( to wit at the word of Iosue) shall he ( to wit Eleazar) and all the
children of Israel go out, and shall go in. And the cause hereof is this, for
that in the Old Testament the Secular and Ecclesiastical, or the Priestly,
and Regal Jurisdictions were not distinct, as they are now, although the
offices of the Priests and Levites were altogether distinct from the actions
Aboperibus.
of the Lay men: whereupon the Priests, when they offended, might be put to
death by the King, as the Lay men might, etc.

27 But some will say (says the same Abulensis) Q. 2. in cap. 14. Iosue.
that the state of Eleazar was more honorable, because he was the high Priest,
and Iosue was the Prince of the people, but the state of Priests was greater
then the state of Lay men, as the Pope is more excellent then the Emperor, or
Kings. But it is to be answered, that this is false. For the state of Priests
in the Old Testament was not more excellent, then the state of Kings, but the
Priests were judged by Kings, and not only concerning Kings, but also Iosue,
who was no King, was greater then the high Priest, as it appears, Number. cap.
27. where it is said, that Eleazar the high Priest, and every one shall at the
commandment of Iosue go in and go out, that is shall do whatsoever they
ought to do: Therefore Iosue was Superior, because to command is an act of a
Superior.

28 And again the said Abulensis Q. 48. in cap. 27. Number.
writes thus, At his word he shall go in, and shall go out, that is, Eleazer
the Priest shall serve at the commandment of Iosue, by doing whatsoever he
shall command. For to go out, Number. 27. verse. 17.
and go in, is by the manner of speech taken for every work. So it was taken
above, that God would put in authority over the Israelites a man, who should
go out and go in before them, that is, should do whatsoever ought to be done
before his people, and in all things to be before them commanding and
instructing. But some may take to go in, and to go out, for to go into the
Sanctuary to consult the Lord for Iosue; because it was said above, that
whatsoever was to be done, Eleazar should consult the Lord for Iosue. And in
this place it is added, that at his commandment he ought to do this, to wit,
that whenever Eleazar should be commanded to consult the Lord for Iosue, he
must be subject to do it. But this sense cannot stand, because Eleazar did not
go into the Sanctuary to consult the Lord within the Sanctuary putting on
his Priestly vestements, but by the rationale, and Ephod he did consult the
Lord, as it has been declared. Also it can not stand, because it is not
spoken only of Eleazar, that he shall go in and go out at the commandment
of Iosue, but also of all the children of Israel; but they did not go in to
consult the Lord for Iosue, therefore the first sense must stand. Yet it is to
be considered that Iosue, because he was the Secular Prince, is preferred here
directly before the high Priest, so that Eleazar was bound to obey Iosue in all
things, which he should command, as likewise all the rest of the people; and so
it was in the time of Moses, who was not a Priest, (to wit, by ordination and
Prelacie) yet Aaron, who was the high Priest, did obey him, who was the Prince
of the people. And so it was in all the old Testament, that the high Priests
were subject to the Kings etc. Thus Abulensis.

29 And thus you see, that this learned man understands those words of holy
Scripture, Ad verbum eius etc. At his word he shall go out and shall go in,
in the clean contrary sense, then wherein Mr. Fitzherbert does expound them,
and yet forsooth it is manifest out of this place, says he, that when the
dignities spiritual and temporal were disioyned in distinct and several
persons, as in the time of Iosue, the spiritual was always superior. But
secondly I will go farther with Mr. Fitzherbert, and grant him only for
Disputations sake, that those words are so to be understood, that at the word
of Eleazar, Iosue shall go out, and go in, and not, that Eleazar at the word of
Iosue shall go out, and go in, yet from thence it can not rightly be
concluded, that Iosue was subject to Eleazar in temporals, but only in
spirituals: for that to consult the Lord, and declare to Iosue and the people
the commandment of God, when any difficulty should arise, yea and to command
Iosue, and the people to obey his declaration, and to follow that, which God
had revealed, which Theodoret does only affirm, was not a temporal, but a
mere spiritual thing as before I declared out of Abulensis. Abulens. q. 11.
in cap. 33. Exodi.
Neither can my Adversary deny, but that Iosue did succeed Moses in the
temporal government, and therefore unless he will deny, as I think he dare
not, that Aaron the high Priest was subject to Moses in temporals, and might
be punished by him temporally, if he should transgress the law of God, he can
not with any probability deny, but that Eleazar the high Priest was also in
temporals subject to Iosue, who succeeded Moses in the temporal government,
and that he might be punished by him temporally, if he should offend against
the law of God.

30 The next argument of Mr. Fitzherbert is also as weak as the former. Also
the holy Scripture, says he, Nu. 8. page 7^ Iosue 19.
declaring how the Land of Promise was divided, sets it down in this
manner: Hae sunt possessiones etc. These are the possessions, which Eleazar the
Priest, and Iosue the son of Nun, and the Princes of the families and of the
tribes of the children of Israel divided by lot in Silo etc. Thus says the
Scripture giving the pre-eminence in the division of the land to the high
Priest before the temporal Prince.

31 But this argument proves at the most, that the spiritual Priesthood is
in worth, dignity and nobility more excellent, then the temporal
Sovereignty, but it does not prove, that Priests are in temporal
Sovereignty greater then temporal Princes. As likewise Cardinal Bishops have
the precedence and pre-eminence before Cardinal Priests, and Cardinal Priests
before Cardinal Deacons, and a Cardinal who is first created has the
precedence and pre-eminence before an other Cardinal, who is afterward
created, yet from hence it cannot be concluded, that one Cardinal is greater
in authority then another, or that one Cardinal has power to command and
punish another.

32 Also learned Abulensis expounding those words of holy Scripture, Iosue 14.
This is it which the children of Israel possessed in the land of Canaan, which
Eleazar the Priest, and Iosue the son of Nun, and the princes of the families
by the tribes of Israel gave to them etc. answers this argument at large.
Here, says he, are related the persons dividing the land of the nine tribes,
Abulens. q. 1. and 2. in cap. 14. Iosue.
and a half, to wit, Eleazar, Iosue, and the ancients or elders of Israel.
Wherein it is to be considered that Moses alone before the passage of Jordan,
divided the land of two tribes and a half, although Eleazar the Priest, and
the multitude of the Israelites, to wit, the Princes of the multitude, did
assist him, as it appears Number. 32. and if he had lived, none other had
divided the land. But when he was dead, there did succeed other diuiders: and
it was not given to Iosue, as the only diuider, because God would not give to
any one after the death of Moses all this power, as he had given to Moses,
for that he would not appoint any one equal to him. Therefore before the death
of Moses he caused, that there should be assigned diuiders of the land of
Canaan, whereof the principal power he gave to Iosue, as it appears Deuter.
cap. 3. and 31. to wit, that Iosue should take the land from the hands of the
enemies, and he should divide it by lots. But there were given other coadiutors
of every tribe, and Eleazar was given. For Eleazar the high Priest is put as a
helper of Iosue in all things, as it appears Number. 27. And Eleazar is put here
in the first place, not for that he was the more worthy either for state, or
holiness. Iosue did sufficiently excel, seeing that he was greatly beloved of
God, and God did speak unto him very often, which is not apparent of Eleazar.

33 Neither was the state of Priests in the old Testament more excellent, then
the state of Kings, but Priests were judged by Kings, and this not only
concerning Kings, but also Iosue, who was not a King, was greater then the high
Priest, as it appears Number. cap. 27. where it is said, that Eleazar the high
Priest, and every one shall at the commandment of Iosue go in, and go out,
that is, shall do whatsoever they ought to do. Therefore Iosue was the
greater, because to command is an act of the greater. Yet Eleazar is here put
before, because Samuel the writer of this book would observe the order of the
writing of Moses, But when Moses described the diuiders of the land of
Canaan, he put Eleazar before Iosue, and all the Israelites, as it appears
Number. 34. and therefore he did here keep the same order. Thus Abulensis. And
the cause why Moses did prefer Eleazar before Iosue may be easily gathered
out of the same Abulensis q. 1. in cap. 27. Number. and q. 42.
, for that Eleazar was then the high Priest, and in that respect most honored
among the people next to Moses. Whereupon both Moses and Eleazar did sit to
judge great causes, both of them also did number the people, Cap. 26. Number.
as it appears in the former chapter, and this honor did appertain to all
the high Priests etc. But Iosue was then a minister and servant of Moses, and
was not the chief temporal Prince of the people, but after Moses death,
although Moses in his life time did by Gods commandment appoint him to be his
successor in the temporal government of the people.

34 The next argument of Mr. Fitzherbert is all one with the former. And when
the daughters of Salphaad, says he, Iosue 17.
demanded their inheritance, venerunt, says the Scripture in conspectu etc.
they came into the presence of Eleazar, and of Iosue the son of Nun, and of
the Princes, wherein you see also that as Iosue, who was the chief temporal
Prince, is preferred before the other Princes, so is also the chief Priest
preferred before Iosue. Thus far in my Supplement etc. But why Eleazar the
high Priest was named in the first place before Iosue the temporal Prince, I
have showed before out of Abulensis, and from hence it does only follow that
the state or office of the high Priest, which was to consult the Lord in
doubtful matters, and to be the chief minister in the sacrifices and worship
of God, was in worth, dignity or nobility more excellent then the temporal
state, or Princedome, albeit Abulensis, as you have seen, does deny, that the
state of the Priesthood, in the old law, was more honorable and excellent
then of the temporal Princedome, about which I will not contend with
Abulensis, for that I think he differs from me only in words, yet from
hence it can not be concluded, that the temporal Prince in the old law was in
temporal affairs inferior or subject to the high Priest, but only in
spiritual causes, which is not at this time the question betwixt Mr.
Fitzherbert and me.

35 The last argument also, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings out of the old law
before the institution of the Kings of Israel, is as silly as any of the
former, nu. 9. page 73.
and the most that it proves also is that the authority and office of the
high Priest is more noble, then the authority and office of the temporal
Prince. Thus far, says he, in my Supplement; where having also Nu. 23. Leu.
4. Philo. l. de victimis Theod. in Leu. Procop. in Leu. Magdeb. cent. 1 l. 1.
c. 7. col. 257. Calu Instit. l. 4. c. 6 ss. 12.
proved the pre-eminence of the Priest above the Prince by the difference of
their Sacrifices (according to the opinion of Philo the Jew. Theodoret and
Procopius Gazaeus, and confirmed it by the testimony and confession even of
the Magdeburgenses, and Calvin himself, I proceeded to the consideration of
the Kings in the old Testament, and whether there was any change, or diminution
of the authority of the high Priest by their institution, to which purpose I
said thus. This being so by the ordinance of almighty God himself, and this
law being continued in full force without any alteration or change, during the
government of Moses, Iosue and the Judges, it is to be considered, whether the
same was changed, or any way altered afterward, at the institution of the
Kings; I mean, whether the Kings were any way exempted from this law, and had
Superiority over the high Priest and Clergy, as our Adversaries do absurdly
affirm, that they had etc.

36 But first what is this to the purpose? The spiritual Pastor has
pre-eminence in dignity and nobility over the temporal Prince, will he
therefore from hence infer, that the spiritual Pastor has power and
authority over the temporal Prince even in temporal affairs? as though
because the Goldsmith has in nobility and excellency pre-eminence above the
Cobbler, therefore we may conclude, that the Goldsmith has power and authority
over the Cobbler. Secondly, neither from the difference of the Sacrifices can
there sufficiently be gathered any pre-eminence, especially in authority above
the temporal Prince in temporal affairs. For although it be ordained Leuit.
4. that a calfe should be offered for the Priest, and a goat for the Prince,
who should offend through ignorance, yet this difference of sacrifices may be
appointed, not for that the Priest has any pre-eminence either in dignity, or
authority in temporal affairs above the temporal Prince, but for that, as
well observes Mr. John Barclay, Cap. 15. 4.
the offense of the Priest sinning through ignorance, is either greater then of
the Prince, and therefore to be purged by a more worthy Sacrifice, or that the
Priest in Ecclesiastical affairs has pre-eminence above the Prince, which no
man denies. And what man of learning would now conclude, that the Priests the
new law have any temporal power over Kings, for that a greater pen^^ is
enjoined to them, if they offend through ignorance, then to temporal Kings, or
that in Churches and Ecclesiastical rites they are the first, and do first
communicate?

37 Wherefore Abulensis upon this place does refer the difference of these
sacrifices not to any pre-eminence of the high Priest above the temporal
Prince; but to the greatness of the offense committed by them both. Abul. q.
12. in cap. 4. Leuit.
You must know, says he, that these sacrifices are appointed greater,
according as the sins for which they were offered were greater: but the sin
of the high Priest, taking it in the same kind of sin is always greater then
the sin of the Prince of the people, or then the sin of all the people;
therefore the sin of the high Priest did require the greatest Sacrifice,
excelling all other Sacrifices for sins, or at leastwise equal to the
greatest Sacrifices. Now in what manner and for what causes the sin of the
high Priest was greater both in extension and intension then the sin of the
temporal Prince, or of all the people, Abulensis does declare at large in that
place.

38 Thirdly, if Mr. Fitzherbert had examined that place of holy Scripture
himself, and not barely taken that argument from Card. Bellarmine, he might
easily have seen, that the same sacrifice of a calfe with the same ceremonies
was appointed to be offered also for the sin of all the people; So that if
this argument taken from the difference of the Sacrifices were good to prove a
pre-eminence of the high Priest above the Prince, because for the high Priest,
if he should offend through ignorance, a calfe was to be offered, and for the
Prince only a goat, it would also prove, that the people were equal in
pre-eminence to the high Priest, and that they had pre-eminence above their
King, or Prince, for that for the offense also of the people was to be offered
the same sacrifice of a calfe, and for the offense of the Prince only a goat.

39 Fourthly, here is no mention made in this place of Kings, but only of
Princes: If a Prince, says the Scripture, does sin, and by ignorance do of
many things one, that by the law of our Lord is forbidden, and afterward
understands his sin he shall offer an host to our Lord a bucke of the
goats without spotte. Now at this time the Israelites had no King, but 400.
years after. For the better understanding whereof, you must observe, as well
declares Abulensis, q. 8. in c. 21. Leuit.
that Moses was the first Prince of the people, under whom all the people of
Israel did depart out of Egypt, yet Moses was not a King, but a Captain or a
Leader of the people. Yea he was not Dominus, a Lord, or ruler says Abulensis,
q. 19. in cap. 8. Iudic.
but only, as making laws to the Jews on the behalf of GOD, and he
commanded nothing to the Israelites, as from his own will, but as from GOD:
whereupon he was not called a Lord, but a Doctor of the Israelites. And it is
apparent, that if he had been a Lord of the Israelites, or as it were a King,
it had belonged to him to bestow dignities, by instituting and deposing, and
none of the people could resist him, or accuse him of this, at leastwise, de
iure, by right, and if he were accused de facto, he was not bound to answer,
but he might repress those who opposed against him by answering nothing: and
yet Core with a hundred and fifty men did oppose against him: And also the
three Princes of the tribe of Reuben, to wit, Dathan, Abiron, and Hon for the
high Priesthood, saying that he gave it unjustly to Aaron, to wit, in giving
all things to his kindred; and he purged himself, saying, in this you shall
know, that our Lord has sent me to do all things that you see, Number. 16.
and that I have not forged them of my own mind, if they shall die the
accustomed death of men, our Lord has not sent me: Also before in the same
Chapter Core said to Moses and Aaron, Let it suffice you, that all the
multitude consists of holy ones, and our Lord is among them, why lift you up
your selves above the people of our Lord? But if Moses had been a Lord, or a
King, no man could have said this unto him, for that he who was a Lord, might
have lifted himself up; yea there is no greater lifting up, then to be a Lord.
Thus Abulensis.

40 And although Moses alone did judge the people without the help of any
other Judges who were subordained to him, until Iethro father in law to Moses
came unto him into the desert of Sin near to the mount Sinai (which happened
either in the end of the first year, or in the beginning of the second since
their departure out of Egypt, after that the law was given to Moses in the
mount Sinai) yet afterward by the advice of Iethro, who perceiving that Moses
could not long sustain so great a burden as to judge himself alone the whole
people of Israel, sitting in judgment from morning until night, he was
persuaded to impart the burden thereof to others, and so choosing substantial
men out of all Israel he appointed them Princes of the people, Tribunes, and
Centurians, and Quinquagenarians and Deanes, who judged the people at all
times, and whatsoever was of greater difficulty, they referred to Moses, they
themselves judging only the easier causes.

41 But because these Judges, who were all subordinate to Moses, judged only
of smaller causes, and all matters of difficulty were referred to Moses, he
was nevertheless overmuch troubled, and therefore not long after at the
sepulcher of Concupiscence, Number. 11.
almighty God at the request of Moses appointed seventy men of the ancients
of Israel, whom Moses had chosen, to assist him, to whom he gave also the
spirit of prophecy, and to them were committed those things, which did
peculiarly belong to Moses, to wit, that they should judge of great matters as
Moses did (for the jurisdiction of the 70. Judges appointed by the advice of
Iethro, who judged the smaller matters, did still remain) and also that they
should consult our Lord, and give answers concerning the questions of the law,
as Moses did, Abul. q. 24. in c. 11. nu.
and so that Jurisdiction, which before by the advice of Iethro did only
belong to Moses, was now by the commandment of God given to seventy
ancients, or Elders, who also were not Priests or Levites, but Laymen chosen
out of the ancients of Israel, Abul q. 61.
and yet they had Jurisdiction both in spiritual and temporal causes: Abul.
q. 24.
And after these seventy men were appointed to help Moses he never
complained in all the forty years that the Israelites were in the
wilderness, that he was burdened with the multitude of so many causes of the
people. Abul. q. 23. Number. 27.


42 Now to succeed Moses, and to be the Captain, and Prince of all the
people God appointed Iosue the son of Nun, Moses yet living. And he was
truly a Prince of the people, for at his commandment, not only the people, but
also Eleazar the high Priest were moved: yet he was not a King, but a Prince,
or Captain; neither also had he authority to judge, says Abulensis, but
Judges were appointed otherwise. Neither is this against that, which God
commanded Numer. 27. Abulensis q. 19. in cap. 8. Iudic.
that as well Eleazar, as all Israel, were moved at the commandment of Iosue,
because this is to be understood concerning those things, which appertained to
war, and because all, or the chief time of Iosue was in making war by
subduing the people of Chanaan, therefore the power of Iosue was great, Yet he
was never called Lord, or King.

43 After the death of Iosue, God raised other Princes of the people, who were
called Judges, or Saviors, Iudic. 2. and 3. neither were they Kings, but their
Princedome, or principality was lesser, neither were they called Lords, as it
appears Iudic. 8. when all the men of Israel said to Gedeon, have thou
dominion over us, and thy son, and thy sons son, because thou have
delivered us from the hand of Madian. To whom he said, I will not domineere,
or have dominion over you, neither shall my son have dominion over you, but
the Lord shall have dominion over you: and yet Gedeon was a Captain in the
wars, and a Judge of the people of Israel: and this principality, or
government of the Judges did continue for a long time together, to wit, for
above 340. years, to the time of Samuel, who was the last of the Judges, in
whose time the Israelites desired a King, as other nations had.

44 After the Judges the Kingly government, or principality did succeed. For
the people desired of Samuel a King, and God commanded, that he should appoint
Saul to be a King over them: and this principality or Kingly government, did
endure a long time, to wit, to the captivity of Babylon, when Sedechias was
King. 4. Reg. 45. After the return of the Jews from Babylon they had no King,
but the high Priests, as Abulensis says, were the Princes of the people: and
this principality continued until the birth of Christ. Abulensis q. 91 in
cap. ^. Math.
Nevertheless for a certain time before the Nativity of Christ the high
Priests, who were Princes of the people did take the Kingly name, and diadem,
and they did continue so until the time of Herod the stranger, who killed his
father in law Hircanus, who was the high Priest, and King, and by the power of
the Romans was made himself the King of the Jews, and at this time Christ
our Savior was borne: and how the authority of Kings was greater then of the
Judges, See beneath. nu. 52. and seq.

46 Lastly, the Jews not only in the time of their Kings, but also of Moses,
Iosue, and the Judges had other Princes, who had great authority and
privileges among the people of Israel, Q 5, in cap. 5. 1. Paralip. See
Abulensis q. 6. and 7. in c. 5. 2. Paralip.
of which their rights, and privileges Abulensis treats at large. For all
the people of Israel were divided into tribes, families, and houses, all which
are names of companies, or congregations, and they differ in this, that one
company is greater, an other less, and one does contain, or is contained in
the other. And first all the company or congregation of the Israelites is
divided into twelve parts, which are called twelve tribes, for that all the
company of the Israelites does descend from the twelve sons of Jacob or
Israel: and in every one of these twelve tribes there was always one Prince;
So that in all Israel there were always twelve men, who were greater and more
noble then the rest, who were called the twelve Princes of the tribes. Neither
were these made Princes by election, or lot, but by birth, for always the
eldest son, that descended from the head or first Prince of the tribe by the
right line of the eldest sons, was called the Prince of all that tribe; So
that if he who was Prince or head of any tribe, as Judas, or Zabulon, had many
sons, the first borne, or eldest son of them was the Prince of all that
tribe: and so it always continued afterward, that always the eldest son of
the Prince of any tribe, was Prince of that tribe after his Fathers death.

47 Now in every tribe there were diverse families: for as every one of the
twelve sons of Jacob or Israel with all their progeny made a tribe so every
son of his twelve sons with all their progeny made a family. So that among
all the Israelites there were as many families, as every one of the sons of
Jacob had sons. As for example, because Ruben the eldest son of Jacob had
four sons, there were four families in the tribe of Ruben, and because
Simeon the second son of Jacob had six sons, there were six families in
the tribe of Simeon, and so proportionally of the rest: and every one of these
families had a Prince, who was always the eldest son of Jacob his second
sons, for he always descended from the first heads or Princes of the
families by the direct line of the eldest sons, and he was subject to the
Prince or head of the tribe, whereof he was: so that as the families were under
the tribes, so also the Princes of the families were under the Princes of the
tribes, and as many families as were in every tribe, so many Princes of
families the Prince of the tribe had under him.

Abulensis q. 51 in c. 2. Iosue.
48 Thirdly, a house was taken for a peculiar congregation of company of many
kinsmen under the same family, and it comprehends all the persons that
descend from the same father yet living, to wit, the sons, daughters and
grandchildren, although they have diverse oeconomies, or dwell in houses a part
from their parents: and yet sometimes a house is taken for the congregation of
all the tribes of Israel, and sometimes for one only tribe or family, as
Psalm. 113. Psalm. 113. verse 1. and 13. Arist. 1. Poli^. cap. 2.
he blessed the house of Israel, he blessed the house of Aaron: but most
strictly it is taken for a peculiar oeconomie consisting of husband, wife,
children, servants. And of these Princes of the tribes and families of Israel
the holy Scripture makes mention very often, especially in the books of
Numbers and of Iosue, 3. Reg. 8.1. Paralip. 5.7.15.26.27. and 2. Paralip. 1.
and 5.: and their dignity and privileges Abulensis declares q. 5. in cap.
5.1. Paral. and in cap. 5.2. Paralip. q 6. and 7. And of these Princes also,
who nevertheless were subject not only to the Kings of Israel, but also to
Moses, Iosue, and the Judges, may this place of holy Scripture be understood,
to wit, that a he goat should be offered for every such Prince offending
through ignorance.

49 Lastly, concerning those three Authors, which Mr. Fitzherbert has taken
from Card. Bellarmine, lib. 2 de Rom Pont. cap. 29. and in tract. contra
Guiliel. Barcl. cap. 15.
he might have seen their testimonies long before he wrote against me, fully
answered by Mr. John Barclay Aduersus Card. Bell. cap. 15.. 4.
. For Philo in that place does not speak of Kings, but of a Prince, and, which
is more, he affirms, that this honor of offering a greater sacrifice, to
wit, a calfe, was given to the high Priest not in regard of himself, but
because he was a minister of the people, doing public sacrifices in the name
of all the people. Besides, this authority of Philo only proves, that the
Priestly dignity was more noble, and excellent, then the Princely dignity,
whereof I do not now dispute. Neither does Theodoret speak of Kings, nor of
the power of the high Priest, but only of his dignity and excellency. God
commanded, says he, that the Priest who shall transgress the law shall
sacrifice a calfe without spot, but if all the people shall commit the like
crime, he appoints the like sacrifice to be offered, teaching how great the
dignity of the Priest is, whom he has made like, or equal to all the people:
but he commands a Prince that shall transgress the law, to offer not a
calfe, but a he goat; so far inferior to Priestly dignity is he to whom
corporal command is committed: But this is nothing else, but that, which S.
Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers do often
say, that the spiritual power is more noble, excellent, and worthy, then the
temporal, which no man now calls in question. But the authority of
Procopius Gazaeus is of far lesser force, both for that this Procopius, as
Card. Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Christo. cap 6.
and Antonius Posseuine In verbo Pr^copius.
do affirm, was a better Rhetorician, then a Divine, and also for that he
speaks not of Kings, but of a Prince, nor of authority, but of honor,
dignity, or reverence, which is due to Priests, but especially, although we
should grant him to speak of authority and also of Kings, for that he
prefers the people before the Prince, and also yields a reason thereof,
which is now flat heretical. For he does not say, that a Prince offending
shall offer a lesser sacrifice then a Priest, for that a Prince is inferior to
a Priest, in honor, dignity, or authority, although from hence he gathers
that the Priest and also the people are more honorable then the Prince, but,
for that a Prince, as soon as he shall pollute himself with sin does desist
to be a Prince, and falls from his dignity, which assertion is now condemned
in the Council of Constance among the articles of John Wicleffe, whereof the
15. article is this: Sess. 45.
He is no civil Lord, He is no Prelate, He is no Bishop, whilst he is in
mortal sin. The words of Procopius are these: It is to be noted, that the
Priest and the people do offer the same sacrifice, if they shall burden
themselves with sin, but a Prince does purge his sin with a distinct
sacrifice, because a Prince as soon as he shall pollute himself with sin,
does desist to be a Prince, and falls from his dignity. Therefore from
hence we may gather, that the Priest is more honorable then the Prince, also
that the people do excel in dignity the Prince.

50 But as touching his second inference, for of the first I have spoken
before, it is very untrue, that the people are superior to their absolute
Prince in dignity or authority: but contrariwise it is manifest, that a King
is superior and above the people, and the people inferior to their King: This
shall be the right of the King that shall reign over you says the holy
Scripture 1. Reg. 8. and in the same place the people said, there shall be a
King over us, and we will be as all nations; and blessed be the Lord my God,
said King David, Psalm. 143.
who subdueth my people under me: wherefore there is no doubt to be made, but
that the Jews were bound to obey the high Priest in spiritual matters, but
that all men were bound to obey the high Priest in temporal affairs, or that
the spiritual power was in the old law the supreme power not only in
excellency, nobility, or dignity, but also in authority, and chastised
Princes temporally, which Mr. Fitzherbert pretends here to make manifest,
this he neither has, nor ever will be able with any manifest proof to
convince. And thus you have seen, how insufficient are all the arguments,
which Mr. Fitzherbert has brought out of the old law before the institution of
the Kings of Israel, now you shall see how weak the rest of his arguments are,
which he brings out of the old law, since that the Israelites demanded of
Samuel to have a King over them, as other nations had.

51 But first of all Mr. Fitzherbert labors in vain to prove, that which
no man calls in question, to wit, that the authority of the high Priest in
the old Testament was neither changed, nor diminished by the institution of
Kings, but that as the Law of God delivered to the Jews by Moses did continue
in full force without any alteration, or change during the time of Moses, of
Iosue, and the Judges, so the same was not altered or changed afterward by the
institution of Kings, and that God did not change the form and course of the
Law in favor of Kings, or turned the same vpside down contrary to the course
of nature, as Mr. Fitzherbert avouches some of his Adversaries absurdly to
affirm. For it is a mere fiction, that by the institution of Kings, the Law
of Moses was altered, or the authority of the high Priest changed, or
diminished, or that the same superiority, which the high Priest, as he was high
Priest, had above the temporal state, to wit, in spiritual affairs, before
the institution of Kings, did not continue in the high Priest, after that the
Kings of Israel were instituted. And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert faigneth absurd
opinions to have occasion to impugn them. For the institution of Kings did not
alter, or diminish at all the spiritual authority of the high Priests, but it
did only change the manner of the temporal government, and it caused, that the
supreme temporal authority, or dominion, was only in one man, and the
temporal government to be simply Regal, or Monarchical, whereas before the
institution of Kings it was not always so.

52 For albeit Moses and Iosue were appointed by God to be Judges, and
Leaders, or Captains of the people of Israel, and they had greater authority,
then the other Judges had, yet they were not properly Kings, neither had they,
speaking properly, true Regal dominion, and authority, as Abulensis Q. 19. in
ca. 8. Iudic.
does well observe. And as for the other Judges of Israel, their authority was
far inferior to Regal authority, or dominion. For as the same Abulensis Q.
5. in prolog. D. Hicron. in librum Iosue and q. 7. and 12. in Prolog. lib.
Iudic.
does also well observe, there was a great difference betwixt Kings, and Judges
both in power and jurisdiction. For the power of Kings was most ample: But the
Judges had over the people no authority to command as due to them by
jurisdiction, but they were only industrious men for wars, and for giving
counsel, and by their advice the people were directed in all things, yet they
had over the people no other authority then the people would give them, and
the people did obey them, as it were freely, when they did see, that they
commanded, or counseled nothing but that which was just: whereupon they were
not called Lords, or did they rule, reign, or had proper dominion over the
people, but they did only govern or judge: because Lords, or they that
reign, and have proper dominion, or Seigniorie, are those, who do whatsoever
they will if it be not against law, or reason, and the subjects are bound to
obey them in all things, such are Kings: but the power of the Judges did extend
to no other thing, then to that which was written in the law, in so much
that Kings might do whatsoever the law does not forbid; but Judges might
only do that, which the law commanded: So that the power of those Judges
was but little.

53 First, because it was given them freely by the people, neither had they
more authority then the people gave them, and they were chiefly chosen to make
war against the enemies, for which cause they were called Saviors. And
although after they had overcome their enemies, the people had no great need
of them, yet by the consent of the people they remained afterward as long as
they lived in their authority to judge. And if any one object, that the power
of the Judges was not given them by man but by God, for as is written Iudic.
3. God raised them a Savior called Aod: I answer, says Abulensis, that the
Judges were made by the election of the people, and from the people they
received a limited power, but they were not chosen by the people always after
one manner. For some were made Judges, because God commanded them, that they
should fight for the people; so was Barac: For the prophetess Debbora told
him on the behalf of God, that he should fight against Sisera Iudic. 4. and
yet after he had won the battle, he was not yet a Judge, or Prince of the
Israelites, but because the people saw, that God would deliver them by the
means of Barac, they chose him for their Judge. So also it happened concerning
Gedeon. For the Angel of our Lord did appear unto him, and commanded him, that
he should go to deliver Israel from the hand of Madian Iudic. 6. And when he
victoriously finished the war, the Israelites took him for their Judge;
neither would they only have made him their Judge, but also their Lord and
King, as it appears, Iudic. 8.

54 Others were taken for Judges not by the commandment, but by the
instigation of God, to wit, because when the Israelites were oppressed with
these calamities, and vvanted a Savior, God gave his spirit to certain men,
by which they were courageous, wise, and most fit for vvarres, whom the
Israelites seeing did take for their Judges, and then God was said to have
raised to them Saviors: So it is to be understood of Hothoniel, and Aod Iudic.
3. Other Judges were made only by the will of the people, to wit, because
when they were in distress, they inquired who was a fit man among them to be
Captain in their wars; And sometimes they took not those that were
virtuous, but only who were exercised in war. So Iephte was chosen Iudic.
11. who was a Prince of thieves, whom the Israelites, because they saw him
fit for war, desired to be their Captain and Judge. And sometimes the Judges
were made only by favor, and as it were by violence of the people, as was
Abimelech the son of Gedeon, Iudic. 9. to whom also by the sedition of the
Sichimites was given the title of a King. And when it is objected, that God
raised a Savior, I answer says Abulensis, that it is not to be understood,
that God commanded any one to be Judge, by creating him, and giving him a
certain manner of authority, but that God did incite the Israelites by some
one of the ways aforesaid to make some their Judges, and yet afterward it
depended upon the will of the people to receive them, or reject them, and to
give them so much authority, as they pleased.

55 Secondly, the authority of the Judges was not derived by succession to
their posterity, but it remained in the power of the people, one Judge being
dead, to choose another, or to choose none at all: But to the greatness of
authority it appertains to have power to derive it to their posterity; as
those things are properly ours, concerning which we may appoint others to
inherit, for in other things we are rather Administrators, or Procuratours,
then Lords, or having dominion, and Seigniorie. And the difference of this
power to be a Judge from that, which by succession is transferred to
posterity, is manifest by the example of Gedeon; for when Gedeon was a Judge
in Israel, the Israelites being desirous to exalt him to greater honor, for
the great victory he had against the Madianites, said unto him, have thou
dominion, or Seignorie over us, and thy son, and thy sons son, that is,
all of thy posterity, but he being contented with the principality, or
pre-eminence of a Judge, would not accept thereof, saying, I will not have
dominion, or Seigniory over you, to wit, by exercising the power of a Lord, or
King, neither shall my son have dominion, or Seigniory over you, but the Lord
shall have dominion, or Seigniory over you, and nevertheless he kept the
principality of a Judge, so long as he lived. Thirdly, the Judges could not
impose tributes, or other taxations upon the people, but they lived upon their
own proper revenues, as other private persons, except those things which by
right appertained to them in war: because it was a custom among all nations,
that in war a certain peculiar part of the spoil should belong to the
Prince, or chief Captain, as it appears by the decrees, dis. 1. cap. ius
militare, etc.

56 Fourthly, the Judges were not Lords, neither had they any power, dominion
or Seigniorie over the people, but they were only Captains or Leaders, for as
much as concerned those things, which belonged to their office, whereof I will
speak beneath. And in this there was a difference betwixt Kings and Judges:
for Kings were Lords of the people of Israel, and they had power to do
whatsoever they would, which was not against the law; therefore they called the
Israelites their servants, as Saul called David his servant, 1. Reg. 22. and
David called the Israelites his servants, 2. Reg. 20. but the Judges were not
called Lords, as it appears by those former words of Gedeon, refusing to have
that degree of principallitie, according to which Princes are called Lords, and
said to have dominion or Seigniorie over the people. Neither were these called
Judges of judging, Abulens. q. 11. in Praefat. lib. Iudic.
but as a Judge is taken for a name of a certain little principality. For
there is this difference betwixt a Lord and a Judge; for a Lord signifies one,
who has simply power, dominion or Seigniorie, and he has power to do what he
will, although it be not ordained by the law: But a Judge is he, who has not a
liberty to command, but he can only command that, which the laws command,
and he has a power given him to define according to the law, and therefore he
who is subject to a Judge, is not subject to the man, but to the law, but he
that is subject to a Lord, is subject to the man. And because the principality
of these Judges or Saviors, was such, that they could do nothing according to
their own wills, as Kings and Lords could do, but that only, which reason,
and the law did dictate, they were called Judges, because Judges have the like
principality.

57 Fifthly and lastly the office to which the Judges were assumed, was to fight
for the people against their enemies, as it is manifest by the institution of
the Judges. For Iudic. 2. it is said, that whenever the Israelites were in
the hands of their enemies, God raised up Judges, that should deliver them. And
the same also is evident by the peculiar institutions of the Judges: for it is
said of Hothoniel, who was the first Judge, that when the Israelites were
oppressed by the King of Mesopotamia, God raised them up a Savior called
Hothoniel Iudic. 3. and the like is said of Aod in the same chapter; and of
Barac chap. 4. and of Gedeon chap. 6. and of Iephte chap. 11. and so of the
rest: and concerning the wars these Judges had full power, for all things
whatsoever belonged to warfare were at their dispose, and in this all the
Israelites did obey them, as in all wars the chief Captains have this full
power concerning military discipline. But the wars being ended, these men
remained as it were private persons, to wit, that they had not any Dominion or
authority: but yet they were always very much honored by the people, and
sometimes the government of Cities was committed to their charge, that they
might dispose of them as Princes. So Iair had thirty sonnet, who were Princes
of thirty Cities Iudic. 10. But to judge of causes was not directly the office
of these, albeit sometimes it was committed to them, especially when they were
Prophets, and prudent men. So was Samuel, who was the last Judge of Israel, and
every year he went about all Israel, and judged the people in three places, to
wit, in Bethel, Galgatha and Masphath. Thus writes Abulensis, who also
affirms, that although Moses and Iosue were greater then these Judges, for
that they were chosen and appointed by God, not only to bc Captains of the
Israelites in the time of war, but also to be their Judges and Governors,
yet he denies, that Moses himself was properly a Lord or King of the
Israelites, but rather that he was chosen to be their Lawmakers and Prince, not
by manner of reigning, or having properly dominion, but rather Abulensis q. 8.
in cap. 6.2. Paralip.
per modum iudicantis, by manner of judging.

58 And by this you may plainly see, in what manner the temporal government of
the Jews, and not the spiritual, was altered by the institution of Kings: for
that the supreme temporal power or dominion, which before their institution
did reside in the whole multitude, or people of Israel, was after their
institution wholly translated to the King: But that the course of the law was
changed, and turned vpside down in favor of Kings, or that the spiritual
government of the high Priests was altered by the institution of Kings, is a
mere fiction. For the same spiritual authority and superiority that the
Priests had before the institution of Kings, they kept also after their
institution, and as all the people of Israel, in whom the supreme spiritual
power did before reside, were nevertheless subject in spirituals to the high
Priests; so also were Kings afterward subject also in spirituals to the same
high Priests, although in temporals they were supreme, and the high Priests
subject and inferior to them.

59 And therefore to avoid tediousness I will omit to relate Mr. Fitzherberts
text, which he sets down, in the three next pages to prove, that the law of
God was not altered and turned vpside down by the institution of Kings, and
that the institution of Regal authority did not work any alteration of the
divine law touching the authority of the high Priest, and matters belonging to
Religion, nor brought any prejudice to the Ecclesiastical dignity, nor did
derogate from the obedience due to the high Priest in matters mere spiritual,
nor from the Sovereignty of the spiritual power and function in things
spiritual: for of this there is no controversy for ought I know, albeit Mr.
Fitzherbert says, that his Adversaries, but who they are I know not, neither
does he express who they be, do make question about the same. And therefore
supposing that the high Priest retained the same spiritual power, authority
and dignity after the institution of Kings, which he had before their
institution, I will proceed to the examining of Mr. Fitzherberts arguments,
which he brings to prove, that in the old law the high Priests were superior
not only in dignity and nobility, but also in power and authority to the
Kings, as well in temporal as spiritual causes, and that the Kings might be
chastised temporally by the high Priest.

SECT. II.
Wherein all Mr. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the old law since the
institution of Kings are at large examined; and first his argument taken from
the authority of Priests and Prophets to create, anoint, chastise and depose
Kings is disprooued; secondly, Widdringtons answers to the examples of Queen
Athalia deposed by Ioiada the high Priest, and of King Ozias deposed by Azarias
the high Priest, are confirmed, and whatsoever D. Schulckenius obiecteth
against the said answers is related and answered, and thirdly, it is showed,
that the authority of S. Chrysostom brought by my Adversary, to confirm the
example of King Ozias makes nothing for him, but against him, and that in
urging this authority he deals fraudulenty, peruerteth S. Chrysostomes
meaning, and also contradicts Card. Bellarmine.

THe first argument, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings out of the old law since
the institution of the Kings of Israel, is taken from their institution
creation, and unction. For almighty God, says Mr. Fitzherbert, nu. 14.15. page
76.
ordained that the Kings should receive their very institution, creation and
unction from the high Priests and Prophets. Whereupon it follows from the
undoubted maxim of the Apostle, Hebr. 7.
that the said Priests and Prophets were superior to Kings: for sine vlla
contradictione, says the Apostle, quod minus est a meliore benedicitur;
without any contradiction the less is blessed by the better: which argument S.
Chrysostom uses in like manner saying, Chrysostom. de verbis Isa. hom.
Deus ipsum Regale caput etc. God has subjected the very head of the King to
the hands of the Priest, teaching us, that this Prince (to wit, the Priest) is
greater then the other, for that which is less receives benediction from that
which is more worthy. So he, who urges also to the same end, that the Kings
in the old Testament were anointed by Priests, and infers thereupon, that
mayor hic principatus, the principality of the Priest is greater then the
Kings. Ibid. hom. 4.
Whereby he also acknowledges, that the Priests of the old Testament were
superior to Kings. And what marvel, seeing that the said Kings were not
only created and anointed, but also chastised, yea deposed sometimes by
Prophets and Priests? 1. Reg. 9. Ibid. cap. 16. 4. Reg. 9. 3. Reg. 19. 4. Reg.
11.
Samuel first created and anointed Saul, King of the Jews, and after deposed
him for his offenses, and anointed David to reign in his place. In like manner
the kingdom of Israel was translated from the children of Achab to Iehu by the
Prophet Elizaeus; and the kingdom of Syria from Benhadab to a subject and
servant of his called Hazael, by the Prophet Elias. Also in the kingdom of
Judah the wicked Queen Athalia etc.

2 But this argument only proves that, which is not in controversy betwixt
me, and my Adversaries, to wit, that the Priests, and Prophets were superior
to Kings in spiritual affairs, and also that the spiritual power is more
noble, excellent, and worthy then the temporal, as spiritual things do in
worth, dignity, and nobility excel temporal things, For to anoint, create,
institute, and depose Kings, in that manner as Kings in the old law were
anointed, created, and deposed by Priests, or Prophets were spiritual, and
not temporal actions. Qu. 38. in c. 1. lib. 3. Reg.
For the anointing of Kings was a religious ceremony and appertained to the
office of a Priest, especially when it was done with solemnity, and as well
observes Abulensis, it did directly belong to Priests, seeing that it was a
sacred thing, and sacred oil was powered upon them, the making and handling
whereof did belong only to Priests; yet sometimes it was done by Prophets for
want of Priests; to wit, when by no means it could be done by Priests, as when
it was secret, and unknown whom God would have to be anointed for King, for
if it were manifest, who was to be anointed, he was anointed by Priests; so
was Solomon, and afterward Ioas, and so it is to be thought of all others, who
were anointed, for that the kingdom did belong to them by hereditarie
succession: but sometimes it was unknown, who was to be anointed, to wit,
when one was anointed, to whom it did not appertain by right of succession,
and this was done by the commandment of God, for seeing that the will of God
was not made manifest but to the Prophets, it could only be known by them who
ought to be anointed, and that it might be done more secretly, it was done
by them: and so it was in all the aforesaid examples: for Saul was anointed
not by succession, seeing that he was the first King of Israel: David also was
not anointed by succession, for the children of Saul ought to succeed; Iehu
also who was not of the race of the Kings of Israel, and he was anointed to
overthrow the house of Achab: 4. Reg. cap. 9. 3. Reg. cap. 19.
and Asael was not of the issue of the Kings of Damascus, and he was anointed
by Elias to persecute the Israelites. Thus Abulensis.

3 So likewise the creation, institution, and deposition of Kings in that
manner as the aforesaid Kings were created, instituted and deposed, were
spiritual, not temporal actions. For the Prophets did not create, institute,
or depose Kings by their own proper authority, or by any ordinary power of
theirs, but only by an extraordinary power, as they were mere messengers, and
sent by God with a peculiar and extraordinary message, or embassage, to
create, institute, or depose the aforesaid Kings, whereupon they did not speak
in their own names, but in the person of almighty God, saying, this says the
Lord I have anointed thee to be King, or the Lord has sent me to anoint
thee to be King, or, the Lord has rejected thee that thou shall not be King,
and has delivered it to thy neighbor better then thy self: So that the
aforesaid creations, institutions, and depositions were only declarations of
the will of God, which without all doubt are spiritual actions. Neither from
hence can it be rightly concluded, that therefore the Priests of the old law
had authority to create, depose, or chastise Kings temporally, or that Kings
were subject to Priests in temporalls, because sometimes Prophets were sent by
God, as his messengers, to declare his will and to tell them, that God would
create, depose, or chastise them with temporal punishments.

4 And who would not blush to hear a man, who takes upon him to be learned,
and to be a teacher of others in such difficult and dangerous points of
Divinity, urge such pitiful arguments to prove matters of so great moment,
as is the dethroning of Kings, and absolute Princes, and the subiecting of them
to Priests in temporal affairs. A Priest has power to bless the King and
all the people, as it is usual at the end of Mass, therefore the King, and
all the people are subject to the Priest in temporal things, for without any
contradiction, says the Apostle, the less is blessed by the better. The
father has authority to bless his son, who is a King, and consequently
supreme in temporalls, therefore without doubt he is greater then his son
in temporalls. One of the Kings privy chamber is sent by the Kings express
order to declare to one, that it is his Majesty's pleasure to make him Lord
Chancelour, therefore without doubt one of the Kings privy chamber has
authority to make one Lord Chancelour. If God almighty had given to the
Priests, and Prophets of the old testament, authority to denounce to the King
or people concerning temporal affairs, as is the creation, or deposition of
King, and Princes, not only what God himself had revealed unto them, and
commanded them to denounce, but also what according to their own will and
judgment they thought fit, and convenient, then there might be drawn from
thence a good argument, to prove, that Kings were subject to the Prophets in
temporal affairs, but seeing that it was not lawful for the Prophets of the
old law in such cases to command, or denounce to the King, or people, but that
which by some clear and assured revelation God had commanded them to declare
and signify concerning such temporal affairs, it is manifest that no
colorable argument can be drawn from thence to prove, that the Priests or,
Prophets of the old law had authority to create, institute, depose, or punish
Kings temporally.

5 Neither does S. Chrysostom cited by my Adversary teach any other thing,
then that Kings are subject to Priests in spiritualls, and that the office of a
Priests is in worth, dignity, and nobility greater, and more excellent then
the office of a King, for that a King has power only over earthly things, but
a Priest over heavenly, to the Priest are committed souls, to the King bodies,
the King takes away the spots of the body, the Priest the spots of sins,
etc. But St. Chrysostom never meant, that Kings* were subject to Priessts and
Prophets in temporalls, or were to be punished by them temporally, but he
affirms the clean contrary, to wit, that Priests and Prophets are subject
to temporal Princes: Omnis anima, etc. Let every soul, says he, Hom. 23. in
c. 13. ad Romans
be subject to higher powers, albeit thou be an Apostle, albeit an Evangelist,
albeit a Prophet, or lastly whosoever thou be; for this subjection does not
overthrow piety, and he does not say simply, let him obey, but let him be
subject. And again S. Chrysostom affirms, In that place above cited by my
Adversary, and l. 2. de Sacer. unto med.
that a Priest has not so great power granted him to punish delinquents, and
to compel a man to change his evil manners, as a temporal Judge has, to
wit, by forcing him with temporal punishments, but only, by reproouing, and
giving a free admonition, not by raising arms, by using targets, by shaking a
lance by shooting arrows, by casting darts, but only says he again, by
reproouing and giving a free admonition.

6 Neither also can Mr. Fitzherbert sufficiently convince, that when David was
first anointed by Samuel, Saul was forthwith deprived of his Regal
authority, or right to reign, but only that David was instituted the future
King and heir apparent to the Crown, and to succeed him after his death; as
likewise when Solomon was anointed King, David was not thereby deprived of his
Regal authority, but only Solomon was declared to be the future King, and to
succeed David in the kingdom. But howsoever it be, it is little to the
present controversy, whether Saul, after David was anointed by Samuel, was
true King de facto, and de iure, or David King de iure, and Solomon de facto,
for that Samuel in that business was only a messenger of GOD, and did nothing
by his own proper authority, but only what GOD by a peculiar revelation did
command him to do. And so if almighty GOD should now in the new Testament by
any undoubted revelation command a Priest to deliver this message to such a
King, that for the sins he had committed, he would deprive him of his
kingdom, and give it to another mor virtuous then he, no man will deny, but
that this Priest hat good and full power and authority to do that message,
but from hence to argue an ordinary power to be in Priest, to give and take
away kingdoms were ridiculous, and unbeseeming a man but meanly learned.

7 The second argument, which M. Fitzherbert makes, is taken from the example
of Queen Athalia. Also in the kingdom of Judah, says he, P. 77. nu. 15. 4
Reg. 11.
the wicked Queen Athalia ws deposed by Ioiada the high Priest, and Ioas set
up in her place. But now our Adversaries to answer this example fo Athalia do
say etc. But before I come to examine, what M. Fitzherbert obiecteth and
answers concerning this example, I think it not amiss to set down, what I
answered to the said example in my Apology Apol. nu. 364 and seq.
and Theological Disputation, Disp. Theol^ in Admon. nu. 6.
and what Doctor Schulckenius, of whom M. Fitzherbert has been bold to
borrow his answers without acknowledging so much, has replied to the same.
Thus therefore Card. Bellarmine argued from this example L. 5. de Romans Pont.
cap. 8.
.

8 The second example, says he, is 2. Paralip. 23. Where when Athalia had
tyrannically usurped the kingdom, and did maintain the worship of Baal,
Ioiada the high Priest called the Centurions and soldiers, and commanded them
to kill Athalia, which also they did, and for her he created Ioas King. For
that the high Priest did not counsel, but command, it is apparent by those
word 4. Reg. 11. And the Centurions did according to all things that Ioaida the
Priest had commanded them. Also by those words 2. Paralip. 23. And Ioiada the
high Priest going forth to the Centurions, and captains of the army, said to
them, Bring her (Queen Athalia) forth without the precinct of the temple, and
let her be killed with the sword without. And that the cause of this deposition
and killing of Athalia was not only her tyranny, but also for that she did
maintain the worship of Baal, it is manifest by those words, which are set
down immediately after her killing, Therefore all the people, says the
Scripture, entered into the house of Baal, and destroyed it, and they brake his
altars, and his images, Simulachra.
Mathan also the Priest of Baal they slew before the Altars.

9 To this example I answered first, that if this argument of Card. Bellarmine
were of any force, as in very deed it is not, it would also demonstrate, that
the Pope has power to deprive Sovereign Princes both for heresy, Idolatry,
and also tyranny, not only of their dominions, but also of their lives, which,
although I have before Number 43. and seq. and number. 329.
evidently deduced to follow manifestly from his doctrine, yet he now bringing
this example of Athalia (who by the commandment of Ioiada the high Priest was
deposed and also slain) for proof of his opinion, does clearly insinuate the
same. That this is clearly deduced from his doctrine, I proved principally by
this argument: for that, according to Card. Bellarmines doctrine, the Pope is
the supreme Prince of all Christians, yea and of Sovereign Princes, not only
in spiritualls, but also in temporalls in order to spiritual good, and that in
order to the same spiritual good he has a most ample power in temporalls, and
so great, that greater there cannot be, and consequently he has as great, and
ample authority over temporal Princes in temporalls in order to the same
spiritual good, as temporal Princes have in temporalls over their subjects in
order to temporal good, but temporal Princes have in order to the common
temporal good, not only authority to deprive them of their lives, but also,
if the crime be public, and notorious, or if the known, and manifest
perturbers of the common temporal good be so potent, that they cannot without
danger of rebellion, and great manslaughter be apprehended, the Prince may
without citation, defense, or process, condemn them in their absence, and
without their priuitie, (as there I proved out of Navarre, Nauar. in Manual.
cap. 25. number 10.
and Sayrus) Sayrus lib. 7. Thesauri cap. ^1. number. 11.
and also he may give leave to private men to kill such notorious malefactors
by poison, or in any other public, or secret manner, therefore the Pope may in
order to spiritual good proceed in the same manner with temporal Princes, who
in order to spiritual good are according to Card. Bellarmines doctrine subject
to the Pope in all temporalls.

10 Which doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, and others of his Society, whose
books have been therefore condemned, and some of them burned by a public
decree of the Parliament of Paris, how dangerous, and prejudicial it is, not
only to the supreme authority of absolute Princes, who in temporalls are
supreme, and subject to none but God alone, by whom only with temporal
punishments they can be punished, as I have proved in other places by the
common consent of all the holy Fathers, and ancient Divines, but also to their
persons and lives, I have insinuated else where, and leave it to the
consideration of any judicious man, especially considering that Popes are also
now temporal Princes, and subject to humane infirmities as other men are, who
with the passions of ire, envy, covetousness, and desire to augment and
enlarge their temporal States and Dominions, may not only be moved, but under
pretense also of advancing, or defending the common spiritual good, may be
sometimes overcome; and moreover, that, according to the doctrine of Card.
Bellarmine, it belongs to the Pope to judge what hinders, hurts, or
aduanceth the spiritual good, neither must his judgment, or sentence be
contradicted by any man, as it is declared in can. Patet, and can. Aliorum 9.
q. 3.

11 Now you shall see, D. Schulcke. in Apolog. ad number. 363. page 556.
in what a shuffling manner D. Schulckenius would shift of this argument. And
first here he remitteth himself to the numbers 43. and 329. before cited,
where he says that he has clearly answered the argument; but how clearly,
or rather obscurely he has answered the same, you shall presently perceive.
For as touching the principal argument, which I did set down at large in the
43. number and seq. and have briefly signified the same above, first he
concealeth the whole proof of my consequence for six entire numbers together,
and he only answers thus: I answer, says he, Page 144.
that so prolixe a discourse is needless: for there is none but sees to what
all this does tend; neither is it a hard matter to solue the arguments; let
them pass as not making to the purpose. For I have above not once only
commended that not able sentence of Pope Leo the great, and received by the
Church in use, and practice, Ecclesiastica lenitas refugit cruentas vltiones;
Ecclesiastical Lenity does shun bloody reuengings, or punishments: And
afterward he makes a long discourse, that no Pope has over commanded the
killing of Princes, or caused them to be slain by privy murderers: and that
Princes need not to fear, that any Pope will plot the death of any Prince.
Wherefore let Widdrington cease by vain words to put Secular Princes in fear,
and to make the Pontifical power to be odious. The Pontifical power is
instituted by the Savior of mankind for the salvation, and not for the
destruction of Princes. These arguments do tend to no other end, then to
provoke the hatred of Princes against the Pope; for otherwise Widdrington was
not ignorant, that Ecclesiastical, especially Pontifical lenity does shun
bloody punishments.

12 But first whether D. Schulckenius by this his answered does intend to
acknowledge, that the Pope in order to spiritual good has authority to take
away the lives of wicked Princes, by all those ways public, or private, by
which temporal Princes have authority in order to temporal good to take away
the lives of their wicked and rebellious subjects, which I intended by that
argument to convince, in this place he speaks doubtfully, and in express
words does neither say I, nor no, yet afterward he does plainly enough affirm
the same, saying, Cap 9. ad nu. 229. page 413.
that Ecclesiastical lenity, for as much as concerns the punishment of
death, does shun bloody punishments, not for that it does by the law of God
want power to do the same, but because it does not beseem the Ministers of
Christ: and again, It does not belong, says he, Cap. 10. ad number. 318. page
490.
to the Ecclesiastical Court to give sentence of death, not because the Church
cannot absolutely give this sentence, but because it is not decent. And the
Pope himself might, if he should judge it expedient, both give this sentence,
and also grant by a dispensation, that other Priests might do the same. For we
have nothing, whereby it is forbidden, but the positive Ecclesiastical law,
wherein the Pope by the consent of all men may dispense.

13 Secondly, this Doctor does egregiously, and against Christian charity, and
justice abuse my innocence, in misconstruing my good intentions, which, God is
my witness, are most pure and sincere. For it was never my meaning, to make
the Sea Apostolic odious, or dreadful to Christian Kings, and Princes, but
only to find out the Catholic truth plainly and sincerely in a matter of such
great importance, which does so nearly concern the supreme authority of all
temporal Princes, and the due obedience, which all subjects, of what religion
soever they be, do by the law of Christ owe to them in temporal matters* It
is rather this Doctor, and such as embrace his desperate principles, who by
this their false, seditious, scandalous, and new broached damnable doctrine,
and unknown to the ancient Fathers, and the primitive Church do seek, as
much as lies in them, to make the Sea Apostolic odious and dreadful to all
Christian Princes, and subjects. And if it be so easy a matter to answer my
aforesaid arguments, as this Doctor affirms, why then does he not answer
them, but shifteth them over, with a let them pass as not pertaining to the
purpose? Is it not to the purpose, that Card. Bellarmine, and his followers
should force upon the Christian world the doctrine touching the Popes
spiritual power to depose temporal Princes, as a point of Catholic belief,
from which such absurd, dangerous, desperate, scandalous, seditious
consequents, and not heard of before these miserable times, do evidently
follow?

14 But such strange novelties must with shufflings, and shiftings be cunningly
covered, and must not be clearly known to Sovereign Princes, and their
subjects, least forsooth they make the Sea Apostolic odious and dreadful to
Christian Princes. As thought it were likely that Christ our Savior would give
to S. Peter, and his Successors any spiritual power, which should be a
sufficient cause to make the Sea Apostolic odious to Christian Princes, or
that the knowledge of true Catholic faith either concerning the Popes
spiritual power to take away the crowns or lives of Christian Princes, or
concerning any other thing could be a sufficient cause to make the Sea
Apostolic odious to Christian Princes, more then the knowledge of true
Catholic faith concerning the power of temporal Princes to take away the
temporal goods, and lives of their subjects can be a sufficient cause to make
temporal authority odious to Christian subjects. Hostis Herodis impie
Christum venire quid times, said Sedulius, who flourished about the year 430.
Non eripit mortalia, qui regna dat caelestia, which is Englished thus. That
Christ is come why do thou dread, O Herod, thou ungodly foe, He does not
earthly Kingdoms reaue, that heavenly Kingdoms does bestow: But Herod might
justly have replied, if this new broacht doctrine were true, yes I have great
cause to fear, for that not only Christ, but S. Peter also, and his
Successors have by their ordinary commission authority to bereave me not
only of my kingdom, but also of my life.

15 And the same answer, which is also conform to the doctrine of all the
ancient Fathers, would Sedulius have made to any Christian King, who should
have feared, that the Pope by his spiritual power might deprive him of his
kingdom and life: to wit, that he need not to fear the Popes power in that
respect, for that Christ our Savior has given to the Apostles and their
Successors the keys of the kingdom of heaven and not of earthly kingdoms,
to absolve from sins, not from debts, to bind the soul with the bond of
anathema and not with chains of Iron.

16 But although the Pope should have power over the lives of Princes in order
to spiritual good, yet Princes, says this Doctor, need not to fear, that
the Pope will plot the death of any Prince, for that no Pope has ever
commanded the killing of Princes, or caused them to be slain by privy
murderers, and it is well known, that Ecclesiastical lenity shunneth
bloody punishments. But first, if the Pope have such a power, it is evident,
that it is in his free choice and courtesy, to take away the life of any wicked
Prince in order to spiritual good, as it is in the courtesy of a temporal
Prince to take away the life of any wicked subject in order to temporal good.
Secondly, that the Pope is also bound, as I proved against Suarez, to proceed
against a Christian Prince, See Apendix to Suarez part. 1. sec. 9. nu. 6. and
seq.
who is a known heretic, or persecutor of the Church, or public enemy to
spiritual good, in that manner, and by all those ways, public or secret, by
which a temporal Prince is bound to proceed against a public traitor, a
notorious robber and murderer by the high way side, and a known enemy to the
common temporal good.

17 Thirdly, if no Pope has ever plotted the death of any Christian Prince the
reason hereof I think to be, for that there was never any Pope that held this
newly invented, and never before heard of bloody doctrine, that the Pope as
Pope, or by virtue of his spiritual power, which by the law of Christ shunneth
bloody punishments, might in order to spiritual good deprive any man of
corporal life, or concur to the effusion of blood: And therefore if those
Popes, who have been so vehement to maintain their pretended power to deprive
Princes of their kingdoms, had duly considered, what odious, detestable and
bloody conclusions do evidently follow from that doctrine and position, I
make no doubt, but that they would likewise from their heart have detested,
abhorred and utterly forsaken, and caused to have been hissed out of Christian
schools the doctrine and premises, from whence such horrible, hateful and
abominable conclusion is are so clearly and certainly deduced. Fourthly
therefore, although it be most true, that Ecclesiastical lenity does shun
bloobie punishments, yet it is not for that the law of Christ does forbid
Ecclesiastical persons to concur in any case to the effusion of blood, nor
only for that Ecclesiastical persons are by the Popes laws, which by force
of the laws do not bind the Popes themselves, commanded not to inflict in any
case bloody punishments, or not to use the material sword, but also for that
it is not lawful, according to the law of Christ, for Ecclesiastical men, as
they are Ecclesiastical men, or for Popes, as they are Popes, or by virtue of
their Ecclesiastical power, to inflict temporal punishments, or which is all
one, as I observed before Part. 2. ca. 9.
out of S. Bernard, to use the material sword.

18 Now you shall see how fraudulently, and insufficiently D. Sculckenius
answers this my argument at the number 335. where briefly I did only touch
the same, for at the number 43 and seq. where at large I proved the same, he
cunningly, as you have seen, passes it over, only with, It is not a hard
matter to solue the argument, let it pass as not belonging to the matter. That
which Widdrington does adioyne in the end, says he page 510.
, that from the doctrine of deposing Princes it does manifestly follow, that
the spiritual Pastor may give leave to private men to kill by any art, or
stratageme an heretical Prince, as a certain wolf, is a most horrible
slander, like unto which I know not, that the breast of man has at any time so
despitefully uttered. Act. 8.
I see plainly, that Widdrington is in the gall of bitterness, and the
obligation of iniquity. For seeing that the opinion of Bellarmine is commonly
received by the Catholic Church, and also confirmed by most frequent practice,
whilst my Adversary Widdrington does propound and debate it as spitefully as
possibly he can, he seems to have no other purpose, then to bring the Vicar
of Christ his Father and Pastor, whether he will or nill, into the hatred, and
that most great of Princes, and to make all Catholic Divines and Lawyers to be
odious, yea and plainly, and of set purpose to sound the alarm, to call
Princes to arms against the Church of God, but iniquity will belie it self.

19 For it is one thing to depose one for a just cause; and another thing to
kill him by privy murderers. For it is oftentimes lawful for one to depose,
who may not lawfully kill, and oftentimes that is a cause of a just deposing,
which would not be a cause of a just killing: wherefore whatsoever it be
concerning the truth of the consequent, which is not called in question,
neither does it make to the purpose, the consequence, which my Adversary
Widdrington does infer, is denied whilst he argues thus: The Pope has
power to depose Princes, therefore also to kill them, etc. for from the power
to depose does not follow the power to kill. And to confirm it by examples: A
Father may for some cause depose his son from the right due to the first
begotten son, yet he may not kill him, or give leave to kill him. A Master
may depose a servant from his office, yet he may not kill him. A King may
depose a Magistrate from his government for some offense, for which he may not
justly kill him. A Biship may depose a Clerk, and yet he may not forthwith
kill him. The Pope may sometimes depose a Bishop, and yet he may not for the
same cause justly bereave him of his life.

20 But* to omit the railing and slanderous speeches of this uncharitable
Doctor, whereof I have spoken somewhat above, and which more plainly will be
discovered by laying open his manifest fraud, and fallacious dealing in
answering my argument, mark, good Reader, I beseech thee, how foulely and
shamefully he seeks to delude thee, in proouing the consequence of my
argument not to be good, but to be false, and a most horrible slander, and
whether of himself, or me that saying of the Prophet is verified, mentita est
iniquitas sibi, Psalm. 26.
iniquity has belyed her self. For it is one thing, says this Doctor, to
depose one for a just cause, and another thing to kill him by privy
murderers. Who makes any doubt of this? and oftentimes, says he, one may
lawfully depose, who may not lawfully kill, and oftentimes that may be a cause
of a just d^position, which is not a cause of a just killing: And of this also
speaking in general, and abstracting from a supreme power to depose and kill,
and from the crimes for which one may lawfully be deposed or killed there can
be made no question. But what of all this? how can it from hence be concluded,
that from the doctrine of the Popes power to depose heretical or wicked
Princes in order to the public spiritual good, which was the antecedent
proposition of my argument, it does not manifestly follow, that the Pope in
order to the same spiritual good has not also power to kill heretical and
wicked Princes and known perturbers of the common spiritual good, by all
those ways public or private, and by all those Arts and Stratagemes, by
which temporal Princes in order to the public temporal good may kill public
malefactors and perturbers of the public temporal peace.

21 Wherefore, whatsoever it be, says he, concerning the truth of the
consequent, which is not called in question, nor makes to the purpose, the
consequence, which Widdrington infers, whilst he concludes thus, The Pope
has power to depose Princes, therefore also to kill them, etc. is denied. But
first, I would gladly know, wherefore this Doctor says, that the truth of my
consequent, which is, that the Pope has power to kill Princes, is not called
in question, nor makes to the purpose. For if his meaning be, as it seems to
be, that no Catholic affirms, that the Pope has power to kill Christian
Kings, for otherwise he would not so bouldly have said, that I, by urging this
argument, did impose upon the Vicar of Christ a most horrible slander, like
unto which the breast of man has never so despitefully uttered, then, I say,
the consequence of my argument is good, and to the purpose, and it proves,
that my Adversaries, by teaching, that the Pope has power to depose Christian
Princes, and not I, who do not maintain that doctrine, do consequently
impose that most horrible slander upon the Vicar of Christ, our common Father,
and Pastor.

22 For wherefore, think you, does this Doctor deny the consequence of my
argument? Mark, I pray you, his fallacious reason, and how he fraudulently
alters my argument, and cunningly changes both the subject and predicate of
my antecedent proposition, upon which my consequence, and consequent do wholly
depend. For it does not follow, says he, from a power to depose a power to
kill. I never said, that from a power to depose in general, does follow a
power to kill, abstracting both from the persons, who are to depose and kill,
and from the crimes, for which the persons that may be deposed, may be
killed: but my argument did specify in particular, as well the persons, who
were to depose and kill, as the causes and crimes for which one may by them be
deposed or killed. And I affirmed, that from the doctrine, that maintains the
Popes power to depose heretical Princes, and public enemies to the common
spiritual good, it does evidently follow, that the Pope in order to the same
public spiritual good has also power to kill such Princes: and that
therefore this argument was good; The Pope in order to the common spiritual
good has power to depose absolute Princes, if the crime deserve deposition,
therefore in order to the same spiritual good he has power also to kill them,
if the crime deserve corporal death.

23 And the reason, or ground of my consequence was, for that, according to the
doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, and those that maintain the Popes power to
depose Sovereign Princes, for this cause and reason they grant unto the Pope a
power to depose Princes in order to spiritual good, for that they grant the
Pope to have in order to spiritual good ^^otestatem summam in temporalibus, so
great a power in temporals, that none can be greater, and therefore as great a
power in temporals, as ^emporall Princes have. Whereupon they are not afraid to
affirm, that all Christian Princes, Kings, Emperors and Monarchs are the
Popes subjects in temporals in order to spiritual good, as other infe^iour
persons are subject to temporal Princes in temporals in order to ^emporall
good: But a temporal Prince has in order to temporal good authority not
only to take away the lands and lives of their ^ubiects, if the crime deserve
that punishment, and the common temporal good does require the same, but also,
if the crime be public and notorious, and the malefactors, or perturbers of
the public temporal good be so potent, that without rebellion, or great
temporal harm ^hey can not be apprehended, he has authority to condemn
them ^riuately, and in their absence, without any process, citation or
de^ence, and afterward to give license to any private man to bereave them of
their lives by any art or stratageme, and by any public or ^riuie way:
therefore the Pope according to these desperate grounds and principles, which
grant him potestatem summam in temporalibus, ^ath the like authority over
temporal Princes in order to spiritual good, who, according to this false and
scandalous doctrine, are in order to spiritual good subject to the Pope in
temporals. This was my ^rgument.

24 wherefore, my consequence was only concerning the Pope, ^o whom is
therefore granted by my Adversaries a power to depose Princes, for that he
has in order to spiritual good potestatem summam ^n temporalibus, so great a
power in temporals that none can be greater: for ^ supreme power in temporals
does necessarily include a power both to depose and kill, if the crime deserve
the same. And therefore who would not admire, or rather pity, that so learned
a man, as is he, who ^ reputed to be the true Author of this book, should
bring such vn^earned instances from those, who have not a supreme power in
tempo^als, or if they have from a crime, which does not deserve death, to
im^ugne my consequence, which speaks both of one, who is supposed ^o have a
supreme power in temporals, and also of a crime, which is so ^eynous, that
according to the law it deserves death, if it were committed by subjects or
private men.

25 For the consequences of those five examples, which this Do^tour has
brought to impugn my arugment, are all defective, either ^or that the persons,
who are to depose, and therefore to kill, are not ^upposed to have supreme
power in temporals, to wit, every Father, Ma^ter or Bishop; or else, because
the crime, for which the persons there ^pecified may be deposed, does not
deserve so great a punishment, as is death. But if we once suppose a Father,
Master and Bishop to have a supreme power in temporals over their sons,
servants and Clerks, as the Pope is supposed by my Adversaries to have over
all Christian Princes, and also the crime to deserve death, then, I say, it
does evidently follow, that if such a Father has power to deprive his son of
his inheritance, he has also power to deprive him of his life, not for that a
power to kill is necessarily annexed to every power to depose, but to such a
power to depose, which is a supreme power over all temporals, or rather for
that a power to depose and to kill, to take away goods, and life are
necessarily included in every supreme power to dispose of all temporals. And
therefore all the shuffling shifting and cunning of this Doctor will never be
able to weaken the force of my consequence, but this consequence will ever
remain good and strong, that if the Pope has power to deprive temporal
Princes of their kingdoms, for that he is their supreme Lord in temporals in
order to spiritual good, it does necessarily follow, that he has power also
to deprive them of their lives, if the necessity of the common spiritual good
require the same. And therefore, although the opinion of Card, Bellarmine be
received, not by the Catholic Church, as this Doctor untruly affirms, but
by many Catholic Doctors, and confirmed by the often practice of many later
Popes, yet always contradicted by Catholic Kings and subjects, nevertheless,
if these Catholic Doctors and Popes had duly considered, what odious and
detestable consequences do follow from that opinion, they would forthwith in
my judgment have detested the premises from which such hateful conclusions,
(and which this Doctor seems here so greatly to abhor, that he fears not
therefore to accuse me of imposing a most horrible slander upon Christ's Vicar)
are most clearly and certainly deduced.

26 Wherefore to conclude this point, that which this Doctor answers
secondly, concerning Athalia, who was slain by the commandment of Ioiada the
high Priest, is nothing to the purpose. To this argument, says he, Page 556.
I answer now, that examples are to be taken according to the conuenience of
the matter and persons. In the old Testament Priests did make war, and fight
with the rest of the Israelites against their enemies, but in the new Testament
Priests do abstain from the shedding of blood, and if they find any to be
worthy of death, they deliver them over to the Secular power to be punished.
But this, I say, is nothing at all to the purpose: For my argument was not
concerning inferior Priests, but only concerning the Pope, neither also what
Popes in practice, and de facto do, but what according to the institution of
Christ they have authority to do. Now it is evident and approved by the
common consent of Catholic Divines, that the shedding of blood is not by the
institution of Christ forbidden either the Pope, or inferior Bishops and
Priests, who therefore with the Popes license make war, and concur directly
to the effusion of blood, as oftentimes they have done, yea now at Rome all
effusion of blood by a iuridicall sentence, and condemning malefactors to
death, and all making of wars by the Popes subjects are derived from the
Popes authority, not as he is Pope, but as he is a temporal Prince; for that
which I contend is, that Priests neither in the old law, nor in the new, as
they are Priests, or by their Priestly power, have authority to condemn any
man to death, or to inflict any temporal punishment, as death, exile,
privation of goods, imprisonment, or the like.

27 Secondly and principally to this example of Athalia I answered, Apolog. nu.
366. and seq.
that it is untrue, that Ioiada the high Priest, did, as Card. Bellarmine af.
firmeth in this place, create Ioas King, that is, did give him a right, or true
title to reign, which before he had not, seeing that the true dominion and
right to the kingdom, did by hereditarie right belong to Ioas, presently after
the death of his brethren, whom wicked Athalia had treacherously slain,
although Athalia did tyrannically usurp the possession thereof: For it is not
unusual for one to possess sometimes either with a good, or bad conscience,
that thing whereof another man is the true lord or owner; And therefore betwixt
right and possession a great difference is commonly made by all Divines and
Lawyers. Wherefore Ioiada in killing Athalia did no other thing, then what
every faithful subject ought to do in such a case. For seeing that for his
innocent life, opinion of sanctity, and the dignity of his office, he was in
great veneration among the people and Peers of the kingdom, his authority,
or favor did prevail so much with them, that all men with uniform consent
would very easily be drawn, especially by his persuasion to kill the
treacherous vsurpresse, and to seat the lawful King, who was unjustly
detained from the possession of his kingdom, in the possession thereof. But
this did only argue the strength and power of Ioiada, and his great favor
with the people and Peers, and not any authority in him to create a King, who
by right was not a lawful King before.

28 Wherefore from this example of Athalia nothing at all can by any true, or
probable consequence be concluded in favor of Cardinal Bellarmine: because
from the holy Scripture it cannot sufficiently be gathered, either that Athalia
was by the commandment of Ioiada slain for Idolatry, but only for manifest
tyranny, for that she had cruelly murdered the Royal issue, and had
unjustly usurped the kingdom, the true heir being alive, and therefore she
could not be the lawful Queen, or that Ioiada the high Priest did command
her to be slain by his own proper authority, but by the consent of the King,
Peers, and people. And therefore this example does nothing avail to prove,
that true Kings, and Princes (albeit heretics, and Idolaters) who are in
lawful possession of their kingdoms, may be deprived of their kingdoms, or
lives by the Popes authority.

29 This second, to wit, that Ioiada the high Priest did only by his aid and
counsel solicit, and not by his own proper authority, but with the consent
of the States command in the Kings name Athalia to be slain, 2. Paral. 23.
is manifest by those words; And in the seventh year Ioiada taking courage
took the Centurions, etc. and made a covenant with them (to wit, to kill
Athalia, and to seat Ioas the Kings son, and lawful King in the possession
of his kingdom, which she had unjustly usurped) who going about Judah, says
the Scripture, gathered together the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and
the Princes of the families of Israel, and they came into Jerusalem. Therefore
all the multitude made a covenant with the King in the house of GOD: And Ioiada
said to them, Behold the Kings son shall reign, as the Lord has spoken,
upon the sons of David: which words the Gloss expounding, 4. Reg. 11.
writes thus. Here is described the institution of the true heir, (whom also
he calls the due King) through the carfulness of Ioiada the high Priest,
seeking thereunto the assent, and aid of the Princes, and Nobles of the
kingdom, when it is said, And he made a covenant with them. Wherefore that
commandment, which Ioiada gave to the Centurions to kill Athalia, did proceed
from that former covenant, which before he had made with them, and the King.
And therefore as every private subject may, and ought to command any man in the
Kings name to aid him for the apprehending of a traitor to his Prince, and
Country without having any authority proper, or peculiar to him to do the
same, so it is not necessary, that any peculiar authority to command be
given to Ioiada, only for that he with the consent of the King, and the common
wealth commanded Athalia unjustly usurping the kingdom to be slain:
although we should understand that commandment of Ioiada, of a commandment
being taken strictly, and not largely, or commonly, in which sense to command
does little differ from to counsel, or persuade.

30 But the first, which is affirmed by Cardinal Bellarmine, to wit, that
Athalia was slain not only for tyranny, but also for idolatry (albeit if
this were true, it nothing avails to prove, that a true, and lawful Prince
although an Idolater may lawfully be slain, seeing that it is manifest, that
Athalia was not a true and lawful Queen, but an usurper of the kingdom, the
true heir being alive) he very insufficiently concludes from they holy
Scripture, seeing that he relates not truly those words, which do
immediately follow the killing of Athalia. For those words, Therefore all the
people entered into the house of Baal, and destroyed it, and they brake his
Altars and his Images, do not immediately follow either 4. Reg. 11. or 2.
Paralip. 23. the killing of Athalia, as Cardinal Bellarmine untruly affirms
(intending to prove from thence that she was slain for idolatry) but these
words do immediately follow her killing: And Ioiada made a covenant between
himself and all the people, and the King, that they would be the people of
the Lord: and after them do immediately follow those words related by
Cardinal Bellarmine; Therefore all the people entered into the house of Baal,
and destroyed it, etc. Wherefore these last words, which he brings for his
only ground, are not so much to be referred to the killing of Athalia, as to
the covenant made after Athalia was slain betwixt Ioiada, the people, and the
King, that they would be the people of God; through which covenant made with
God, that they would be his people, they were moved to destroy the house of
Baal, and his Images. Therefore Cardinal Bellarmine does not well conclude
from this place, that Queen Athalia was slain either by the proper authority
of the high Priest, (as he was high Priest) or for Idolatry in doing worship
to Baal. And although we should also grant him both, yet how vicious it is to
draw an argument from the killing of an unlawful Queen and unjustly usurping
the kingdom to prove that a true King, who is an Idolater, may lawfully be
slain, any man that is not void of natural reason may presently perceive.
Thus I answered to this example of Athalia in my Apology.

31 Now you shall see what a weak, fallacious, and slanderous Reply D.
Schulckenius has made to this my answer. I answer, says he, Page 558.
that Athalia without doubt did tyrannically invade the kingdom, but seeing
that she ruled peaceably for six years, it is credible, that by little and
little by the consent of the people she did get a lawful right to the
kingdom. For so many Kings, who are Tyrants in the beginning, are afterward
by the consent of the people made lawful Princes. Surely Octauian Augustus
himself, who is numbered among the best Princes did oppress the common wealth
by force, and arms, and spoiled her of her liberty, yet afterward by the
consent of the people he began to be accounted a lawful Prince, and did
lawfully transfer the Empire to his posterity. Otho killed Galba, Vitellius
killed Otho, Vespasian killed Vitellius, Philip killed Gordian, and yet they
were all saluted Emperors by the Senate, and people of Rome. How did the
Ostrogoths invade and possess Italy, the Visigothe Spain, the Francks
France, the English Britanie? and yet afterward by the consent of the people
they were accounted lawful Kings of those Dominions.

32 But any man though of mean understanding may easily perceive the
weakness of this his first Reply. For first the maine controversy betwixt
me, and Cardinal Bellarmine, as I have often signified in other places, at
this present only is, whether it be certain, and a point of faith, and by
demonstratiue arguments it can be convinced, that the Pope has power to depose
temporal Princes, and he pretends to demonstrate the same, and therefore
he calls the contrary opinion, not so much an opinion, as an heresy, and
his doctrine to be the doctrine and voice of the Catholic Church which every
Christian is bound to hear and follow, otherwise he is to be accounted as a
Heathen, and a Publicane, and now this Doctor for proof of this his new
Catholic faith brings a bare credibile est, it is credible, or which in
sense is all one, it is not incredible, that although Athalia was without doubt
an vsurpresse in the beginning, yet afterward by the consent of the people
she was lawful Queen, or did get a lawful right to the kingdom, as though
a bare credibile est, and slight conjectures of his own invention are
sufficient proofs to demonstrate a matter of so great moment, as is the Popes
authority to take away the kingdoms, and lives of Sovereign Princes, who in
temporalls are subject to none, but to GOD alone.

33 Observe now, good Reader, the reason, for which this Doctor affirms,
that it is credible, that Athalia did by little and little by the consent of
the people get a lawful right to the kingdom: Because, forsooth, she reigned
peaceably six years together: as though either six years prescription, or
peaceable possession is sufficient to give to a most cruel Tyrant and Usurper,
a true and lawful right to the kingdom, which he has tyrannically usurped,
especially the true and lawful heir being alive, or thar six years
peaceable possession can be a credible presumption, that the whole
commonwealth has given their free, hearty and altogether willing consent,
that the said usurper should be their true, and rightful King: or thirdly,
that the common wealth can deprive the true heir, and rightful King of his
right to the kingdom without any fault, or negligence committed by him, and
give it to another, who has no right thereunto. For it is the common doctrine
of the Lawyers, Molina de Inst. trac. 2. disp. 69. and 74.
as Molina well observes, that ten years, at the least, are required, that a
private man may against another private man get by prescription a lawful right
to any immovable thing, as lands, houses, or the like, which he bona fide,
with a good conscience possesses: and to get a lawful right by prescription,
to those lands, or houses, which belong to the Crown, and yet may be
prescribed by a private man, are required a hundred years: for those things,
which are intrinsecally due, and proper to the Prince in sign of subjection
due to him by his subjects, as is the paying of tributes, and which do belong
intrinsecally to his supreme temporal power, as to punish offenders, to be
subject to the laws, to appeal to him from inferior Judges, cannot by any
subject, by continual possession of never so long a time be prescribed:
besides that, it is a common and approved rule of the law, Regula possessor de
Reg. iuris in 60. and all Divines that write de Just. and Iure. as Sotus,
Salon. Aragona etc.
that whosoever possesses any thing with a bad conscience can never prescribe,
or get a lawful right to the thing which he possesses. See Molina tract. 2.
de Iustitia disput. 72. 73. 74. and Lessius disp. 2. cap. 6. dub. 8. and 12.

34 And therefore can any man be so senseless as to imagine, that only six
years possession are sufficient for a notorious tyrant, and manifest usurper,
who therefore can not with any probable presumption be thought to possess with
a good conscience the kingdom, to get by prescription a lawful right to a
whole Realm, against the true and rightful heir, who is living? There is
this deceit, Gregor. Tholos. lib. 26. de Repub. cap. 7. number. 4.
says Gregorius Tholosanus, of Tyrants, or Usurpers, that after they have
invaded the kingdom, they would be partakers of the titles, or rights of the
true Princes, whom they have dethroned, by using the general Assemblies of the
people, or by forcing the authority of some Superior: which nevertheless
does not make them not to be true Tyrants, and not to be contained in the laws
of Tyrants; unless, as some are of opinion, after they have usurped the
kingdom, they wholly resign that authority, and submit their forces with
their person to the judgment of those, who may lawfully give the kingdom; or
unless after they have by tyranny obtained the kingdom, they with their
progeny do by prescription get a lawful right to the Sovereignty by
possessing it a hundred years or more.

35 Secondly, there is no likelihood, that if Athalia had demanded the consent
of the people, or common wealth, whereof nevertheless there is no mention made
in the holy Scripture, they would have given their free, hearty, and willing
consent thereunto. And first, as notes Abulensis, Q. 4 i cap. 11. lib. 4. reg.
for that she was a woman, and it was a disgrace to them to have a woman, who
especially had no title to the kingdom, to rule over them by their own free
and voluntary consent. Secondly, for that she was greatly hated by the people,
both because she had most barbarously murdered her own sons children, and
all of the blood Royal, and also for that she was daughter to Achab, whom the
people of Judah did grievously hate, because by the means of his issue many
mischiefs happened to them, to wit, for that the house of Achab had instructed
the Kings of Judah in evil; and for this the people of Judah suffered many
evils for the sins of their Kings, as it fell out in the time of Ioram, who
was a most wicked man by reason of the alliance he had made with the house of
Achab, for this Ioram married this wicked Athalia, who was daughter to Achab:
and for this God sent enemies into the land of Judah who destroyed a great part
thereof, and they spoiled all the substance that was found in the Kings house,
as it may be seen 2. Paralip. 21.

36 Moreover seeing that there had been so long strife, and contention betwixt
the tribe of Judah and the people of Israel about the Soueraignitie (for there
was never true and constant amity betwixt them, and the ten Tribes from the
time of King Jeroboam to Achab the father of Athalia) it is not credible, that
the people of Judah would now yield up the bucklars, and freely without fear
and compulsion give there consent, that Athalia, a woman, and not of their
tribe, an Idolater, an Usurper, and who barbarously massacred all the Royal
issue of the lineage of King David, should now reign over them, and sit in the
throne of King David, to whom they knew God had promised, that his seed should
reign over the people of Israel for ever.

37 Besides, that the people did not give their consent heartily, willingly and
freely, that Athalia should reign over them, or at the most that can be
imagined, only upon supposition that there was none of the blood Royal left
alive, it is manifest by the great joy, which all the people took at her
death, 4. Reg. 11. and 2. Paral. 23.
and at the crowning of King Ioas, Laetatusque est omnis populus terrae, says
the Scripture, and ciuitas conquieu^t, And all the people of the land reioiced,
and the City was quiet: for that they saw their King, says Abulensis, In
fine cap. 11.
sit peaceably in his throne, and because whilst Athalia lived the people were
greatly troubled, but now she being slain all were quiet. I said heartily,
willingly and freely, because the consent of the common wealth in the
approbation of such a King ought to be most free; for if it be enforced from
them by any fear or violence it is not be accounted a suffiicient consent, but
a constraint or compulsion, as may easily be gathered from the doctrine of
Gregorius Tholosanus before related: and also because the contract betwixt the
King, and the Common wealth is a certain kind of marriage, wherein as in
carnal, and also in religious matrimony by making a solemn vow to GOD in an
approved Religion, if the consent be not most free, it can not be called a
sufficient consent, but a constraint, and the contract is not of force before
GOD, as all Divines, and Lawiers do affirm; but the people of Judah had just
cause to fear the cruelty of so barbarous a woman, who feared not to murder
her own grandchildren, and all the blood Royal, and therefore by all
likelihood would not spare any other, that should resist her tyranny.

38 Lastly, it is not credible, that the people, and Princes of Judah would
freely, and willingly consent to such a new, and exorbitant action, as to make
an Idolatresse their rightful Queen, without the consent of the Priests, and
Levites, and that the Priests, and Levites would give their free consent,
without the priuitie and approbation of the high Priest, whose office was to
instruct, and direct the people in all difficult matters concerning the law of
GOD: But it is evident, that the high Priest neither did, nor would his free
consent, if it had been demanded, to such a wicked action, both for that he
should have been a traitor to his lawful King, whom he kept secret in the
house of GOD for fear of Athalia, and also for that he should have
transgressed the law of GOD, in honoring an Idolatresse with the true title of
a lawful Queen, who was to be put to death according to the law; which is not
to be presumed of so holy a man, as Ioiada was, whose advise so long as King
Ioas followed, he did not fall from GOD, according to that of 4. Reg. 12. And
Ioas did right before our Lord, so long as Ioiada the high Priest taught him.
And therefore this consent of the people, which this Doctor faigneth, is
altogether incredible, and is neither grounded in the holy Scripture, nor in
any other probable reason. Nevertheless I will not deny, but that Athalia
being the Kings mother, and having in his absence the custody of his Palace,
treasure, and forces, and also having cruelly slain all her grand children,
(as she, and the people also thought) might have many favorers, either for
fear, or gain, but that the people, Princes, and Priests, did either in any
public assembly, which represents the body of the common wealth, or also in
their hearts without any such assembly, give their free consent to make that
wicked Athalia their rightful Queen, it is altogether improbable, and has no
color at all of credibilitie.

39 But be it so for Disputation sake, that the people, imagining upon a false
ground, that none of the blood Royal, and who by inheritance had a lawful
right to the Kingdom of Judah, were alive, were content, that Athalia should be
their rightful Queen, yet that this consent of the people did give her a true
lawful right to the Kingdom, the true King, and rightful heir being alive,
as this Doctor affirms, is a very false, and seditious doctrine, and
injurious to the true rights of all Sovereign Princes, who have right to their
Kingdoms by inheritance, but especially of those of the Kingdom of Judah,
which by a peculiar, and special promise of GOD, was given to King David, and
his seed for ever, from whom Queen Athalia did not descend. And therefore Fa.
Becanus, who in the former edition of his Controuersia Anglicana taught this
pestiferous doctrine, fearing belike least it would have been censured by the
University of Paris, as in very deed it had been, As it may appear by the
Acts of the Faculty of Paris held in their ordinary Congregation the first
day of February in the year 1613.
if some had not cunningly prevented the same, by procuring it to be first
condemned at Rome By apeculiar decree against his book dated at Rome the third
day of January 1613.
by a special command of his Holiness (as containing in it somethings, which
are false, temerarious, scandalous, and seditious respectively) until it
should be corrected, was careful, that in the later Edition of his book,
which was forthwith published, this dangerous position should be quite blotted
out: And yet this Doctor following therein Card. Bellarmine in his book
against D. Barclay, is not afraid most desperately, and seditiously to renew
the same. But with what strange paradoxes, and seditious doctrines these
vehement manitainers of the Popes authority to depose Princes, and to dispose
of all temporalls, being so famous for their learning, so reverent for their
Order, so great in authority, so potent by friends, and so violent in
maintaining their novelties, will in the end infect a great part of the Church
of Christ, whereof these men are accounted to be the chief pillars, unless
God by his infinite mercy prevent their exorbitant courses, I tremble to
consider, and how little beholding are Sovereign Princes to such extrauagant
Writers, who will also have their people, who are subject to them, to have
authority over them in temporalls, and to take away their lawful right, which
they have to their Crowns, and to give it to another, who by inheritance has
no true right thereunto, and that without any fault, or negligence committed by
them, any prudent man may easily perceive.

40 To conclude therefore this point, that which this Doctor adds concerning
those Emperors and Kings, who although in the beginning were Tyrants, and
Usurpers, yet afterward by the consent of the people, and of those, who had
true right to those kingdoms, were made lawful Princes, are nothing like to
this example of Queen Athalia: and all those examples are particularly
answered by Mr. John Barclay Cap. 38. paragraph 2.
against Cardinal Bellarmine, who also in the very like words urged the same:
Neither can they be rightly applied to the kingdom of Judah, which by the
express promise, and appointment of almighty God was due to the posterity of
King David: neither was it in the power of the high Priests, Princes, and
people without violating the ordinance of almighty God to transfer the
kingdom of Judah from the race of King David to another tribe, and especially
to an Idolatresse, as was wicked Athalia, who by the Law of God, as being a
subject, was commanded to be put to death.

41 Wherefore this, which this Doctor in the end adioyneth [to wit, that the
Scripture does manifestly teach, that Ioiada together with the people did make
Ioas King, and they made him King, 4. Reg. 11. and 2. Paralip. 23. and cap. 24.
Ioas was seven years old when he began to reign, where the beginning of
his kingdom is put from the death of Athalia, and his institution to be King:
and although before his coronation the Scripture called him King, 2. Paralip.
23. this was only by anticipation as a designed King, and therefore he was
first called King, and afterward it is said, he shall reign, because he was
a King not present but future] this I say is either a manifest equivocation, or
a plain untruth; for if he mean, that they did make him King, that is, did
put him in possession of his kingdom, which was wrongfully, and tyrannically
kept from him by Athalia, or which is all one, they did make him King, de
facto, or to reign, de facto, this is most true, and the Scripture does
plainly show the same; but if he mean, that they did make him King, de iure,
and give him his right to the kingdom, as though before their making him King
he had not right to the kingdom, and was not King, de iure, it is most false,
and also implies a very seditious doctrine, to wit, either that those, who are
Kings by hereditarie succession, do not, as other heirs, albeit they be in
minority, succeed in all their Fathers rights presently after he is departed
the world, or else that the people may deprive them of their lawful right to
the kingdom, without any fault, or negligence committed by them.

42 And to this I plainly answered before, as you have seen, in my Apology,
by declaring the sense of those equivocal words, they created, or made Ioas
King: sort I said in express words, [that it is untrue, that Ioiada the high
Priest, did create Ioas King, as Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, that is, did
give him a right to reign, which he had not before, seeing that presently
after the death of his brethren, whom wicked Athalia had treacherously
murdered, the true dominion, and right to the kingdom did by inheritance
belong to Ioas, although Athalia did tyrannically keep the possession.] For as
soon as a King is dead, the next heir apparent to the Crown is forthwith
the lawful King, neither does his anointing, crowning, or acceptance of the
people give, but only confirm his former Kingly right. And this is so clear,
that neither Cardinal Bellarmine, nor this Doctor, if they be not the same
person, dare deny the same: but such false and seditious positions cannot but
by equivocations with any show of credibilitie be maintained. If this Doctor
had declared the ambiguitie of those words [ they did make him King] as I did,
the Reader would quickly have perceived, that out of those words of holy
Scripture it cannot be proved, that Ioiada with the people did make Ioas King,
that is, did give him a lawful right to the kingdom, which before he had not,
but only, that they did make him King de facto, and put him in possession of
his kingdom, whereof before he was King de iure, although the possession was
tyrannically kept from him by Athalia. And thus much concerning the
incredibilitie of this Doctors credibile est.

43 Now you shall see, how weak, fallacious, and slanderous are the other
Replies of this Doctor to the rest of my answer. For whereas I affirmed, as
you have seen, that Ioiada in killing Athalia did no other thing, then which
every faithful subject ought to do in such a case, this Doctor very falsely,
and slanderously affirms, that Widdrington does here in plain words give
occasion to subjects to rebel against their Kings, and to kill them, and if
they think, that any man has by an ill title usurped the kingdom, they may,
and not only may, but also are a bound to kill such a King, etc. But mark his
words, I answer, says he, Page 560.
that my Adversary Widdrington has sometimes falsely and slanderously objected
to Bellarmine, that he should give occasion to subjects to rise up against
their Kings and to kill them: and nor he in plain words does teach the same.
For Athalia a Kings wife, a Kings mother, and now her self a Queen reigned
peaceably the seventh year, she was accused by no man, condemned by no Judge,
and yet Widdrington does contend, that it was lawful for the high Priest (who
according to his opinion, and words was a subject) to exhort the people to
rebellion, and with the Peers and people to conspire against the Queen, and
to kill her.

44 But, says Widdrington, she had usurped the kingdom tyrannically, I
answer, Be it so; but now the people assenting, she reigned the seventh
year. Who gave to subjects authority over their Prince peaceably reigning? Who
judged at that time Athalia to be a Tyrant, not a Queen, if she did not
acknowledge a Superior to her? Let my Adversary Widdrington diligently
consider, whether it be not by far more dangerous to the life of Kings and
Princes, and to the safety of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to give power to
the people, and to subjects, to rebel and conspire, and at the last to kill
Kings, whom they (rashly oftentimes and falsely) account Tyrants, then to say,
that in the Pope, as head of the universal Church, and Christ's Vicar, is a
judicial power to judge Kings, and if the deserve it to depose them Why does
he not add also to kill them, as Ioiada did Athalia.
: For who makes any doubt, that Kings are safer, if they be subject to the
Popes equity, and gravity, to which Christ has subjected them, then if they be
subject to the rash leuity the people, to which my Adversary Widdrington does
subject them?

45 Every faithful subject, says Widdrington, ought to do in the like case,
that Ioiada did by killing Athalia. What did Ioiada? Athalia a Kings wife, a
Kings mother, having killed all the Royal issue (as it was thought) had
usurped the kingdom of Judah, possessed the same peaceably now the seventh
year: Ioiada the seventh year commanded her to be slain, she suspecting no
such thing: and declared Ioas to be King. The same says my Adversary
Widdrington, every faithful subject in the like case ought to do: that is,
every faithful subject, if he think, that one has by an ill title usurped
the kingdom, may and not only may, but also altogether ought to kill such a
Prince, notwithstanding that he has possessed the kingdom peaceably now many
years, that all the people have obeyed him many years, that this Prince
acknowledges no Superior, that he is not rightly, or as it should be,
accused, heard, condemned to have usurped the kingdom by an ill title.

46 I declare it by an example. Let us suppose, that Elizabeth did by an ill
title usurp the kingdom of England, and that the same by all right was fallen
to the most excellent, and most holy Mary Queen of Scotland, and after her to
her son now the most excellent, and most potent King of great Britain. In
the mean time Elizabeth possessed the kingdom peaceably for many years; and
did govern all things belonging to Kingly function no man contradicting, that
she was condemned by no man, what do I say condemned? that she was accused
by no man to usurp the kingdom tyrannically; what ought the subjects here to
do? Every faithful Subject, says my Adversary Widdrington, ought in the
like case to do that Ioiada did by killing Athalia, that is, he ought to kill
Queen Elizabeth, and to transfer the kingdom to Mary and her son.

47 Behold O Kings and Princes, you have one, who is careful of your
security. So obseruant of your Royal Majesty are they, who do violate and
calumniate the Pontifical authority. Every subject, says Widdrington, not
only may, but also ought to do in the like case that Ioiada did. O miserable
state of Princes, whose kingdom and life is subject to the judgment of every
private man? If Card. Bellarmine had written the like thing, what tumults would
not my Adversary Widdrington make? what clamours would he not raise? Thus
writes this Doctor.

48 But how false, fraudulent and unconscionable is this Doctors Reply, I have
most clearly convinced heretofore. Disp. Theolog. in Admonit. nu. 6.
For I never affirmed, as this Doctor most slanderously and shamefully
imposes upon me, that every faithful subject, if he think any one to have by
an ill title usurped the kingdom, not only may, but also ought to kill such a
King. I only said, that Ioiada in killing Athalia did no other thing then that
every faithful subject ought to do in the like case. Now this Doctor clean
alters the case, and turns it from the case of Ioiada in killing Athalia,
which was this: Athalia daughter to Achab king of Israel, and wife to Ioram
King of Judah, and mother to Ochozias King Iorams son, who then reigned,
hearing that her son King Ochozias was slain by Iehu, did cruelly murder
all the Kings stock of the house was Ioram, as she thought, thereby to usurp
the kingdom her self. But Iosabeth King Iorams daughter, the sister of
Ochozias, and the wife of Ioiada the high Priest, taking Ioas the son of
Ochozias, stole him out of the midst of the Kings children, that were slain,
and his nurce out of the bedchamber, and hid them in the temple, where they
lived with Ioiada, and Iosabeth six years, in the which Athalia reigned over
the land. But in the seventh year Ioiada taking courage (for all the time
before both Ioas was very young, and now began to have some understanding, and
he also feared the power of Arthalia, and by little and little procured the
favor of the people and soldiers to take his part in so just a cause) sent
for the Centurions, and communicating the whole matter with them, made with
them a covenant adiuring them in the house of our Lord, to wit, that they would
constantly take his part in putting down Athalia, and setting up Ioas the
lawful heir and rightful King, from whom Athalia had now six years
tyrannically kept the kingdom, who going about Judah gathered together the
Levites out of all Judah, and the Princes of the families of Israel, and they
came into Jerusalem.

49 And then Ioida brought them into the temple, and showed them the Kings
son, saying to them, Behold the Kings son shall reign, as our Lord has
spoken upon the sons of David: and all the multitude made a covenant with the
King in the house of God. Then Ioiada gave order and commandment to the
Centurions, in what manner they should stand in the temple with their soldiers
to guarde the Kings person, which the Centurions performed according to all
things that Ioiada had commanded them: and after he had given them the spears
and weapons of King David, which were in the temple, with commandment, that if
any person should enter into the temple to disturb them, he should be slain,
he brought forth the Kings son, and put the crown upon him, and the
testimony, and they made him King, and anointed him, and clapping with their
hands said, God save the King. Which noise when Athalia being in the Kings
Palace near to the temple heard, she went into the temple, and seeing the
King standing upon the tribunal seat according to the manner, and the Princes
and the companies about him, and the singers, and trumpets near him, and all
the people rejoicing, and sounding the trumpets, she rent her garments, and
cried, A Conspiracy, a Conspiracy; Treason, Treason. But Ioiada the high
Priest commanded the Centurions that were over the army not to kill her in the
Temple, but that she should be slain with the sword without, and that
whosoever should follow her should be stricken with the sword: And they laid
hands upon her, and when she was entered within the gate of the horses of the
Kings house they killed her there. Thus it its written 4. Reg. 11. 2. Paralip.
23.

50 This therefore, as you see, was the case of Ioiada in commanding Athalia to
be slain. Ioiada, not only being the high Priest, and therefore next in
authority to the King (for that next to the King there was none greater among
the people then the high Priest) Abul. q. 15. in c. 11. l. 4. Reg.
but also being the Kings uncle by his wife, and the Kings Protector and
Guardian, did put in possession of the kingdom of Judah, Ioas the Kings son
being but seven years old, to whom the kingdom by the right of inheritance
did appertain, whom he kept secretly in the temple for six years together,
and therefore did not only by probable conjectures think, but he did
certainly know, that he was the lawful King: and nevertheless before he
would accomplish the same, he communicated the matter with the Centurions, and
Princes of the people, and made a covenant with them: and he also caused
Athalia to be slain, not only for that she had most tyrannically and
barbarously usurped the kingdom, by killing all, as she thought, of the Kings
issue, but also for that she sought to make an open rebellion against the
anointed King, crying out in the Temple in the presence of the new crowned
King, of the high Priest, being the King Uncle and Protector, of all the
Peers and people, a Conspiracy, a Conspiracy, Treason, Treason. And this, I
say, Ioiada, and every faithful subject in such a case, that is, having the
protection of the true, and whom for certainty he knew to be the rightful
King, not only might, but also, if it were in his power, was bound to do:
neither dare this Doctor unless he will rashly and seditiously teach a most
false and pernicious doctrine, deny the same.

51 But mark, I pray you, how learned Abulensis answers to this question,
whether Ioiada was bound to make Ioas King, that is, put him in possession of
the Kingdom, to which he had right by hereditarie succession. It was, says
he, Q. 15. in cap. 11. lib. 4. Reg.
a manifest sin, that Athalia should usurp to her self the kingdom, Ioas
being alive, to whom it did by lawful right appertain, therefore Ioiada was
bound to do as much as lied in his power, that Ioas should not by Athalia be
deprived of his right to the kingdom, therefore he was bound, when it did lie
in his power to make Ioas King. Secondly, this is manifest, because Ioiada was
in a certain manner by his office to make Ioas King, because after the King
there was none greater among the people, then was the high Priest, and then
there was no King, therefore it belonged to Ioiada, as to the high Priest, to
redress the agreeuances, which happened among the people: and this was the
greatest agreeuance, that the King should be deprived of his right, and
therefore Ioiada was in this bound, as much of lied in his power, to procure a
remedy by anointing Ioas King, to whom the kingdom did of right belong.
Thirdly, this is manifest, because every man is bound to execute the known
will of God, forasmuch as it does prejudice charity, or some commandment of
God, but God had said, that of the seed of David there should be Kings for
ever, and it was not against charity, or any other commandment of God,
always to anoint Kings of that tribe: therefore Ioiada was bound as much as
lied in his power, to accomplish that will of God, to wit, that he should
anoint Ioas King: And this was that, whereon Ioiada grounded himself, when he
anointed Ioas King, saying to the people, Behold the Kings son shall
reign, as our Lord has spoken, over the sons of David: 2. Paralip. 23^.
as though he should say, because God commanded, that the sons of David
should always reign, therefore we ought to anoint this for King, who was of
the stock of David.

52 And as concerning the killing of Athalia, the said Abulensis Ibidem ^* 20.
writes thus: I answer, that it was lawful for Ioiada to command Athalia to
be slain. For the cause was just, to wit, for that she intended to kill the
King, seeing that she had usurped the Kingdom; and also she was guilty of
death for many other causes; or she had slain all the Kings sons, and she
was a disturber of the people, and a corrupter of the worship of GOD, seeing
that she brought in the worship of Baal into Jerusalem, and had made there a
temple, and had Priests; Therefore any one of these things were sufficient,
that she might be slain. Also it was lawful for Ioiada in regard of the
power. For that now (that is, the King being in his minority) he was the
Prince of the people as being the high Priest, who was always the greatest
Judge in Israel, from whose sentence it was not lawful for any man to appeal
under pain of death, or to contemn in any wise his commandment. Deuteronomy. 17.
(Nevertheless the high Priest was subject to the King in temporalls, and might
be judged by him, as the said Abulensis before affirmed, where he assigned the
difference betwixt a Judge, and a King.) Also, it was lawful for Ioiada in
regard he now represented the Kings person. For he made a covenant in the
place, or person of the King with all the people, and with GOD, and he
represented the Kings person in all things, for that he had hitherto kept him
hidden, and now he anointed him King, but it was lawful for the King to
command Athalia to be slain, who had usurped the kingdom, therefore it was
lawful also for Ioiada, who represented the Kings person in all things.

53 Now I remit to the judgment of any understanding man, although he be never
so partial, whether every faithful subject, having great power, and favor
with the people, and being the Kings Protector, and Guardian, and presenting
the Kings person in all things, ought not to defend the true and known King,
against a manifestly surper, and to command that usurper to be slain, who in a
manifest rebellion seeks the crown and life of the true, and anointed King,
which was the case of Ioiada in commanding Athalia to be slain. How
unconscionably therefore, and shamefully does this Doctor both abuse me, and
also delude his Reader in misinterpreting so grossly those words of mine,
Therefore Ioiada in killing Athalia did no other thing, then which every
faithful subject ought to do in the like case: that is, says this Doctor,
every faithful subject, if he think one to have by an ill title usurped the
kingdom, not only may, but also ought to kill such a King, etc. As though
this were the case of Ioiada, whereas it is manifest, that Ioiada did not only
think, but also certainly know that Athalia was an usurper, and that Ioas was
the rightful King: Besides, he was the Kings Uncle, his Protector and
Guardian, and represented the Kings person in all things; and also he proceeded
orderly by procuring first the consent of the Princes and people, in putting
Ioas in the possession of his kingdom, and afterward commanding Athalia to be
slain, for making a manifest rebellion in presence of the King, sitting in his
Royal throne, and of all the Princes and people, crying a Conspiracy, a
Conspiracy; Treason, Treason; for proof whereof there needed no accuser, or
witness, the fact being so public and notorious, but it was sufficient to use
martial Law in this case, especially seeing that there might have been danger
in delay.

54. Neither does this give occcasion to subject to rebel against their
lawful Kings, or to kill them, but rather to defend the right of their true
Kind, and who is evidently known so to be, and too put down a known and
manifest Usurper. Neither do I contend, as this Doctor without shame
offirmeth me to do, that it was lawful for the high Priest (whom indeed I
granted with S. Thomas. S. Bonauenture, Abulensis, and other Catholic Divines
before Sec. 1. nu. 5. 6.
cited, to be subject to the King in temporalls) to exhort the people to
rebellion, and to conspire with the Peers and people against the lawful
Queen, and to kill her, but I only contend, that it was lawful for Ioiada
the high Priest, and for every faithful subject to defend the rightful title
of the true and known King against a manifest Usurper, especially if such a
subject be the Kings Uncle, Protector, and Guardian, and has the true, and
known King in his protection, and custody, and represents the Kings person
in all things, as Ioiada was.

55 Neither is that example of Queen Elizabeth, which this Doctor urges to
disgrace me with our Countrymen, to the present purpose; Seeing that it was
not manifest, that Queen Elizabeth was an Usurper, as was Athalia, but rather
it is manifest, that she was the lawful Queen, considering that the Kingdom
was left unto her by the last Will, and Testament of her Father King Henry, and
also that she was accepted for lawful Queen by a public decree of the
Parliament without any contradiction, or claim of Queen Mary our now
Sovereigns mother, or of any other, who might pretend a right to the kingdom.
And although her title to the Crown had been doubtful, yet I think my
Adversary will hardly deny, that in case of doubtful titles, it chiefly
belongs to the Commonwealth, or kingdom, which the Parliament does
represent, to declare, and determine whose title is the best. As in the time of
Schism, when two pretend to be the true Pope, this Doctor will not deny, that
it belongs to the Church, whom he makes inferior, and subject to the true,
and undoubted Pope, to declare and determine whether of their titles to the
Popedom is the best, neither does this expose the Crowns of Popes or Kings
to the rash leuitie of private men.

56 But rather this Doctor seems here to insinuate diverse very false and
seditious positions: As first, that the people may deprive a lawful King, and
who by a special promise, and appointment of God has right to the kingdom,
of his Princely right, and lawful inheritance without any fault committed by
him, and give it to a manifest Usurper, and who also, as being a subject, is by
the express law of God for many crimes to be put to death.

Secondly, that if a manifest Usurper possess the kingdom peaceably for six
years together, the true, and rightful King then living, so that the people
fearing his cruelty do not rise up in arms against him, the true heir is
thereby deprived of his Royal right, and the Usurper has now gotten a lawful
right to the kingdom.

Thirdly, that an Usurper making an open rebellion against the true, and
anointed King in presence of the King himself sitting in his throne, of the
Peers, people, and all his army, the Kings Protector, and who represents
the Kings person in all things, may not by the law of arms, or martial law
(the King being in his minority) command such a manifest traitor presently
to be slain, the fact being so public and notorious, that it needs no
accuser, witness, or other proof, and especially when by delay there may be
danger of Conspiracy, and tumults among the people. All these do evidently
follow, as you have seen, from Doctors Reply against my answer to this
example of Athalia. And therefore to retort his bitter inuectiue against me to
Kings, and Princes back upon himself:

57 Behold, O Kings, and Princes, you have here one, who is careful of the
security of your Royal issue, or rather of those, who shall tyrannically
usurp their kingdoms. So obseruant are they of your Princely Majesty, and of
your Royal posterity who so immoderately advance the Popes temporal
authority. Every faithful subject, say they, ought not to do in the like
case, that which Ioiada did in killing Athalia; that is, if a manifest Usurper
shall cruelly murder your innocent children, and so tyrannically invade the
kingdom, every faithful subject, who has preserved one of your Royal issue
from cruel death, and who is the chief Peer of the Realm, his Uncle,
Protector, and Guardian, and represents his Royal person in all things, and
has great power and favor among the people, ought not to put your son in
the possession of his Crown, and command the Usurper to be slain by the law
of arms, if he seek to make a public and manifest rebellion in presence of
the anointed King, Princes and people, for this was the case of Ioiada in
commanmanding Athalia to be slain. O miserable state of Princes children,
whose kingdom and life, is by the desperate writings of these men exposed to
eminent danger? If Widdrington had written such a thing, what tumults would not
this Doctor make? what clamours would he not raise?

58 Another slander not much unlike to the former does this Doctor
unconscionably impose upon me in his words immediately following. Near also,
or adjoining to his, says this Doctor, page 563.
is that, which Widdrington teaches in the number 460. that the Pope in his
opinion then subject to the Emperor, and as subject, might and really did with
the tacit er express consent of the people of Rome lawfully and with
validity take away the Empire of the West from the Emperor of Constantinople,
and transfer it to Charles the great. For how little a part of the Empire was
then the people of Rome? or what power had they in the election of the
Emperor? From this therefore it does evidently and necessarily follow, that
every subject with the tacit or express consent of one City, that also,
which has no voice, or suffrage in the election of the King, may deprive his
true, lawful, and natural Prince either of all his dominion, or of part,
whereby truly is opened a most broad way to seditions, conspiracies,
rebellions, and reuoltings.

59 But truly I cannot but greatly marvel how this my Adversary, by his
Degree a Doctor, and by his function a Priest, is not ashamed to teach,
contrary to his profession, such palpable untruths, and so fowly, grossly, and
shamefully to corrupt my words and meaning: And therefore, whereas in most
places he is very careful to set down my express words, or in some sort the
sense of them, here, least the Reader should presently perceive his corrupt
dealing, he clean omitteth to set them down for almost 40. pages together,
to wit, from the number 413. to 463. wherein I amply declared, in what manner
the Pope, and people of Rome translated the Roman Empire to Charles the great,
with other observations concerning the facts of Popes in deposing Emperors,
and Princes, and why there are so many Authors, whose books are extant, that
favor the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, all which this
Doctor passes over with silence. For as I have showed above, Cap. 3. nu. 37.
and seq.
I proved there most clearly by the testimonies of many learned Authors,
first that the translation of the Roman Empire from the Grecians to Charles
the great was done not only by the authority of the Pope, but also of the
Senate, and people of Rome, with the express or tacit consent of all the
people of the West, and that none of the Authors brought by Cardinal
Bellarmine do contradict the same: And secondly, that the Pope and people of
Rome, and of the Western Empire, were not at that time subject to the Grecian
Emperor, for that he had then the Roman Empire as forsaken, and abandoned,
and that therefore the Roman, and Western Provinces, being left to
themselves, might choose what Emperor they pleased according to Card.
Bellarmines express doctrine, which I there related.

60 Consider therefore, good Reader, with what conscience this Doctor
affirms me to say, that the Pope in my opinion then subject to the Emperor,
and as subject, with the consent of the people of Rome might lawfully deprive
the Grecian Emperor of the Western Empire, and transfer it to Charles the
great, from whence it evidently folleweth, says he, that every subject with
the consent of one City, yea and of that City, which has no suffrage in the
choosing of the King, may deprive their true, lawful and natural Prince
either of his whole dominion, or of part thereof. For I never affirmed, either
that he Pope, or people of Rome were then really, and in very deed subject to
the Emperor of Greece, who had the Roman Empire for abandoned and forsaken:
or that the whole common wealth being subject, and as subject, much less one
City, or Province had authority over their Prince to judge him, depose him,
or to change the manner of government. That which I affirmed is, that the
common wealth it self, in case it has no Prince, and consequently is then
supreme it self, and not subject to any Prince, and not that people subject,
as this Doctor faigneth, have power, I do not say, to judge, or depose their
King, as he also shamefully affirms me to say, for that the Common wealth
in that case has no King, but to choose to them a King, or to change the
manner or government from a Monarchy, to Democratic, Aristocratic, or mixed.
And this I affirmed Cardinal Bellarmine to avouch, when he teaches, that the
supreme temporal power is by the law of nature in the whole multitude or
common wealth, when they have no King, or Superior over them, and that by the
same law of nature they man transfer it from the whole multitude to one only,
or to more, and that therefore they may change the Monarchy into Aristosratic,
or Democratic, and contrariwise, as we see it was done at Rome.

61 Neither can it with any probability be denied, that the City of Rome,
which was the chief Imperial City, and Metropolis of the Roman Empire, that
is, the Pope, Senate, and people of Rome, had by right a great sway in the
election of their own Emperor, albeit the army did de facto commonly choose
him, to which election the Senate and people of Rome did either willingly, or
for fear give their consent: and that therefore the Pope, Senate, and people
of Rome with the consent either express, or tacit of the rest of the Western
Provinces had fell power and authority to choose to them an Emperor,
supposing they were left to themselves, and forsaken and abandoned by the
Emperor of Greece: and this is agreeable to Card. Bellarmines doctrine: But
that one only Subject, or one City, which is a small part of the kingdom, yea
or that the whole kingdom it self may lawfully and rightly deprive of the
whole kingdom, or of any part thereof their lawful King being neither
condemned, nor heard, nor accused, yea may lawfully condemn him, although he
be heard, or accused, I never affirmed, neither does it follow from my
doctrine; nevertheless, that every faithful subject is bound to do in the
like case that which Ioiada did, either in deposing or killing Athalia, this I
do constantly affirm, neither can any Catholic deny the same without note of
teaching a most false, a most scandalous, and a most seditious doctrine.

62 And therefore I remit to the judgment of Christian Kings, and subjects,
what censure those last words of this Doctor do deserve: Also that every
faithful subject is bound to do that which Ioiada did in kil^ing Athalia,
Bellarmlne never taught, it does not follow from Bellarmines doctrine, all
Catholics do abhor, and detest it, and among them without doubt Bellarmine.
I omit to examine at this present, what title Charles ^he great had, either by
hereditarie succession, or by the right of con^uest to the Western Empire,
before this translation; and what real ^ower, authority and dominion this
translation gave to Charles the great: for that he, and his Father Pipin had
before conquered all Italy, ^and before this translation his son Pipin was
created King of Italy, Sigebert ad ann. 774. and others.
and he himself Patritius Romanorum, which, Otho Frisingens. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Sigebert. ad ann. 781. and others.
as Card. Bellarmine himself confesses, Lib. 1. de Translat. Imper. cap. 9.
Lupold. Babeng. lib. de Iuribus Regn and Imperij Romans cap. 12.
is the next dignity to the Emperor. Neither will I now ^ispute, what real
difference there is betwixt the Emperor, and an ab^olute King concerning their
supreme power, and authority over their ^ubiects. This only is sufficient for
me at this present, that supposing with Card. Bellarmine this translation to
have not only a titular, but also ^ real effect, whereof Lupoldus of Bamberbeg
does particularly treat, if Card. Bellarmine will needs have this translation
to have all it force and validity from the Popes authority alone, and not
also of the Roman people or common wealth, he calls in question the right
and title, which the Latin Emperors have to the Roman Empire, in making it ^o
be grounded upon no so sound title or foundation, as I signified before cap. 3.
number. 48. See also that Chapter number. 37. and seq. where I trea^ed more amply of
this translation.

63 But now to return to that fact of Ioiada, from whence with ^his Doctor I
have made this digression, Ioiada, says this Doctor, Page 565.
to ^aue done that which he did through the opinion only of his sanctity, and
without any true and lawful power, Widdrington affirms, we deny: He
^peaketh of his own head, we follow the words of the Scripture: Ioiada, says
^he Scripture 4. Reg. 11. commanded them, the Centurions and soldiers, ^aying,
This is the thing, which you must do etc. And a little beneath, And if any man
shall enter the precinct of the temple, let him be slain: And forthwith, And
the Centurions did according to all things that Ioiada the Priest had commanded
them. And again, Ioiada commanded the Centurions that were over the army, and
said to them, Lead ^er [Athalia] forth without the precinct of the temple, and
whosoever shall follow her, let him be stricken with the sword. See also 2.
Paralip. cap. 23.

64 But still this Doctor persisteth in corrupting my words, and meaning. For
I never said, or meant, that Ioiada did that which he did, without any true, or
lawful power; this is a mere fiction of his own brain. That which I said
was, that all that Ioiada did either concerning the putting the true heir, and
rightful King into the possession of his inheritance and kingdom, or
concerning the putting Athalia to death, did not argue in Ioiada, either any
true authority to create a king denouo, that is to give him a right to the
kingdom, which right he had not before, or any proper authority due only to
the high Priest, and which might not also be common to every faithful subject
in the like case: but that which Ioiada did concerning the killing of Athalia,
he did by the authority and consent of the King, Princes and people; and what
he did concerning her deposing, he was bound to do by the law of God, of
nature, and nations. For Ioiada was the Kings uncle, the Kings Protector, his
tutour, and keeper, and represented his person in all things, and was the
chief Captain, and Author of all this covenant, which he made with the
Centurions, Princes, and people, to put king Ioas in possession, and to defend
him from Athalia, and therefore no marvel, that he, as representing the Kings
person, gave commandment to the centurions, and soldiers, how they should
carry themselves either toward Athalia, or any other in the kings defense.

65 True it is, that Ioiada might by his own proper authority, as he was high
Priest, command the Soldiers, that Athalia should not be slain in the temple,
least the temple, whereof the high Priest had the chief charge, should not be
polluted by her blood, but absolutely to command her to be slain, none could
do by his own proper authority, but he only, upon whom the weal public,
common justice, and the temporal sword does principally depend, who only is
the King in a kingdom, from whom, as from the head of civil power, all
temporal authority and command in his kingdom is derived: Wherefore I never
meant, that Ioiada did that which he did without any true, lawful, and proper
authority, as proper is opposed to improper, or metaphorical, but he did that
which he did not by any proper authority of his own, which was peculiar to
him, as he was high Priest, in which sense proper is distinguished from common,
but he did that which he did concerning Ioas, and Athalia, by that true, and
lawful authority, which might also be common to other subjects in the like
case, to wit, to such subjects, as are the chief Peers of the Realm, the
Kings Protectors, and Guardians, and who represent the Kings person in all
things.

66 For two principal things Ioiada did: the one was, that he preserved the
true, and rightful King, and whom he knew certainly so to be, from being
murdered by wicked Athalia, and to that end he kept him secretly in the
Temple for six years together, and in the seventh year by the aid of the
Princes, and people he did put him in possession of his kingdom, which
Aathalia had tirannically kept from him. And this every faithful subject in
the like case is bound to do, and by the Law of nature and nations has
authority so to do: and the consent of all kingdoms, and the authority of
the rightful King does give sufficient warrant to the same. So that this
authority was not proper to the function of the high Priest, as he was high
Priest, but is common to every faithful subject, who is the Kings Protector,
and Guardian, and represents the Kings person in all things. The second was,
that Ioiada commanded Athalia to be slain, who endeavored to make a public
rebellion, against the true, lawful, and now crowned, and anointed King,
crying out in the presence of the King himself, the Princes and the people, A
conspiracy, A conspiracy, Treason, Treason: And the authority also to command
this was not proper to the function of the high Priest, as he was high Priest,
but is common also to every faithful subject, who is the Kings Protector, and
Guardian, and represents the Kings person in all things. And to teach the
contrary to any of these two things, is to teach a most false, scandalous, and
seditious doctrine.

67 This second, to wit, that the commandment of Ioiada to kill Athalia was
done in the Kings name, and by his authority, this Doctor affirms Page 567.
not to be incredible, because it happened after the creation of the new King,
neither would this, says he, hurt Bellarmines opinion. For Bellarmine does not
contend, that heretical Kings ought to be slain by the Popes commandment,
but only to be deposed. But this is very untrue: For although Card. Bellarmine
does not in express words, yet by a clear, and necessary consequence he does
contend, that the Pope has power to deprive heretical Kings not only of
their kingdoms, but also of their lives, seeing that he contendeth, that the
Pope has authority in oder to spiritual good to dispose of all temporalls,
and I hope, that the lives of Princes are not to be excluded from temporal
things. See above nu. 9 and seq. And although Ioas was made King de facto, by
the procurement of Ioiada, yet it cannot with any credibilitie be denied, but
that all the time that Athalia reigned de facto, and unjustly usurped the
kingdom, Ioas was King, de iure, and that the kingdom, and all Kingly
authority did by right belong to him.

68 But Widdrington does not well prove, says this Doctor, that all those
things were done only by the counsel, and not by the authority of Ioiada.
For as the Scripture testifies both 4. Reg. 11. and 2. Paralip. 23. Ioiada
called the Centurions together; Ioiada armed the Soldiers; Ioiada commanded
that if any one should enter within the precinct of the Temple he should be
slain, if any one should follow the Queen he should likewise be slain;
Ioiada, as says the Gloss cited by Widdrington, did institute the King;
Ioiada crowned the King; Ioiada commanded the Queen to be slain; Ioiada made
a covenant betwixt himself, the King, and the people, that they should be the
people of our Lord; Ioiada commanded the Temple of Baal to be overthrown; the
Altars of the Idols to be destroyed; the Priest of Baal to be slain; Ioiada
set the watch in the house of our Lord, etc. All these things Ioiada the high
Priest did: but because he alone could not accomplish the whole matter, he
adjured the Centurions, that they would help valiantly, and faithfully, and
therefore he made a covenant with them for the execution: Wherefore nothing is
given to the Centurions but obeying, and executing at the commandment of
Ioiada; The Centurions, says the Scripture, did according to all things that
Ioiada the high Priest had commanded them.

69 But why does this Doctor still corrupt my words, and meaning? why does he
omit that word propria authoritate, by his own proper authority, which of set
purpose, to express plainly my meaning, I did set down. I never affirmed,
that all those things here mentioned by this Doctor, were done by Ioiada
without true, and lawful authority, but I always added, that they were not
done propria authoritate, by his own proper authority, to wit, which was
proper and peculiar to him, as he was high Priest, but by the authority and
consent of the King, Princes, and people, and which things every faithful
subject might do, and was bound to do in the like case, that is, if he were
the Kings Protector, and Guardian, and represented in all things the Kings
person, and such a King, whom he did not only probably imagine, but also
certainly knew to be the rightful, and undoubted King, and heir of the
kingdom.

70 Nevertheless I do willingly grant, as I have said before, and oftentimes
in all my books I have freely confessed, that Ioiada by his own proper
authority, that is, by his Priestly power had authority to declare to the
people the Law of God, and to command them to observe the same, but not to
constrain them by temporal punishment to the observation thereof: and that
therefore he might command them in general to put Ioas in possession of his
kingdom, knowing that it did by the Law of God, and by the right of his
inheritance belong to him, as being descended by a direct line from the stock
of King David, according as God almighty had promised to David, and Solomon.
But concerning the particular manner how Athalia was to be deposed, and Ioas
was to be put in possession of his kingdom, which was not contained in the Law
of God, this, I said, Ioiada could only do by his advice and counsel, if we
respect him only as he was high Priest, but if we respect him, as he was the
Kings Protector, Keeper, and Guardian, and represented the Kings person in all
things, this I said, he did by authority, but not by his own proper
authority, as he was high Priest, and which could not be common also to all
other subjects in the like case, but by the authority of the King, and
commonwealth, and as he, being the Kings Protector, and Guardian, represented
the Kings person in all things. And therefore I do not deny, that Ioiada did
all those things mentioned by this Doctor by authority, but not by his own
proper authority, which this Doctor has not as yet any way impugned, nor will
be ever able to impugn.

71 That Ioiada did not those things, by his own proper authority, but in the
name, and by the authority of the King with the consent of the Princes, and
people, I proved by the words of the holy Scripture, and of the Gloss upon
that place, Therefore all the multitude, says the Scripture, made a covenant
with the King in the house of God, and Ioiada said to them, Behold the Kings
sone shall reign, as our Lord has spoken upon the sons of David. The words
of the Gloss are these: Here is described the institution of the true heir,
the due heir, and which ought to be the due King, and which ought to be (for
all these names, very haeredis, haeredis debiti, Regis debiti the Gloss uses)
by the procurement of Ioiada the high Priest, seeking thereunto the assent of
the Princes, and Nobles of the Realm, when it is said, And he made a covenant
with them.

72 Mark now how cunningly this Doctor would shift of these testimonies. That
which is added, says he, Page 568.
concerning the covenant with the King, is understood of the future King, to
wit, with him, who a little after was to be instituted King, as it is manifest
by the same place; for presently it is added, And Ioiada said to them, Behold,
the Kings son shall reign. And the Gloss is against Widdrington; for if
here be described the institution of the true King, and to this is required
the assent of the Princes, assuredly Ioas was not King before, albeit he was
the Kings son: For he that is King by succession ought not to be instituted,
but declared, neither does he need the assent of the Princes. Therefore Ioiada
did constitute the King, and depose the Queen, but the Princes ayding and
assisting him, without whom he could not have accomplished the matter.

73 But if this Doctor had been pleased to declare plainly the true state of
the present question betwixt me, and Cardinal Bellarmine, as I did, and not
delude his Reader with ambiguous and equivocal words, the plain truth of
this controversy would presently have appeared. For this word, King, is
equiuocal and may be taken either for a King de iure, and who has true, and
lawful right to the kingdom, albeit he be not in possession thereof; or for a
King de facto, and who does actually reign, abstracting from that he does
reign de iure by right and lawfully, or by usurpation. Now I granted, that
Athalia was Queen de facto, and in possession of the kingdom for six years
together, but I denied, that she was Queen de iure, and that the kingdom did
belong to her by right, but to Ioas the rightful heir, as being the only
son then living of Ochozias, King of Judah; and that therefore Ioiada did not
create or institute Ioas King, that is, give him a true right to reign, which
he had not before, for that the true dominion, and right to the kingdom did
reside in Ioas by right of inheritance and succession instantly upon the death
of his eldest brethren, and this much the aforesaid words of the holy
Scripture, and of the Gloss do evidently convince.

Wherefore that, which this Doctor says concerning the covenant of the people
with the King, is understood of the future King, which a little after was to be
instituted, is also equivocal: for if he understand, that Ioas was not then
King de facto, but a little after by the procurement of Ioiada was made and
instituted King de facto, that is, was put in possession of the kingdom, and
did actually reign, this was not the controversy betwixt me, and Card.
Bellarmine; for I never denied, but did always in express words grant, that
Ioiada with the assent of the Princes and people did put Ioas in possession of
his kingdom, which Athalia had vniusty kept from him, and in this sense Ioas,
who before was King de iure, was afterward by Ioiada created and instituted
King de facto. But if he mean, that Ioas was not then King de iure, and that
the kingdom did not by right of inheritance, and by the ordinance of almighty
God belong to him, this, I say, is plainly against the words of the holy
Scripture, and of the Gloss. Ecce filius Regis etc. Behold the Kings son
shall reign, as our Lord has spoken over the sons of David: that is, behold
the Kings son, to whom therefore the right to the kingdom by inheritance
does belong, although he does not actually reign, for that Athalia contrary
to the commandment of God, who gave the kingdom to the sons of David, has
tyrannically kept it from him, shall reign, that is, shall be King de facto,
and actually reign, according as our Lord has spoken upon the sons of David.

75 But the words of the Gloss are more plain: for he calls Ioas not only
the true, due or rightful King, but also the true, due or rightful heir:
Neither can this Doctor deny, that Ioas was presently after the death of all
his brethren the only son of King Ochozias, and consequently the true and
only heir to the kingdom of Judah, and therefore the true King de iure or by
right: For he can not be so ignorant, as not to know, that the heir to a
kingdom, has presently after the death of his father all the right, which his
father deceased had to the kingdom: It is manifest, says the rule of the law,
ff. de regulis iuris regula. 59
approved by all lawyers, that an heir has the same power and right, which
the deceased had; and again, Ibidem regula 62.
Inheritance is no other thing, then a succeeding to all the right which the
deceased had. Wherefore the words and sense of the Gloss are plain: for the
words are not, Here is described the institution of the true King, but of the
true heir, whom he called before the due or rightful heir: Now it is
manifest, that Ioiada did not make or institute Ioas the true and rightful
heir to the kingdom of Judah, but he was made and instituted the rightful
heir by succession, and by the ordinance of almighty God, for that he was the
only son and heir suruiuing of the deceased King Ochozias. And therefore
those words of this Doctor, Assuredly Ioas was not King before, although he
was the Kings son, if he mean that he was not King de iure before, are very
untrue; but rather contrariwise, I infer, that assuredly Ioas was King de
iure before, because he was the Kings son, to whom by succession and
inheritance the kingdom of Judah did by right, and by the ordinance of
almighty God belong, and those words of holy Scripture, Behold the Kings son
etc. do convince as much.

76 But he that is King by succession, says this Doctor, ought not to be
instituted or made, but to be declared, neither does he need the assent of the
Princes. It is true that he who is King de iure, and by succession, ought not
to be instituted or made King de iure, neither needs he the consent of the
Princes to make him King de iure. But he that is King only de iure and by
succession, but not King de facto and by possession, ought to be instituted or
made King de facto, and to this is necessary the assent and aid of the
Princes and people. Wherefore as this word [to depose] is equivocal, and may
be taken either for to deprive one of his right, or to put him out of
possession of the thing he holds, so also to institute, create or make a King
or heir is equivocal, and may be taken either for to give one a right to a
kingdom or inheritance, which right he had not before, or to put him in
possession of the kingdom or inheritance, whether he has right thereunto or
no. And therefore, as well observes Gregorius Tholosanus, In Syntagin. Iu^is
lib. 17. cap. 16. nu. 4.
because the instituting or giving of a benefice (and the like may be said of a
Dukedom, Princedome, Kingdom or inheritance) is sometimes effected by giving
the possession, or as it is commonly said by installing or inuesting, therefore
to institute is sometimes taken for to install or inuest as by delivering some
corporal thing, as a ring, a crown, a scepter etc. by which the real and
actual possession is given, apprehended or induced. cap. ad haec de officio
Archidiaconi, and. 1o. de consuetudine recti feudi lib. 2. de feudis tit. 33.
And in this sense the Gloss did understand the word, institution, to wit, for
inuesting, installing or putting Ioas into possession of his kingdom, or,
which is all one, making him King de facto. For it is too too manifest, that he
was before the rightful heir, and King by succession, and not then made or
instituted the rightful heir by the election of Ioiada, and of Princes.

77 Wherefore the last inference, which this Doctor makes in these words,
Therefore Ioiada did institute the King, and deposed the Queen etc. is very
true if he mean that he did constitute the King de facto, or put him in
possession of his kingdom, and deposed the Queen de facto, that is, thrust
her out of the possession of the kingdom; For Ioiada in this sense did make or
constitute the King, and deposed the Queen by the aid and assistance of the
Princes, without whom he could not have accomplished the matter: but to make or
constitute him King de iure, or the rightful heir to the kingdom, only
succession without the aid and assent of Ioiada, or the Princes was
sufficient. Neither dare this Doctor absolutely auerre, as you have seen,
that Ioas was not before this, King de iure, but Athalia, but he affirms it
with a credibile est, which nevertheless I have proved to be incredible, and
to contain a very false, scandalous and seditious doctrine.

78 Lastly, although that question betwixt me and Card. Bellarmine, to wit,
whether Athalia was slain only for treason, or also for idolatry, be not
much material to the present controversy between us, which is, by what
authority it was done: seeing that, whether she was slain only for treason,
or also for idolatry it was done by the authority of the King, who then was
crowned and confirmed by the Princes and people, as this Doctor here is not
also unwilling to grant: Nevertheless I still affirm, that it can not be
proved from the holy Scripture, that she was slain for idolatry: albeit I
do not deny, that she deserved death therefore. Whereupon the Scripture only
mentions, that upon her endeavoring to make a rebellion against the true,
and now anointed King, crying out in the presence of the King, Princes and
people, A conspiracy, A conspiracy, Treason, Treason, she was commanded to be
slain. Neither can this Doctor sufficiently conclude from those words of holy
Scripture, Therefore all the people entered into the house of Baal, and
destroyed it etc. as Card. Bellarmine pretended to prove, or from those words
immediately going before, And Ioiada made a covenant between himself, and all
the people, and the King, that they would be the people of the Lord, that
Athalia was actually slain for idolatry, although I do willingly grant, that
she was an Idolatresse, and therefore deserved death according to the law.

79 Neither did I, as this Doctor untruly says page 570.
either slander Card. Bellarmine, or else knew not what I said my self, when
I affirmed, that Card. Bellarmine did not sincerely relate the words of holy
Scripture, to wit, Therefore all the people entered into the house of Baal, and
destroyed it etc. which words, as he says, do immediately follow the killing
of Athalia. For after the killing of Athalia these words, And Ioiada made a
covenant between himself, and all the people and the King, etc. which as the
Gloss affirms, were a confirmation of the King newly anointed, and crowned,
do immediately follow, and after them do follow those words, Therefore all
the people entered into the house of Baal, and destroyed it, etc. And whereas
this Doctor affirms, that Bellarmine did not mean, that those words
precisely; Therefore all the people entered into the house of Baal, etc. do
immediately follow after the words, wherein the killing of Athalia was
commanded, but his meaning was, that the overthrowing of the temple of Baal was
done immediately after the killing of the Queen, and therefore he did not
properly speak of words, but of things done; This is plainly both against
the text of holy Scripture, for that betwixt the killing of Athalia, and the
destruction of the temple of Baal, was the confirmation of King Ioas newly
crowned, and anointed, and of the covenant, which Ioiada made between
himself, and all the people, and the King, that they would be the people of
our Lord, and it is also against Cardinal Bellarmines own words: Those
words, says Cardinal Bellarmine, Therefore all the people entered into the
house of Baal, and destroyed it, etc. do immediately follow the killing of
Athalia: And yet this Doctor, forsooth, will have Cardinal Bellarmine not to
speak properly of words, but of things done, contrary to Card. Bellarmines
express words. But truth, and plain dealing cannot colourably be impugned,
but by such pitiful shifts, and fraudulent euasions.

71 And thus thou see, good Reader, how insufficiently this Doctor has
confuted my answer to Cardinal Bellarmines argument taken from the example of
Athalia, who was not deposed by Ioiada, that is, deprived of her right to
reign, seeing that she was never a lawful Queen, nor ever had any true
right to reign, but she was by the procurement of Ioiada, and by the aid,
and assistance of the Princes, and people, thrust out of the possession of the
kingdom, which she tyrannically had for six years usurped, and wrongfully
detained from Ioas the true and rightful King by hereditarie succession, as
being the only son and heir suruiuing to King Ochozias; and that Ioiada
that which he did both in putting Ioas in possession, and in killing Athalia,
not by his own proper authority, and which was peculiar to him, as he was
high Priest, but by that authority, which might be common to every faithful
subject in the like case. Now you shall see, how bouldly, and barely Mr.
Fitzherbert repateth again this example of Athalia, without taking any notice
of the answer, which I made thereunto before in my Apology, and Theological
Disputation.

72 But now our Adversaries, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Nu. 16. p 77.
to answer this exemple of Athalia, do say, that she was no lawful Queen,
but a Tyrant, and usurped the state in prejudice of Ioas the right heir, whom
Ioiada set up, and that therefore the example of her deposition cannot be of
consequence to prove, that the high Priest in the old law had authority to
depose a lawful Prince: But they are to understand, that it little imports
for the matter in hand, whether she were a true Queen, or a Tyrant; for
though she had been a lawful Queen, yet he should have been her lawful
Superior, it being evident, that otherwise he could not have been her Judge
to determine of her right, and depose her as unlawful, especially after she
had been received for Queen, and obeyed by the State for six years: to
which purpose it is to be considered, that no man can lawfully condemn an
offender, over whom he should not also have power in case he were innocent; for
as well, and justly does the Judge absolve a man when he is innocent, as
condemn him when he is nocent, having equal authority, and the same
judicial power over him in both cases.

73 Yes, good Sir, it much imports to the matter in hand, whether she was a
true Queen, or a Tyrant: for if she had been a lawful Queen, then he should
not have been her lawful Superior in temporalls, neither could he have been
her lawful Judge to determine of her temporal right, for that, as I showed
before out of many learned Catholics, and which also Card. Bellarmine himself
holds to be probable, in the old law the high Priest was subject to the king
in temporalls, and might by him be judged, and punished with temporal
punishments. But if she were no lawful Queen, but an Usurper, as in deed she
was, then it is evident, that Ioas was the true, and rightful King, and that
all civil authority did reside in him, and was derived from him, as from the
head of all civil power, whereof the King is head, as D. Schulckenius himself
confesses; Page 339. ad number. 169.
and that therefore Ioiada, who was the Kings Protector, and Guardian now in
his minority, and represented the Kings person in all things, might be her
Judge both to depose her, and also to kill her, as a manifest traitor, and
usurper.

74 But those words, which Mr. Fitzherbert adds, especially after she had
been received for Queen, and obeyed by the whole state for six years, do
savor of that false, scandalous, and seditious doctrine, which D. Schulckenius
taught before, as though either six years prescription were sufficient to
deprive a lawful King of his Princely right, and give it to a wicked usurper,
or that the kingdom of Judah either did deprive, or had authority to deprive
the true, rightful, and certainly known King of his lawful inheritance, and
Princely right, and that without any offense at all committed by him.

75 Neither is that to the purpose which Mr. Fitzherbert would have his Reader
believe, to wit, that no man can lawfully condemn an offender, over whom he
should not also have power in case he were innocent, for as well and justly
does a Judge absolve a man, when he is innocent, as condemn him when he is
nocent, having equal authority, and the same judicial, power in both cases:
For I do not deny, that Ioiada being the Kings Protector, and Guardian, and
therefore representing the Kings person in all things, was the lawful
Superior, and Judge of Athalia, and of every other subject in the kingdom;
but that, which I contend is, that although Ioiada was in spiritualls her
Superior, and Judge, as he was high Priest, yet in temporalls he was neither
her Superior or Judge, nor of any other subject in the kingdom, as he was
high Priest, or by his Priestly authority, but as having his authority derived
from the true and lawful King, in whom only all supreme civil authority, as
in the head of all civil power does reside. And therefore this his
consideration is not to the purpose, as also it is not generally true. For all
Catholics, yea Cardinal Bellarmine himself, Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 19
do grant, that in time of Schism, when two contend to be the lawful Pope,
the Church is the lawful Superior, and Judge of both Popes, and that it
belongs to her to determine of their right: and neither yet Cardinal
Bellarmine, nor my Adversary will affirm, that the Church has the same
authority, and judicial power over the true, and undoubted Pope. Likewise
what will Mr. Fitzherbert say to Cardinal Caietaine, and others of his
opinion, that the Church is Superior to an heretical Pope, and has
authority to judge him, and depose him; who nevertheless will not admit, that
the Church is Superior to a Pope, who is no heretic. Moreover, no learned
man can deny, that when two contend to have right, or a title to any kingdom,
if they be members of that kingdom, the whole kingdom, or Commonwealth is
Superior to them, and has authority to judge and determine of their right,
and yet we may not therefore conclude, that the whole kingdom, or
Commonwealth is Superior to a known, and undoubted King.

76 No less idle also is that which follows. Nu. 17. p. 78.
Besides that, says Mr. Fitherbert, our Adversaries must needs grant, either
that Ioiada deposed her as her lawful Judge, being high Priest, or else that
any peculiar man many of his own authority take upon him to depose, and kill a
Tyrant, and usurper, which opinion was worthily condemned by the Council of
Constance as heretical, and with great reason, for that no particular man can
make himself another man's Judge, and much less the Judge of a Prince. Neither
can there be any doctrine more dangerous to Commonwealths, or pernicious to
Princes states, then that every subject may take upon him to judge, when his
Prince is a Tyrant, and proceeds against him to his deposition, or death.

77 True it is, that Ioiada deposed Athalia, that is, put her from the
possession of the kingdom, which she unjustly usurped, as her lawful Judge,
being High Priest, but it is not true, that he deposed her, as being
High Priest, or by his Priestly authority, nor as a private man, or by private
authority, but he both deposed her, and commanded her to be slain, as her
lawful Judge, being the Kings Protector, and Guardian in his nonage, and as
representing the Kings person in all things, and also with the assent of the
Princes and people. Neither from hence does it follow, that every particular
and private subject may by his own authority take upon him to kill a manifest
usurper, although S. Thomas In 2. did. vltima q. 2. ar. 2. ad. 5. Caietan 2.
2. q. 64. ar. 3. Sotus l. 5. de. Iustit q. 1. ar. 3 Solon 2 2. q. 64 ar. 3.
controuers. 1. Aragon ibidem. Lessius l. 2. de Iustit. c. 9. dub. 4
and many other Divines are of opinion, that every particular subject and
citizen has authority to kill, not a manifest Tyrant in the abuse of
government, but a manifest usurper, for in this case, say they, every private
Citizen has sufficient authority given him by the consent of the rightful
King, and also of the Commonwealth, against whom this manifest usurper does
continually make a manifest unjust war, and therefore it can not be called
properly private, but public authority. Neither, say they, is this doctrine
aginst the decree of the Council of Constance which does not speak
particularly of those, who are manifest Tyrants by usurpation, but of Tyrants
in general, comprehending also those who are true and lawful Kings, and only
Tyrants in government. For the proposition, which is in that Council condemned
as heretical scandalous and giving way to frauds, deceipts, treasons and
periuries, is this: Every Tyrant, (and consequently also a Tyrant only in
government, although otherwise a true and rightful King) may and ought
lawfully, and meritoriously to be slain by any his vassal or subject even by
secret wiles and crafty deceipts, or flatteries, notwithstanding any oath, or
confideracie made by them with him, not expecting the sentence or commandment
of any Judge whatsoever, which is in very truth a most damnable and traitorous
doctrine: But that a manifest Tyrant by usurpation may not be lawfully slain
by any private man, having authority thereunto from the true, rightful and
undoubted King, or from him, who is the Kings Protector and Guardian in his
minority, and represents the Kings person in all things; this is not
condemned in the Council of Constance, but the contrary doctrine is damnable,
scandalous and seditious.

78 Mark now, what a trim consequence Mr. Fitzherbert gathers from the
premises. Whereupon, says he nu. 18. page 78
, it follows, that seeing Ioiada did lawfully depose Athalia ( being a holy
man, Matthew. 23. Hieron. lib. 4. in. Number. cap. 23.
and therefore called by our Savior Barachias, that is to say, Blessed of our
Lord) he did it not as a particular and private man, but as a public person.
All this is true, as you have seen. But that which he adds, to wit, as
High Priest, to whom it belonged to judge of her cause, is very untrue, neither
does it follow from his premises. For his antecedent proposition was this,
Ioiada being high Priest deposed Athalia, as her lawful Judge, and not as a
particular, and private man, but as a public person, this I granted; now he
infers that Ioiada as High Priest did depose her, which I ever denied, and
he brought no show of argument to prove the same: only here in the next words
following he adioineth some color of an argument for proof thereof:
especially, says he, page 79.
seeing that she was not only a cruel tyrant, but also an abominable
Idolairesse, having drawn her husband Ioram, her son Ochozias, and the
people to Idolatry, and transferred the riches of Gods temple to the temples
of Idols, which being matter of Religion belonged directly to the tribunal of
the high Priest, and therefore I conclude, that Ioiada deposed her, as her
Superior, and lawful Judge according to the supreme authority that God gave
to the High Priest in the old Testament over the temporal State. So I in my
Supplement.

79 But how insufficient this conclusion is, it will presently appear, only
by laying open the ambiguitie of those words, Idolatry being a matter of
Religion belonged directly to the tribunal of the high Priest. For it belonged
indeed to the tribunal of the high Priest of the old Law, and his consistory
to judge what was Idolatry, as likewise now in the new Law it belongs to the
Pope, and Church to judge, what is heresy, or idolatry, and so to declare,
and determine what is heresy or Idolatry is a matter of Religion both in the
old Law, and in the new: but it did not belong to the tribunal of the high
Priest in the old law, but of the King, and temporal state to punish
Idolaters with corporal death, as likewise in the new law to punish heretics
with corporal death, being not a spiritual, but a temporal matter, does not
belong to the spiritual power of Priests, but to the temporal authority of
temporal Princes, Sot. in 4. did. 29 q. 1. ar. 4. Bannes secunda secundae q.
11. ar. 4. q. 1. in fine.
as I proved also out of Sotus, and Bannes in my Theological Disputation C.
7. s. 2. nu 17
. And therefore in the old Law the temporal power was supreme, and the
spiritual was subject to it, for as much as concerned the power to constrain
with temporal punishments, and as well Priest, as Laymen, were subject to the
coerciue, or punishing power of the temporal State, as I proved before Sec. 1
nu. 5. 6.
out of St. Thomas, St. Bonauenture, Abulensis, and others, whose doctrine also
Cardinal Bellarmine does not account improbable.

80 Wherefore, although it belonged to the High Priest to declare the law of
GOD, yet to execute the law, and to punish the transgressors thereof, whether
they were Priests, or Laymen, with temporal punishments, belonged to the
supreme temporal power of the King, and not to the supreme spiritual
authority of the High Priest. Seeing that Ozias, says Abulensis, because he
was King, Abul. q. 4. in c. 15. l. 4. Reg.
was the executor of the law of GOD against offenders, it belonged to him by
his office to destroy all Altars, which were without the temple of our Lord,
and to take away such a worship, and consequently all Idolatry, under the
penalty of death. And therefore I conclude, that Ioiada did depose Athalia
being a manifest Usurper, as her Superior and lawful Judge, but not according
to the supreme coerciue authority, that GOD gave to the High Priest in the
old Testament over the temporal state, which as I proved before, was in
temporalls supreme, and not subject, but superior to the spiritual power,
but according to the supreme coerciue authority, that GOD gave to the King,
to whom both Priests, and Laymen were subject in temporalls, and by whom they
were to be punished with temporal punishments, whose place, and person Ioiada
being the Kings Protector, and Guardian while the King was in his minority,
did in all things represent. Neither has Mr. Fitzherbert either in his
Supplement, or in this his Reply, as you have clearly seen, brought any
probable argument, much less conuincing, as he pretended, to impugn the same.

81 Now let us proceed to the example of King Ozias, which is the last Mr.
Fitzherbert brings out of the old Testament, to which nevertheless I did
abundantly answer in my Apology, which my answer he passes over altogether
with silence. But before I set down what he says here concerning this
example, I think it not amiss to repeat my said answer, and what D.
Schulckenius replyeth to the same; for thereby the weakness of Mr.
Fitzherberts objection will presently appear, and so also he shall not take
occasion after his usual manner to remit his English Reader to D. Schulckenius
to seek out a Reply, to that which I answered before in my Apology concerning
this example of King Ozias.

Bell. lib. 5. de. Romans Pont. c. 8
82 In this manner therefore Cardinal Bellarmine argued from this example. A
Priest of the old law had authority to judge a King, and to deprive him of his
kingdom for corporal leprosy, therefore in the new law the Pope has
authority to deprive a King of his kingdom for spiritual leprosy, that is,
for heresy, which was figured by leprosy.

The Antecedent proposition he proved thus, for that we read 2. Paralip.
26. that King Ozias, when he would usurp the office of a Priest, was by the
High Priest cast out of the temple, and when he was for the same sin stricken
by GOD with leprosy, he was also enforced to depart out of the City, and to
renounce his kingdom to his son. And that he was deprived of the City, and
of the administration of the kingdom not of his own accord, but by the
sentence of the Priest, it is apparent: For we read Leuit. 13. whosoever,
says the law, shall be defiled with leprosy, and is separated at the
abitrement of the Priest, shall dwell alone without the Camp. Seeing therefore
that this was a law in Israel, and withal we read, 2. Paralip. 26. that the
King did dwell without the City in a solitary house, and that his son did in
the City judge the people of the land, we are compelled to say, that he was
separated at the arbitrament of the Priest, and consequently deprived of his
authority to reign.

S. Aug. in q. Euan. l. 2. q. 40.
The Consequence Cardinal Bellarmine proves out of Saint Austin, who
teaches, that heresy was figured by leprosy, and Saint Paul 1. Corinthians. 10.
who says, that all things chanced to the Jews in a figure.

83 Thus argued Cardinal Bellarmine from the example of King Ozias, which if,
good Reader, thou duly consider, does only prove, that it belonged to the
Priests of the old Law, to declare the Law of God, when any difficulty should
arise, and that they were the supreme Judges in spiritual matters, as was to
declare, and judge whether any one was infected with leprosy or no. For
leprosy was not only in the old Law a natural disease, and a contagious
uncleanness in the body, whereupon the leper was by the law commanded to
remain out of the camp apart, least others should be infected by him, but it
was also a legal uncleanness, Abul. q. 2. in c. 13. Leuit.
and as well observes Abulensis, it did principally debar men from entering
into the Sanctuary, and from touching sacred things, and because to judge
whether any one was to be debarred from entering into the Sanctuary, and from
touching sacred things, did belong principally to the Priests, who were the
ministers of sacred things, God appointed them to judge, whether any one was
infected with leprosy, and gave them rules, and directions whereby to know the
same. So that the principal thing, which the Priest was to do in the case of
leprosy, was to judge according to the signs, and tokens prescribed by the
law of God, whether any one was infected with leprosy or no: and if he found
him infected to declare him so to be, and to condemn him of the said
uncleanness; after which declaration the leper was by the law it self
forthwith debarred both from sacred, and also civil conversation: for that
he was not only deprived of all sacred rites, but also he was to be severed
from the rest of the people, who were not defiled with such uncleanness, and
commanded to live apart out of the Camp, or City.

84 Now the execution of this law, forasmuch as concerned the spiritual
penalty, did belong principally to the High Priest, who was the chief
minister of sacred things; but concerning the temporal or civil penalty,
which was to be debarred from civil conversation, the execution thereof, if
the leper would not of his own accord undergo the penalty, did belong to the
Civil Magistrate, who was the minister of civil, or temporal things: As
also, when any temporal punishment, as death, whipping, or such like was
prescribed by the law against malefactors, although the crime was spiritual,
as Idolatry, usurping the office of a Priest, etc. the execution belonged to
the temporal Judge, who in temporalls had authority over them. Whereupon we
never read in the holy Scripture, that any true, and lawful King, although he
had committed any crime worthy of death according to the law, as many Kings of
the Israelites were Idolaters, and King Ozias here usurped the office of a
Priest, which were crimes that deserved death according to the law, were for
such crimes put to death by the ordinary authority of any man whatsoever, for
that Kings had no Superior over them in temporalls, who had authority to
execute the law, which did chiefly belong to themselves, as I a little above
Nu. 80*
observed out of Abulensis, or to punish them with temporal punishments, in
which sense King David did truly say, that he had sinned only to God,
saying, Tibisolipeccaui, for that God alone, to whom only he was subject in
temporals, had power to punish him with temporal punishments, as all the
ancient Fathers do expound that place. So likewise in the new law it belongs
to spiritual Pastors to declare and determine what is heresy, and whether
one befallen into heresy, or no; but to punish heretics with temporal
punishments does not belong to the authority of spiritual Pastors, but of
temporal Princes, who in temporals are supreme, and to whom only the using of
the temporal sword does principally belong.

85 Wherefore from this example of King Ozias nothing else can forcibly be
proved, but that in the old law it belonged to the Priests to declare the law
of God, and that only Priests, and not Laymen were to intermeddle in sacred
things. For observe, good Reader, what did the Priests, 2. Paralip. 26.
and what was done by King Ozias. First therefore King Ozias, says the
Scripture, entering into the temple of our Lord would burn incense upon the
Altar of incense. And incontinently Azarias the Priest going in after him, and
with him the Priests of our Lord, eighty, most valiant men, they resisted the
King, and said, It is not thy office, Ozias, to burn incense to our Lord, but
of the Priests, that is, of the children of Aaron, which are consecrated to
this kind of ministry, go out of the Sanctuary, contemn not, because this
thing shall not be reputed to thee for glory by our Lord. Here is nothing
done, as you see, by the Priests, which is not spiritual. And who makes any
doubt, but that the Priests also of the new law may resist Kings, if they
attempt to intermeddle in sacred things, which belong only to Priests, and
tell them, that it is not their office, but of the Priests, which are
consecrated to this kind of ministry, and command them to go out of the
Church, and not to contemn the law of God, because it will not be reputed to
them for glory by our Lord God.

86 But secondly, King Ozias being angry and holding in his hand the Censar to
burn incense threatened the Priests. And forthwith there arose a leprosy in
his forehead before the Priests. And when Azarias the high Priest had beheld
him, and all the rest of the Priests, they saw the leprosy in his forehead,
and in haste they thrust him out; yea and himself being sore afraid made haste
to go out, because he felt by and by the plague of our Lord. And here also is
nothing, which the Priests might not do by their spiritual authority. For I
do not deny, but that it belongs to the office of Priests to exclude
excommunicated persons, as in some sort leapers were in the old law, from the
temple of God, and from participation in sacred rites, as S. Ambrose excluded
Theodosius the Emperor. Nevertheless it cannot be proved by the words of
holy Scripture, that they thrust him out of the temple by corporal violence,
and by laying their hands upon his sacred person, but only by denouncing with
vehement words Gods indignation against him, for fear of which he now being
stricken by God miraculously with the plague of leprosy did of his own accord
depart in haste out of the temple, which also S. Chrysostom does sufficiently
confirm, saying, Chrysostom. hom. 4. de verbis Isae. vidi Dominum.
That they thrust him out, no man enforcing him, and the words of holy
Scripture, yea and himself being sore afraid made haste to go out, do
clearly insinuate the same.

87 And thirdly, King Ozias, says the Scripture, was a leper until the day of
his death, and he dwelt in a house apart, full of the leprosy, for the which
he had been cast out of the house of our Lord. Moreover Ioathan his son
governed the Kings house, and judged the people of the Land. Neither from this
can it be gathered, that the Priests of the old law did intermeddle in any
temporal action, or did deprive King Ozias of his kingdom, or the
administration thereof; but the most that from hence can be concluded is, that
the plague of leprosy did deprive him of the administration of his kingdom,
by ordaining that a leaper should dwell apart out of the camp or City, and
the Priest did only declare the law of God, and denounce him according to the
signs and tokens prescribed by the law to be infected with leprosy, which is
no temporal, but a mere spiritual action.

88 As likewise spiritual Pastors now in the new law have authority to
declare, that the goods of the faithful are to be exposed, if the necessity
of the Church do require the same, but not to dispose of them, or to take them
away by force from the faithful, and also to declare, when Princes are to use
the material sword, for the good of the Church, but not to use it themselves,
as before part. 1. cap. 3. and part. 2. cap. 9.
I declared out of Ioannes Parisiensis and 8. Bernard. And if we should suppose
a case which is not, to wit, that heresy, idolatie or any other mortal crime,
does ipso facto deprive Princes and Prelates of their dominion and
Jurisdiction, which was the doctrine of John Wicleffe condemned in the Council
of Constance (and therefore those words of the Ordinary Gloss in cap. 13. lib.
1. Reg.
, that a wicked King during the time of his wickedness is not according to
truth to be celled a King, but only equiuocally, as a stony or painted eye,
and the same much more is to be said of a wicked Prelate, are to be read
warily, and expounded favorably to excuse them from error) then, I say, that
spiritual Pastors may be said to have authority, not properly to depose an
heretical King, but to declare him to be infected with heresy, and
consequently, according to this false supposition, deprived ipso facto: But all
this is nothing else, but to declare authentically the law of God, which no man
denies to be within the limits of spiritual Jurisdiction. And this might
abundantly suffice for an answer to this example of King Ozias: But because
Mr. Fitzherbert shall not, as I said, take occasion to say, that all this has
been confuted already by D. Schulckenius, I am enforced, good Reader, to
entreat thy patience in laying down before thine eyes, what I answered in my
Apology to this objection of Cardinal Bellarmine, and what D. Schulckenius
has replied to the same.

89 First therefore I answered, that if this argument of Card. Bellarmine taken
from the example of King Ozias were of force, it would prove more, then
perchance Card. Bellarmine would willingly grant, to wit, that not only the
Pope but also inferior Bishops, yea and Priests, have power by the law of God
to deprive Princes of their kingdoms for spiritual leprosy, seeing that in
the old law not only the high Priest, but also inferior Priests had power to
judge of leprosy. The man, says the law Leuit. 13.
, in whose skin and flesh shall arise a diverse color, or a blisters, or any
thing, as it were, shining, that is to say, the plague of the leprosy, shall
be brought to Aaron the Priest, or any one of his sons, and at his
arbitrament he shall be separated. Besides, this example does also prove, that
Prince not only for heresy, but also for all other mortal sins whatsoever,
may be deposed by Bishops and Priests, for that not only the sin of heresy,
but also other sins were figured by leprosy, Bellar. lib. 3. de Paenit. cap.
3.
as Card. Bellarmine himself confesses, who speaking of the confessing of
sins says, that the knowledge of sin, which was figured by leprosy, and
is most aptly named a spiritual leprosy, appertains to Christian Priests.
This was my first answer.

90 To which D. Schulckenius replyeth thus: page 542. ad number. 355.
I answer. It is credible, that is the old Testament according to the
diversity of the leprosy, and the diversity of the persons there were also
diverse judgments, greater and lesser, and that it was not lawful for every
Priest to judge a King. But for this his credibile est, it is credible, he
produces neither Scripture, reason, nor any other authority, and therefore we
are rather to believe the words of holy Scripture, which absolutely affirm,
that either Aaron the High Priest, or any one of his sons, might judge of
leprosy, without distinguishing either this kind, or that kind of leprosy, or
this kind, or that kind of person, then the bare credibile est of this Doctor,
grounded upon his own bare word, and not upon any text of holy Scripture,
Abul. q. 1. in cap. 13. Leuit.
reason or authority. Other Priests, says Abulensis, had power to judge in
the plague of leprosy, as Aaron, and therefore to whom soever of them that
person, who had such signs, should be showed, it was sufficient. Therefore
when Christ had cured the ten lepers, he did not send them specially to the
High Priest, but to any one of the Priests, saying, Go, show your selves to
the Priests.

91 But howsoever it be, says this Doctor, concerning the custom of that
nation, assuredly in the Church of Christ greater causes are reserved to the Sea Apostolic, as we read cap. Maiores de Baptismo and eius effectu in the
Decret all Epistles. Therefore every Priest may indeed judge of the leprosy of
sin, and absolve, or bind his Subjects, but some more heinous crimes are
reserved to Bishops, others also to the Pope, as first of all is the crime of
heresy, to which the name of leprosy does autonomastice agree. Therefore it
is no marvel, that every Priest cannot judge Kings even for the crime of
heresy. Add, that in the old Testament it self we have not an example,
wherein Princes were judged for leprosy, then by the high Priest.

92 But this Reply does not answer my argument. For my argument did only
proceed of the power of Priests standing in the law of God, and abstracting
from the positive laws of the Church: It would follow, said I, that not only
the Pope, but also inferior Bishops,) yea also and Priests have power by the
law of God, etc. Now who knows not, that cases are reserved only by the law
of the Church, and that by the law of God there is no reservation of cases; but
that every Bishop, and Priest, to whom the charge of souls is committed, have
by the law of God sufficient authority, and jurisdiction to absolve from all
cases. I said, to whom the charge of souls is committed, for I do not intend
now to dispute, whether every Priest by his ordination receives authority, and
jurisdiction to bind and loose. For I am not ignorant, that diverse Catholic
Doctors, as Paludanus, In 4. di st. 17. q. 3. ar. 3.
Abulensis, In Defensor. part. 2. c. 62. and seq.
, Syluester, In verbo Confessor. 1. q. 2.
and learned Navarre In Sum. c. 27. nu. 259. and 260. and in cap. Placuit de
poenitent. did. 6. nu. 48.
do affirm, that standing in the law of God every Priest has by virtue of
his ordination sufficient jurisdiction to absolve from sins, which
jurisdiction is not hindered but by the prohibition of the Church: And
therefore I did not speak of all Priests, as this Doctor imposes upon me,
but of Priests indefinitely, signifying thereby, that if Cardinal Bellarmines
argument were good, it would also prove, that standing in the law of God, not
only the Pope, but also some inferior Priests should have authority to judge
Kings and Princes for spiritual leprosy, considering that in the old law not
only the high Priest, but also inferior Priests had authority to judge them
for corporal leprosy.

93 Neither is it to be marueiled, if there be no example in the old
Testament, wherein we read, that Kings were judged for leprosy by any other
then by the High Priest: for that in the old Testament we have but one only
example of any King, to wit, of this Ozias, who was infected with leprosy, yet
the words of the holy Scripture, wherein is given authority to Priests to
judge of leprosy, are common, as well to inferior Priests, as to the High
Priest, neither is there any exception made of the persons that are to be
judged to be infected, or not infected with leprosy. Yea and in this very
example not only Azarias the High Priest, but also all the other eighty
inferior Priests judged King Ozias, and resisted him, saying, It is not thy
office Ozias, etc. And therefore Ozias being angry, says the Scripture,
threatened the Priests, and forthwith there arose a leprosy in his forehead
before the Priests: And when Azarias the high Priest had beheld him, and all
the rest of the Priests, they saw the leprosy in his forehead, and in have
they thrust him out. And therefore this Doctor does not well affirm, that in
the old law we have not an example, wherein Princes were judged for leprosy
by any other, then by the High Priest, seeing that in this example of King
Ozias the High Priest did not any thing, which the test also of the Priests did
not, and which if the High Priest had not been present at that time, the other
Priests might not according to the law have done without him.

94 Wherefore that also, which this Doctor answers to my second consequence,
which was, that if Card. Bellarmines argument were of force, it would prove,
that Bishops, and also Priests might depose Princes not only for heresy, but
also for all other mortal crimes, is nothing to the purpose. I answer, says
he; Page 543.
It is true, that all sins are signified by leprosy, but not therefore
Princes may be judged for all sins whatsoever by every Priest. Because as we
now have said, greater sins are reserved to greater Prelates, and some to
the Pope alone, especially when we speak of persons, that are placed in the
highest degree of dignity.

95 But what is this to my argument? For first I spoke of Bishops and Priests
indefinitely, and also standing in the law of God, now this Doctor applies my
words to every Priest, and flies from the law of God, by which there is no
reservation of cases, to the law of the Church and of Popes, by which law only
cases are reserved. But secondly, and principally he cunningly concealeth the
force and drift of my argument. For in this second consequence my principal
drift was to speak not so much of the persons, who according to Cardinal
Bellarmines argument should have authority to depose Princes (for of them I
spoke in the first consequence, as the Reader may plainly see) as of the
crimes, for which Princes might according to Cardinal Bellarmines argument be
deposed: And I affirmed, that if Cardinal Bellarmines argument were of force,
it would prove, that Princes might for every mortal sin be deposed, at
least wise by the Pope, if not by inferior Bishops, and Priests: Now this
Doctor speaks not one word concerning the force of this consequence, for as
much as concerns the crime, for which Princes may according to Cardinal
Bellarmines argument be deposed, whereof I chiefly treated in this second
consequence, but he cunningly flies to the persons, who may depose Princes, of
whom I spoke principally in the first consequence, and he answers, that
indeed all sins are signified by leprosy, but not therefore Princes may be
judged by every Priest for all sins, insinuating thereby that Princes may be
deposed (for of that judgment I only spoke) at least wise by the Pope for all
sins, which are mortal, and may infect others, which doctrine how dangerous
and pernicious it is to the Sovereignty, and also security of Princes, I
leave to the consideration of any prudent man.

96 But because, as the vulgar maxim says, ducere ad inconueniens non est
soluere argumentum, to draw one to an inconvenience is not to solue the
argument, I did secondly and principally answer, that this argument of
Cardinal Bellarmine taken from the foresaid example of King Ozias, is also
most weak, seeing, that the antecedent proposition is very uncertain, not to
say false, and the consequence no less doubtful. And forasmuch as concerns
the antecedent proposition, and the proof thereof, albeit he does rightly
gather from Leuit. 13. and 2. Paralip. 26. that the Priest of the Leuiticall
stock might judge Kings infected with leprosy, and pronounce sentence against
them, by declaring the law of God, that they ought to dwell apart out of the
camp, which is the first part of the antecedent proposition, seeing that this
separation was imposed by God upon lepers, at the arbitrament, or declaratiue
sentence of the Priest; yet he does not therefore well conclude, that the
Priest of the stock of Leui had authority to deprive Kings being infected
with leprosy, of their kingdoms, even by accident, and consequently, unless
the depriving them of their kingdom should necessarily follow their dwelling
in a place apart from the rest of the people, which nevertheless cannot be
forcibly proved from the holy Scripture.

97 For as Fa. Suarez does well observe, Disp. 15. de. Excommunnicat. sec. 6.
nu. 3.
the deprivation of dominion does ever last, after it once be done: but that
dwelling apart of lepers, to be imposed at the arbitrament of the Priest, did
only continue for the time they were infected with leprosy, for which time
nevertheless they remained true Kings, although others did administer their
kingdom. For unableness to govern the kingdom does not deprive Kings of
their right and authority to reign; as it is manifest in a King, who is under
age, in whom there is true dominion, power, and right to reign, although
until he come to years of discretion, there is appointed him a Protector and
Guardian, who does in the Kings name, and by the Kings authority adminster all
the affairs of the kingdom. And that King Ozias for all the time of his
infirmity, which continued until the day of his death, did remain true King,
the Gloss does most plainly teach 2. Paralip. 26. who writes thus. The
Hebrews are of opinion, that this (the miraculous striking of Ozias with
leprosy) happened in the 25th year of Ozias, the rest of whose years are
twenty seven, and he reigned fifty one years. And the same is gathered not
obscurely from the Scripture it self in that place. Whereupon although we
read in the 21. verse. that for the time Ozias was a leper, Ioathan his son
governed the Kings house, yet we do not read that Ioathan his son reigned
for him, but after that Ozias was dead, verse. 23.

98 To this my answer D. Schulckenius replieth thus: Page ^.
I answer first, although Ozias should have been deprived only of the
administration of the kingdom, and constrained to give it over to his sin,
yet had kept the right, and authority to reign, as my Adversary Widdrington
will have it, nevertheless Card. Bellarmines argument would be strong, and
unshaken. For from hence also by the grant of my Adversary is we do gather,
that King Ozias was by the Priest of Aaron, deprived, not only of the communion
of sacred things, but also of the administration of his kingdom, and punished
not only with a spiritual but also with a temporal punishment. But my
Adversary denies, that an heretical King can be deprived of the
administration of his Kingdom, and he says that he can only be deprived of
the receiving of Sacraments.

99 But first it is untrue, that I ever granted, as this Doctor says, that
the Priest of the old law deprived King Ozias of the administration of his
kingdom, but, as you shall beneath, Number.
I affirmed the flat contrary. Secondly, it is strange, how Card. Bellarmines
argument can stand firm, and unshaken, if the antecedent proposition, for as
much as concerns the principal part thereof, be not true, as this Doctor in
this his answer does suppose. For the antecedent proposition of Card.
Bellarmines argument contained two parts; the one was, that King Ozias was for
leprosy deprived of his kingdom, and authority to reign and from hence he
concluded, as you have seen, If therefore the Priest of the old law had power
to judge a King, and to deprive him of his kingdom for corporal leprosy, why
may not a Priest now do the same for spiritual leprosy? and of this part, to
wit, of depriving Princes of their kingdoms, and of their right, or authority
to reign I did only speak in this part of my answer: And if this part, which
was the principal point of Card. Bellarmines argument be supposed to be false,
as this Doctor does suppose, how can his argument, for as much, as concerns
this point, stand strong, and unshaken.

100 The second part of Card. Bellarmines agrument was, that King Ozias was for
leprosy deprived by the High Priest of the administration of his kingdom; and
of this second part I did not speak one word in this part of my answer, but
only of the depriving him of his kingdom, dominion, or right to reign: And I
affirmed, that although the Priests of the old law had authority to judge a
leper, and by a declaratiue sentence, or commandment to denounce, that he was
to be severed from the rest of the people, which was only to declare the
commandment and law of God, considering that this separation was ordained by
the express commandment of God after the Priest had judged him to be infected
with leprosy, yet from hence it cannot be well inferred, that the Priests of
the old law had authority to deprive Kings, that were infected with leprosy,
of their kingdoms even per accidens, and consequently, unless their dwelling
apart from the rest of the people does necessarily infer, as it does not,
that they were consequently deprived also of their kingdoms. But their
dwelling apart from the rest of the people does necessarily infer, says this
Doctor, that they were deprived at least of the administration of their
kingdom, and therefore from hence it may be well inferred, that the Priests of
the old law had authority to deprive per accidens, and consequently Princes
that were infected with leprosy at least wise of the administration of their
kingdom. But of this I will treat a little beneath, after I have examined the
second Reply, which this Doctor makes to this first part of my answer to his
antecedent proposition.

101 I answer secondly, says D. Schulckenius. Page 546.
King Ozias did indeed retain the name of a King for the residue of his life,
but a bare and naked name. For his son did govern the kingdom with full
power, although without the name of a King. For so the Scripture speaks 2.
Paralip. 26. King Ozias was a leper until the day of his death, and he dwelt
in a house a part full of leprosy, for the which he had been cast out of the
house of our Lord; Moreover Ioathan his son governed the Kings house, and
judged the people of the land. The same is said 4. Reg. 15. Therefore we have
not from the Scripture, that any part of the government did any way appertain
to Ozias, which Josephus does more clearly explicate lib. 9. Antiq. cap. 11.
While he says, that the son of Ozias did take upon him the kingdom, and
that Ozias* lived a private life until his death. But howsoever it be, this is
manifest, that Ozias was deprived of the administration of the kingdom, and
therefore punished with a temporal punishment.

102 But thou will say, that Ozias retained the name of a King, and as it was
said in the first answer perchance a right to reign. Therefore from hence it
cannot be proved, that heretical Kings may altogether be deprived of their
kingdoms by the Pope. I answer. First from hence it is proved, that the Pope
may for a just cause inflict upon a King a temporal punishment, as is the
depriving of the administration of the kingdom. Secondly it is consequently
gathered, that for a most weighty cause, and for a very heinous crime, and
very pernicious to the Church, as for example is heresy, he may inflict a more
grievous punishment, as is the depriving him altogether of his kingdom. For
both Innocentius the fourth did remove Sanctius the second King of Portugal
from the administration of the kingdom, because he was unfit, and gave him his
brother Alphonsus the third for a Coadiutor, and also he deprived of the Empire
Friderike the second in the Council of Lions being declared an enemy to the
Church.

103 But first, that King Ozias retained only the bare name of a King without
any Royal right, authority, or dominion, it is very false, and affirmed by
this Doctor without any colorable ground at all. For the Scripture does not
only call Ozias a King, after he was infected with leprosy, and recounteth
the years of his reign in the same manner, as he recounteth the years of the
reign of other Kings, who had not only the bare name, but also the true
authority of other Kings, but it does also affirm, that the reigned all the
rest of his life, and that Ioathan began to reign only after his Fathers
death. Sixteen years old, says the Scripture 2. Paralip. 26. and 4. Reg. 15.
, was Ozias, who also was called Azarias 4. Reg. 15. When he began to reign,
and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And again, 2. Paralip. 26.
27.
And Ozias slept with his Fathers, and they buried him in the Kings sepulchers
field, because he was a leaper; and Ioathan his son reigned for him. Five and
twenty years old was Ioathan when he began to reign (and therefore he did
not reign in his Fathers time) and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

104 Ioathan, says Abulensis, 4 Reg. 15. ^^.
was not called King, neither did he sit in the Kings seat of estate, but
Ozias was called King all the time he lived and under him is reckoned the time
of the kingdom, and the power, or authority concerning those things, which
were done in the kingdom did depend on him, although they were administered by
Ioathan his son: and beneath, This Ioathan, says Abulensis, was the only or
at least wise the eldest son of Ozias, therefore he did succeed in the
Kingdom, his Father being dead; for his Father being alive, he did govern the
Palace, and sustained the whole weight of the Kingly labor. Also lib. 26* de
Repub. cap. 5. number. ^
Gregorius Tholosanus among other reasons, which he brought to prove, that a
Prince ought not to be deprived of his kingdom, for that he is, or seems to
be unfit to govern the same, he produces this example of King Ozias. Seeing
that says he, also Azarias, or Ozias (for he was called by both these names)
King of Judah, was stricken by God with leprosy for this sin, that he did not
destroy the Altars of the Idols, after he was become a leaper, he lived
indeed until the day of his death in a free house apart: yet he was not
deprived of his kingdom, but Ioathan his son governed the Kings Palace, and
did judge the people of the Land, at his Coadiutor: And another cause of his
leprosy is alleged, for that he presumed to burn incense upon the Altar of
incense, which was only the office of a Priest, yet in both places it is said,
that Ioathan reigned for him only after his death, but that before his death he
only administered the kingdom in his Fathers name.

105 Wherefore that, which this Doctor affirms, that the Kings son
administered the kingdom with full power, is equivocal, although the Scripture
makes no mention, that he administered the kingdom with full power, but only,
that he governed the Kings Palace, and judged the people of the Land: for if he
mean, that he administered the kingdom with a full absolute and supreme
authority, this is very untrue; for this authority did belong only to the
King, in whose name, and by whose authority he governed the Kings Palace, and
judged the people; but if his meaning be* that he administered the kingdom with
a full delegate power, and which in some cases the King may communicate to a
subject, who is only an administratour, and governor, but not a King, this I
will easily grant. Belike this Doctor will have the Kings Protector, and
Guardian in the time of his minority, or who administreth the kingdom, when
the King is absent in some foreign country, or when he is taken prisoner by
his enemy, or when by reason of some great infirmity, he cannot govern by
himself, to have full, absolute, and supreme power, and consequently to be in
very deed the Sovereign King, and to have Kingly authority to govern the
kingdom which how absurd it is, any man but of mean capacity may easily
perceive.

106 Neither from Josephus can any other thing be gathered, then which the
Scripture it self affirms, to wit, that King Ozias lived in a house apart,
and his son Ioathan governed the Kings house, and judged the people of the
Land. For the words of Josephus, as they are related by this Doctor, are not
so be understood, that Ioathan took upon him the kingdom, and to reign; for
Ozias all the time of his life was King, and did reign, as Josephus affirms
in the same place: but that he took upon him to administer, or govern the
kingdom in his Fathers name, who by reason of his infirmity, for which he
was bound by the law of God to live in a house a part from the rest of the
people, could not conveniently govern the same: But the words of Josephus
according to the Edition which I have, and which also Cardinal Bellarmine in
his book against Barclay follows, are these. After the Priests had perceived
the leprosy in the Kings face, they told him, (or if the word be
iudicauerunt, and not indicauerunt) they judged, that he was stricken by God
with the plague of leprosy; and they admonished him, that he would depart the
City, as one polluted* and unclean. And he with the shame of his calamity
obeyed, being so miserably punished for his pride joined with impiety; and
when for a time he lived private out of the City, his son Ioathan
administering the kindome, at length being consumed with sorrow he dyed the
sixty eight year of his age, and the fifty second of his kingdom or reign.

107 From which words this only can be gathered, that Ioathan administered
the kingdom, and governed the Kings Palace, and judged the people, as the
Scripture says, yet that Ozias was still King, and reigned, although he lived
private, that is, not deprived of his kingdom, for he still remained King, and
did reign until his death, as Josephus confesses, but privately, to wit, he
did not meddle with the public affairs of the kingdom, but lived in a free
house apart, as the Scripture says, which words Abulensis expounds thus:
(...)
And he dwelled in a free house apart, that is, he did not dwell in the Kings
Palace, for he being a leper ought not to give himself to businesses, neither
did he dispose of the kingdom, but Ioathan his son; and it is called a free
house, that is, sequestered from all business, and frequentation of people: for
none did resort to him but those, who served him; but the rest which belonged
to the Kingly affairs Ioathan did; and perchance it is called a free house,
because it was out of the City. Therefore that the Kingly estate, provision,
pomp, should not cease, Ioathan Ozias his son governed the Kings Palace, to
wit, he remained in the Kings house, and all the Nobles, and mightiest men of
the Land had recourse to him as they were wont to have recourse to Ozias, and
he kept all the servants, and all the other provision, which his Father kept,
that the Regal state should not seem to be diminished, and yet he was not
called King, neither did he sit in the Kings seat of estate, and the rest as
follow before nu. 104.

108 Wherefore D. Schulckenius perceiving this his assertion not to be grounded
either in Scripture, reason, or any other authority flies back again to his
former answer, that Ozias was at least wise deprived of the administration of
the kingdom, from whence first it is proved, says he, that the Pope may
inflict upon a King for a just cause a temporal punishment, as is the
depriving of the administration of the kingdom; and secondly from thence
consequently it is gathered, that for a most important cause, and a very
heinous crime, as is heresy, he may inflict a greater punishment, as is the
depriving him altogether of his kingdom.

109 But although I should grant to this Doctor, that the High Priest did
deprive King Ozias per accidens, and consequently not only of the
administration of the kingdom, but also of the kingdom it self, and right to
reign, that is, by declaring him to be a leper, which disease did by the law
of God, as we now suppose, but do not grant, deprive him ipso facto of his
right to reign, yet from thence it cannot be proved, that the Pope has the
like authority to deprive an heretical King of his Kingdom, or the
administration thereof per accidens or consequently, for that no punishment is
appointed by the law of Christ to heresy, as it was in the old law to
leprosy: but to punish heretics with this or that kind of spiritual
punishment Christ has left to the discretion of spiritual Pastors, and to
punish them with temporal punishments to the discretion of temporal Princes,
who therefore, as well said Dominicus Bannes, may put heretics to death, or
punish them in some other manner. But if Christ our Savior had in the new law
assigned particularly any temporal punishment, as death, banishment, privation
of goods, or the like, for those who should be infected with heresy, as God
in the old law did ordain, that lepers should dwell out of the Camp in a
house apart, then the Pope might indeed punish heretics temporally per
accidens and consequently, to wit, only by declaring the law of Christ, and
that they were infected with heresy, to which crime such punishments are
according to this supposition appointed by the law of Christ; Neither should he
herein transcend his spiritual authority: But to execute this law by putting
heretics to death, or by inflicting upon them temporal punishments, and
punishing them actually with the same, does exceed the limits of that
spiritual authority, which has been given to the Priests either of the new
law, or of the old.

110 And albeit Pope Innocent the fourth, and also other Popes have deprived
Sovereign Princes very few times for heresy, but often for other crimes, not
only of their administration, but also of the kingdom it self, yet this is
no sufficient ground to prove, that they had any true and rightful power so
to do, as it is manifest of it self, and in my Apology I have declared more
at large, Nu. 444. 445*
for that it is one thing, says Cardinal Bellarmine, In Respons. ad Apolog.
page 157. Edit. Colon.
to relate the facts of Kings, and so of Popes, and other persons, and another
thing to prove their authority, and power. And thus much concerning the first
part of my answer to the antecedent proposition of Cardinal Bellarmines
argument. The second part of my answer was contained in these words.

111 Neither also does Cardinal Bellarmine sufficiently confirm, that the
Leuiticall Priests had authority to deprive Kings that were infected with
leprosy only of the administration of their Kingdoms, for that time only
that they were infected with leprosy. For albeit Ozias, after he was stricken
by God with the plague of leprosy did not administer the kingdom, the cause
thereof might be, for that he being not fit to govern the kingdom during
the time of his infirmity, did commit the government to Ioathan his son, and
did appoint him the Administratour of the kingdom, until he should be
restored to his former health. But that a Priest of the old law had authority
to deprive Kings being infected with leprosy either of their kingdoms, or of
the administration thereof, it cannot be sufficiently gathered from the holy
Scripture. As also we cannot sufficiently collect from the holy Scripture, that
a Priest of the old law had authority to deprive householders being infected
with leprosy either of their goods, or of the administration thereof, although
it be very like, that seeing such householders ought at the judgment of the
Priest, declaring them to be leapers, to dwell out of the camp, they
themselves did commit to others the authority to be administratours of their
goods for the time they were infected with leprosy; And so the weakness of
the antecedent proposition is manifest.

112 Now you shall see in what a shuffling manner D. Schulckenius replieth to
this my answer. I answer, says he, Page 5^^*
These make nothing to the matter. It is enough for us, that King Ozias did by
the commandment of the High Priest dwell in a house apart from the time of his
leprosy until his death; and that seeing he could not converse with the
people he was enforced to permit the administration of the kingdom to his
son, so that nothing at all concerning the affairs of the kingdom was
referred to him. But if he had not been subject to the power of the High
Priest, he might have contemned the high Priest, and against his will dwell in
the Kings City, and govern the kingdom either by himself, or by his
Ministers. For leprosy does not take away the judgment of the mind, and
wisdom necessary to govern. Truly Naaman Syrus was a leeper, and because he
was not subject to the high Priest of the Hebrews, he did not dwell in a house
apart, but he was the General of Warfare, and he went wheresoever he would.
See 4. Reg. 5.

And in the same manner the High Priest might deprive householders of the
administration of their goods, especially if they had any in Cities, because
he did separate them from the people, or the conversation of men, and did
exclude them from Cities* and consequently deprived them of the administration
of those goods, which they had in Cities, albeit they might administer them by
others. Thus D Schulckenius.

113 But truly it is a shame to see with what face this Doctor can so boldly
affirm, that the principal question, which is now betwixt Card. Bellarmine,
and me, to wit whether King Ozias was deprived either of his kingdom, or of
the administration thereof by the High Priest, is nothing to the matter. Before
as you have seen, both Card. Bellarmine, and also this Doctor, if they be two
different men, have labored to prove, that King Ozias was for corporal
leprosy deprived by the high Priest not only of the administration of his
kingdom, but also of the kingdom it self, and of his right or authority to
reign; from whence they inferred, that therefore the Pope might for spiritual
leprosy deprive temporal Princes not only of the administration of their
kingdoms, but also of their kingdoms, and all Regal authority, or right to
reign. And the second part of this antecedent proposition I did confute above,
and proved clearly, that Ozias did still remain true King de iure until his
death, and was not deprived of his Royal authority, or right to reign,
although his son Ioathan did de facto in his fathers name, and by his Fathers
authority administer the kingdom. To the first part of the antecedent
proposition, which this Doctor affirmed to be manifest, [but howsoever it be,
says he, to wit, whether Ozias remained King only in name, or also with Regal
authority, it is manifest, that he was deprived of the administration of the
kingdom and therefore punished with a temporal punishment] I did now answer,
affirming that Card. Bellarmine had not sufficiently proved the same; for that
it might be, that he perceiving himself to be unfit by reason of leprosy, for
which he was by the law to dwell in a house apart, to govern the kingdom by
himself, did willingly and of his own accord commit the government thereof to
his son Ioathan, from whence it cannot be gathered, that he was deprived of
the government by the high Priest. And now this Doctor being pressed with this
answer blusheth not to say, That this is nothing to the matter, as though to
confute that which he himself affirmetn to be manifest, to wit, that King
Ozias was by the high Priest deprived of his Kingly government for corporal
leprosy is nothing to the matter. But to such shameful windings, turnings,
and shiftings are sometime brought men, otherwise learned, rather then they
will plainly and sincerely confess themselves to have grossly erred, in coining
their false, or fallible opinions, for true and undoubted points of Catholic
faith.

114 Observe now, good Reader, in what a fraudulent manner this Doctor would
seem to prove, that my aforesaid answer is nothing to the matter. It is
enough for us, says he, that King Ozias did by the high Priests commandment
dwell in a house apart all the time of his leprosy until his death, etc.

If this be enough for this Doctor, I shall easily agree with him herein,
for that I do willingly grant, that the high Priest might command King Ozias
being infected with leprosy to dwell in a house apart; Only this I must
admonish him, that Ozias was bound to dwell in a house apart, not so much by
the commandment of the high Priest, if we will speak properly, as by the
commandment of almighty God, who by his law did expressly ordain, that all
lepers should dwell apart from the rest of the people; and the Priests office
only was to judge according to the signs and tokens prescribed by the law
whether they were infected with leprosy or no, and to declare the law of GOD,
which are spiritual not temporal actions; abstracting from which law the high
Priest had no authority to command King Ozias, or any other leper to live in a
house apart from the rest of the people. Wherefore this commandment of the
high Priest was not any constitutiue commandment of his own, imposing a new
obligation upon King Ozias, to which he was not tied before, although the high
Priest had not commanded him, but it was only a declaratiue commandment, or a
declaration of Gods law and commandment, whereby all lepers were long before
commanded to dwell in a place apart from the rest of the people: But from
hence this Doctor cannot gather, that the Priests of the new law may for
spiritual leprosy deprive Kings of their kingdoms, or the administration
thereof, or of their right and freedom to dwell in their Cities, or Palaces,
and separate them by way of temporal constraint from all civil conversation
of men, unless he will grant with John Wicklefe, that these punishments are
by the law of Christ annexed to spiritual leprosy, as in the old law the
dwelling in a place apart from the rest of the people was annexed to corporal
leprosy. Nevertheless I do not deny, that the Priests all of the new law
have authority to declare what is spiritual leprosy, and what crimes do
notably infect the soul, and what punishments are by the law of Christ annexed
to such maladies, and also to separate heretics and other spiritual lepers
from the sacred, religious, or spiritual conversation of the faithful, for
these are spiritual, not temporal actions, and punishments.

115 But Ozias, living in a house apart, could not, says this Doctor,
converse with the people, and so he was enforced to permit absolutely to to his
son the administration of the kingdom, that nothing at all should be
referred to him, concerning the affairs of the kingdom.

But first, it is not true, that King Ozias speaking properly was coactus, that
is, enforced or compelled by corporal force, and violence; or by the coactiue
force of the law, which consists in the inflicting of temporal punishments,
to live in a house apart from the rest of the people, but only he was bound
thereunto by the directive, or commanding force of the law of God, which
ordained, that all lepers should be separated from the rest of the people, and
dwell alone by themselves out of the Camp; for seeing that the King was
supreme in temporalls, and subject therein to none but God alone, and the High
Priests were subject to him therein, and might be punished by him with
temporal punishments, as I showed before, he could not be subject to the
coactiue, or enforcing power of the law, which ordained the inflicting of any
temporal punishment; And therefore we never read in the holy Scripture, that
the High Priest of the old law, whom my Adversaries affirm to have authority
to inflict upon a King a temporal punishment, did ever attempt to put any King
to death, who had committed any crime that deserved death according to the law,
as you find many Kings to have committed such crimes, as David committed
adultery, which according to the law of God was to be punished with death,
and most of the Kings of Israel were Idolaters, whom God commanded to be put to
death, and this crime also of King Ozias, for usurping the office of a Priest
deserved death according to the Law.

116 Secondly therefore, although he was in some sort, speaking improperly,
enforced, or compelled, that is, he was bound by the law under pain of sin
to live in a house apart; from the rest of the people by reason of his
leprosy, yet it was the law of God, and not the high Priest, but only as
judging him to be a leper, and declaring the law of God, and his indignation
against those who should transgress his law, that compelled him thereunto,
which declaration being a mere spiritual action, without doubt did, according
to the law of God in the old law, belong to the function of the high Priest;
and therefore the most that from hence can be inferred is this, that the
Priests of the new law have also authority to declare the law of Christ, and
to judge what is spiritual leprosy, and what punishments are by the law of
Christ appointed against heresy, and other crimes which may infect the soul;
but that spiritual Pastors have now authority to inflict temporal
punishments upon heretics, or any other spiritual lepers, it cannot from
hence be gathered by any probable reason.

117 Thirdly, it is very untrue, that because King Ozias was by the law
commanded to live in a house apart, so long as he remained a leper, it does
consequently follow from thence, that he was also enforced, bound, or compelled
to permit absolutely the administration of the kingdom to his son, so that
nothing concerning the affairs of the kingdom should be referred to him: for
that a King may live in a house apart, not only out of the City, but also out
of the kingdom, and yet he may govern his kingdom by his Ministers in such
sort, that the chiefest things he may reserve to himself, as diverse Kings by
their Viceroys do govern foreign kingdoms, reserving diverse things, as the
placing or displacing of the chiefest Officers, the making of war against
their neighbor Princes, or such like important affairs to themselves: and
therefore from the dwelling of Ozias in a house apart, either in the City, or
out of the City, it cannot be sufficiently gathered, that he was therefore
enforced to permit absolutely the administration of the kingdom to his son,
so that nothing concerning the affairs of the kingdom should be referred to
him; especially seeing that, as this Doctor says, leprosy does not take
away the judgment of the mind, and wisdom necessary to govern.

118 Neither also is it true, that King Ozias could not converse with the
people, as this Doctor so bouldly affirms. For although it was ordained by
the law, that lepers should dwell alone out of the camp, and be separated from
the rest of the people, yet the law did not forbid any man to speak, or talk
with them, or than with others: yea which is more, it was not forbidden by the
law, as well observes Abulensis, In ca. 8. Mat. q. 12. and 13.
to touch a leper; for although the touching of a leper d^d cause a legal
uncleanness, yet it was not any sin, or imperfection to incur a legal
uncleanness, but sometimes it was meritorious to be legally polluted: for to
touch dead bodies, and graves was a legal uncleanness Number. 19. and yet to
bury, the dead was a meritorious work, for which Tobias is greatly commended;
and sometimes also a man was bound to incur a legal uncleanness, as
children were bound to bury their parents, and yet by this they were legally
polluted Leuit. 10. and 21. and not only in profane things, but also in divine
mysteries Priests were sometimes bound by the law to be legally polluted: as
the Priest who offered a red cow in a burnt sacrifice was polluted, and yet
this was done by the commandment of God. Number. 19. See also the like Leuit. 16.
Wherefore to incur a legal uncleanness was not forbidden by the law, but it
was only forbidden to enter into the Sanctuary, or to touch sacred things
before he should be cleansed. Leuit. 15. and therefore it was not a sin
according to the law to touch a leper after what manner soever, unless he that
was so polluted, would before his purification enter into the Tabernacle, or
participate in sacred things. Leuit. 15. So that it is manifest, that King
Ozias was so debarred rom all civil conversation, but that he might
sufficiently declare to his Deputies and ministers, what he would have done
concerning any important business in the kingdom.

119 Wherefore it can not be proved, that King Ozias was deprived for his
leprosy of the administration of his kingdom, and enforced to permit
absolutely to his son the government thereof, that nothing at all should be
referred to him concerning the affairs of the kingdom, although it might very
well be, that he seeing himself for his great pride, and arrogancy stricken
by God with the plague of leprosy, and that he could not so conveniently, and
in such Royal manner, and remaining in his own Palace govern the kingdom,
as he did before, did freely, and of his own accord, and not upon any
constraint or absolute necessity appoint his son the sole administratour of
the kingdom, and that he being now humbled by the potent hand of God would not
for the time of his infirmity meddle at all with the government, which is more
to be attributed to his humility, then to any necessity, for that he might,
if he had been pleased, have reserved some affairs of greatest moment to his
own judgment, and referred the rest to those ministers, whom he should
appoint; and as his son Ioathan was made administratour of the kingdom by
his appointment, and governed in his name, and by his authority, so also if
Ioathan had carried himself partially and tyrannically in the government, he
might by the authority of his father, who still remained the true and
rightful King, have been displaced, and another put in his room.

120 But if King Ozias had not been subject (says this Doctor) to the power
of the high Priest, he might have contemned the high Priest, and against his
will have dwelled in the Regal City, and also have governed the kingdom.

But first no man makes any doubt, but that King Ozias was subject to the high
Priest in spirituals, as was every sentence or judgment, wherein he declared
the law of God: And therefore the King was bound not to contemn in such things
the commandment of the high Priest; neither could he being now declared a
leper, either with the leave, or against the leave of the high Priest dwell in
the kingly City among the rest of the people, for that by the law of God, and
not by any constitutiue commandment of the high Priest, he was to dwell apart
from the rest of the people. Wherefore that clause [and against his will he
might have dwelt in the Regal Citie] is added by this Doctor to no purpose,
unless he would signify thereby, that the law concerning the dwelling of
lepers apart from the rest of the people, was not the law of God, but only the
law and commandment of the high Priest, and that therefore King Ozias, and
other lepers might with the leave and license of the high Priest dwell in the
City among the rest of the people.

121 Secondly, if King Ozias had contemned the high Priest, and had against his
will dwelled in the Regal City, although he had geatly offended therein by
transgressing the law of God which the high Priest ought by his Office to
declare to all the people, yet he could not therefore be punished by the high
Priest with any temporal punishment, for that he himself was supreme in
temporals, and subject to none but God, and the high Priest was, as I showed
before, subject to him therein, and might be punished by him with temporal
punishments. But as for the administration of the kingdom, he should no way
have transgressed the law of God, albeit he had governed the same against the
high Priests will, for that he was not by his leprosy deprived of any jot of
his Regal authority. Neither can this Doctor well declare, how King Ozias
being a man of judgment and wisdom notwithstanding his corporal leprosy,
could be deprived of the administration of his kingdom, or which is all one,
of his right and authority to govern the same for the time of his leprosy,
if he once suppose, that he still remained true King, and had true Regal
authority: seeing that to deny obedience to a Prince so long as he remains
Prince, is plainly repugnant to the law of God, says Card. Bellarmine; in
Tract contra Barcla. cap. 21. page 202.
and, as Suarez does well affirm, in Defens. fidei Cathol. etc. lib. 6. cap.
3. nu. 6.
the obligation of obedience in any degree, or state does so long endure in the
subject, as the dignity, or power and jurisdiction does endure in the
Superior, for these are correlatiues, and the one depends on the other.

122 And in the same manner, says this Doctor, might the high Priest deprive
householders of the administration of their goods, especially which they had in
City, because he did separate them from the people or conversation of men, and
did exclude them from Cities, and consequently did deprive them of the
administration of those goods, which they had in Cities, although they might
administer them by others.

But this also is apparently untrue. For although the high Priest had
authority to declare, that house-holders being infected with leprosy were to
dwell apart out of the camp or City, but yet so that they might talk and
speak a far of to others that should come to visit them, as I signified
before; and in this sense the high Priest may be said to have authority to
separate them from the rest of the people, to wit, by declaring the law of God,
and not by any constitutiue commandment of his own, yet from hence it does
not follow, as this Doctor affirms, that the high Priest did consequently
deprive them of the administration of their goods, which they had in the City.
For he that is deprived of the administration of his goods, can neither set,
let, sell or give away his goods, or make any other contract concerning them,
which is valid and of force by law, as it is apparent in all those who are
deprived of the administration of their goods, as are orphans under age,
madmen, and many times also unthrifts, or over prodigal persons are by the
law deprived of the administration of their goods, and can make no bargain,
which is valid by law, and therefore they have Overseers, Guardians or
Administratours appointed them.

123 Now what man of learning will affirm, that he who either by sickness,
imprisonment, confinement or banishment, is separated from the places where his
goods do remain, is consequently deprived of the administration of his goods?
Is an Englishman, who for some crime or cause is banished his Country,
consequently deprived of the administration of his goods, which he has in
England? and can not he by authentical writings, set them, sell them, or give
them away? Must he that is rightfully detained in prison, be consequently
deprived of the administration of his goods, which he has out of prison, can
he not set, or sell his lands, or goods, which he has in the City, or
Country? What an unsound consequence is therefore this, which this Doctor
makes. The high Priest did exclude lepers out of the City, therefore he did
consequently deprive them of the administration of those goods, which they had
in the City? But they can not come to the City to set or sell their goods.
Who doubts of this, if they be banished the Cities? as neither he that is
detained in prison, or banished the kingdom, can go out of prison into the
City, or return into the kingdom to administer his goods, and to set them,
sell them, or give them away without incurring the danger of the law. But will
any man of learning from thence conclude, that therefore he is consequently
deprived of the administration of his goods, which he has in the City or
kingdom? Or that if he should against the law adventure to go out of prison,
or the place of his confinement to administer, or make away his goods, the
contract should be unjust, and of no effect for want of right and authority to
administer the same? And thus you see that both parts of the antecedent
proposition of Card. Bellarmines argument are very untrue.

124 But although we should grant only for Disputation sake, both parts of
the antecedent proposition, to wit, that the Priests of the old law had
authority to deprive in that manner, as I declared, that is, not by any
constitutiue commandment of the high Priest, but only by the declaring the
law of God, the Kings of Judah being infected with leprosy not only of the
administration, of their kingdoms, but also of their kingdoms, or, which is
all one, of their Regal authority and right to reign, yet how weak and
insufficient is also the consequence of his argument, and so the whole
argument, and every part thereof altogether defective, I showed in these words.

125 As concerning the consequence, albeit we should grant the antecedent
proposition, to wit, that the Priests of the old law had authority to deprive
Kings being infected with leprosy, at least wise of the administration of
their kingdoms, not per se, but consequently as Card. Bellarmine deduceth, to
wit, for that the had authority to separate them from the company of the rest
of the people, and consequently, as he says, to deprive them of their
kingdom, yet we deny his consequence. For that figure of the lepers does
consist in this, that as in the old law they that were infected with corporal
leprosy, oughts to be separated at the arbitrament of the high Priest from the
company of the rest of the people, so long as they were infected with leprosy,
so in the Euangelical law they that are infected with spiritual leprosy may
by Bishops be excluded from the Ecclesiastical communion of the faithful,
until they shall return to their former health. And therefore if from this that
lepers ought upon the sentence of the Priest to remain in a house apart out of
the camp, until they were healed, it does necessarily follow, that they had
not power for that time to govern their temporal kingdom, no marvel, that
consequently also the were for that time deprived of the administration of the
kingdom: But it is manifest enough among the learneder Divines and of better
note, as we have seen above, Nu. 346. Apolog.
that the depriving either of a temporal kingdom, or of the administration
thereof does not necessarily follow Ecclesiastical excommunication. And
therefore this similitude of Card. Bellarmine does also fail in this, and
therefore his whole argument is not forcible.

126 Yea also if Card. Bellarmine in his Treatise of the Eucharist does argue
well from the figure to the thing figured, where from the figures of the old
Testanment he proves, that Christ our Lord is truly and really present in
the Eucharist, albeit we should grant, that the Priests of Leui had power to
deprive Kings being infected with leprosy of their kingdoms, not only
consequently, but also per se, and principally, yet it would not therefore
follow, that the Priests of the new law had also that power to deprive
heretical Kings of their kingdoms. For by this very same that corporal
leprosy, and the punishment annexed to it by the law of God was a figure of
heresy or spiritual leprosy, and of the punishment which is agreeable to it
by the law of Christ, heresy ought not by the Evangelical law to be punished
with the loss of temporal kingdom in regard of the signification of the
figure, for that this punishment was in the old law ordained for corporal
leprosy, but with a punishment of a higher degree, to wit, spiritual, and the
loss of an everlasting kingdom; because the figure is always less perfect,
and of an inferior degree then is the thing figured, as the shadow in respect
of the body, as Card. Bellarmine does in that place affirm. And by this reason
some Divines do not unaptly gather, that Christ our Lord was an eternal King,
and of a higher degree, because he was figured by Melchisedech, who was a
temporal King.

127. But that which Card. Bellarmine adds in the end out of the first to the
Corinthians chap. 10. that all things chanced to the Jews in figure to prove
from thence, that corporal leprosy in the old Testament was a figure of
heresy, and spiritual leprosy, he does not well deduce out of Saint Paul,
neither does he entirely and faithfully produce his words: For Saint Paul does
only say in that place, All these things (to wit, those few things, before he
had rehearsed) did chance to them in figure, but he makes no mention at all in
that place of this figure of leprosy. Thus I answered in my Apology.

128 Now to this my answer D. Schulckenius Page 550.
replieth thus. I answer. First, when Bellarmine said, that Ozia was enforced
to resign up the kingdom to his son (for my Adversary Widdrington seems
to wrest this awry) by the kingdom he understood not the name of King, but the
administration at the kingdom with full power, or Regal authority. But I did
not wrest awry, or misinterprete that word kingdom, for I proved, as you have
seen, that Ozias did not resign up to his son his Kingly authority, but he
still remained King, not only in name but elso and right, and in very deed;
and that his son had indeed full authority to govern, or administer the
kingdom, as an Administratour, Protector, Guardian, or if we may say so,
Viceroy, but no: supreme, or Regal authority.

129 Besides that, says this Doctor, good Divines cited above Nu. 346.
by my Adversary Widdringto^, as Paludanus, Richardus, S. Antoninus, Sot^s,
Medina, Richeomus, and two (they are my Adversary Widdringtons words) most
famous Divines of this age, and of the same Religious Order with Card.
Bellarmine, Franciscus, Suarez, and Martinus Becanus, d^e teach that which is
true, and denied by no man, to wit, that excommucation precisely, and per se
men are not deprived of the dominion of their temporal goods, and thereby not
deprived of their Kingdoms, and Seignories: But that which my Adversary
Widdrington does impose upon them, to wit, that they are not deprived of the
administration of their kingdom, this they do not teach. For it is the common
opinion of Divines, and Cannists, that by excommunication men are deprived of
their power to judge, and of other acts belonging to the external Court,
Forensibus actibus.
wherein the administraton of civil Jurisdiction does consist.

130 For Suarez does say and prove three things against my Adversary
Widdrington, in the place cited by my Adversary, Tom. 5. disput. 15. sec. 6.
First, that by excommunication external jurisdiction does cease in the person
excommunicated, and all acts, which do appertain thereunto.

Secondly, that in subjects does cease the obligation of fidelity, being also
sworn, after the sentence is given by an Ecclesiastical Judge, and he
proves it by the chap. Nos sanctorum, and cap. Iuratos 15. q. 6.

Thirdly, that dominion, and temporal goods do not cease, unless there be
mention made of them, as truly it is made in the excommunication of
heretics, who are deprived of all goods, and of all dignity. Wherefore,
seeing that our principal question is concerning the leprosy of heresy, it
is plain, that my Adversary Widdrington has imposed upon Catholke Doctors a
false doctrine for true.

131 But truly it is plain, that this Doctor cannot with any colorable
Reply impugn my answers, but either by equiuocating, chopping, or changing,
corrupting, or misinterpreting my words or meaning. For my words in this place,
which this Doctor after his usual manner does misinterpret, are, as you have
seen, that according to learned Divines, the depriving either of a temporal
kingdom, or of the administration of a temporal kingdom, does not
necessarily follow Ecclesiastical excommunication, mark that word necessarily
fellow. And in the number 346, to which also I referred the Reader, I affirmed,
that Excommunication ex se, of it self, or of it own nature, has not
sufficient force to deprive a Prince of his dominion, or of the use thereof.
Suarez tom. 5. desp. 8. sec. 1.
And this I proved by the definition of Excommunication assigned by Suarez, to
wit, that it is an Ecclesiastical Censure, whereby one is separated from the
Ecclesiastical communion of the faithful, which definition is taken from
Saint Augustine as he is cited in the Canon law 11. q. 3. omnis Christianus.
who says, that every Christian who is excommunicated, is removed from
Ecclesiastical communion.

132 From whence it necessarily follows, that Excommunication ex se, of it
self, of it own nature, or by any intrinsecall, and necessary consequence
does only exclude from Ecclesiastical communion, and from that which by a
necessary consequence does follow the excluding from Ecclesiastical communion,
and consequently it does not ex se, and of it own nature deprive one of any
civil dominion, or jurisdiction: For the excluding from Ecclesiastical
communion, or, which is all one, from communicating in Ecclesiastical,
spiritual, or sacred things, does only make him to be as a Heathen, or a
Publicane, according to that saying of our Savior, Matthew. 18.
But if he shall not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen, or
the Publicane; But although Heathens, and Publicanes, cannot participate with
the faithful in Ecclesiastical, sacred, or spiritual affairs, yet they are
not therefore excluded from any civil conversation, dominion, or jurisdiction.

Wherefore it is manifest, that when I said, that the depriving a Prince of a
temporal kingdom, or of the administration thereof, does not, (according to
very learned Divines, among whom I numbered Suarez, and Becanus) necessarily
follow Ecclesiastical excommunication, and that Excommunication ex se, of it
self, or of it own nature, has not sufficient force to deprive a Prince of
his dominion, or of the use thereof, my meaning was, that these effects do not
necessarily follow the nature, and definition of Excommunication, and that
Excommunication ex se, of it self, or, which is all one, of it own nature, or
according to those properties, which do necessarily follow the nature of
Excommunication, and which are founded in those words of our Savior, If he
shall not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen, and the
Publicane, that is, as Suarez expounds, Vbi supra.
separated from the Church, does not work the said civil effects. And
therefore I did not impose upon Suarez, and Becanus a false doctrine for true.
Becan. de fide haeretic seruanda cap. 8. number. 16.
For Becanus does in express words affirm, that heretics by that precisely
that they are excommunicated, are not deprived of dominion, or Jurisdiction
either over their subjects, or over their temporal all goods, but that this
deprivation is a distinct punishment, and imposed by a distinct law. And Suarez
holding, as this Doctor confesses him to hold, that Excommunication
precisely, and per se does not deprive a man of the dominion of temper all
goods, of kingdoms, and Seigniories, and teaching also, that the nature and
definition of Excommunication is to separate one from the Ecclesiastical
communion of the faithful, must consequently according to his own principles
hold, and teach that Excommunication does not per se, and of it own nature
deprive one of any civil communion, administration, or Jurisdiction, but only
of Ecclesiastical conversation, which is directly opposite to civil: neither
can there be alleged any sufficient reason, why the Censure of Excommunication
precisely and per se should deprive of civil Jurisdiction or administration,
and not of temporal dominion.

134 But Suarez, says this Doctor, does in the very place cited by
Widdrington, teach and prove against him, that by Excommunication does cease
all external Jurisdiction, and all acts belonging thereunto in the persons
excommunicated; and in subjects the obligation of fidelity although it be
confirmed by oath; and that also the dominion of all temporal goods may cease,
if there be particular mention made thereof, as it is in the excommunication of
heretics, who are deprived of all goods, and of all dignity.

135 But Suarez does not teach, or prove against me, neither can he, according
to his own grounds, affirm, as I showed before, that any civil Jurisdiction,
administration, act, obligation, or communion does cease by Excommunication
precisely, per se, and of it own nature, or by any intrinsecall property
following by any necessary consequence the nature, and definition of
Excommunication. For although Suarez, Becanus, and many other Divines, and
Canonists do teach, that now de facto since the time especially of Pope
Gregory the seventh, some Popes have annexed to Excommunication this civil
effect, to wit, to deprive not only inferior Magistrates, but also Sovereign
Princes of their civil dominion, and Jurisdiction, being persuaded, but
without sufficient ground, as I have showed both in this Treatise and else
where, that they had authority so to do, yet they do not teach contrary to
that, which I here contend, to wit, that this effect does per se, or by any
nacessarie consequence follow the nature and definition of Excommunication,
which according to Suarez, and the truth it self, is an Ecclesiastical
Censure, by which one is separated from the Ecclesiastical communion, or
conversation of the faithful, and consequently not deprived of any civil
Jurisdiction, administration, or conversation, which is directly opposite to
Ecclesiastical, as I declared more amply in my Latin Appendix to Suarez, Par.
2. sec. 4
where I discoursed more at large of the effects of Excommunication, which it
has per se, and of it own nature, and which it has per accedens, by the
positive laws of the Church, which, for the better satisfaction of the English
Reader, I think it not amiss to repeat here again.

136 And first I showed in that place, that Excommunication per se, of it own
nature, and according to the true definition thereof set down also by Suarez,
and grounded in those words of our Savior, If he shall not hear the Church,
let him be to thee as the Heathen and the Publicane, has only this effect to
debar the person excommunicated from the Ecclesiastical communion of the
faithful, and consequently from no civil dominion, administration,
jurisdiction or conversation, which is directly opposite to Ecclesiastical:
And therefore that Mayor, and Minor Excommunication are not per se, of their
own nature, and according to their intrinsecall definition distinguished in
this, that Minor Excommunication does exclude only from Ecclesiastical
communion, and Mayor both from Ecclesiastical, and also civil communion: but
it is therefore called Minor Excommunication, or a lesser Excommunication, for
that it debarreth from a lesser Ecclesiastical communion, to with from
Sacraments only, and it is called Mayor Excommunication, or a greater
Excommunication, for that it debarreth from a greater Ecclesiastical
communion, to wit, from Sacraments, Suffrages, and other Ecclesiastical
graces, benefits, and priueledges, whereof a man is partaker by being a
Christian: For seeing that both Excommunications do participate the nature and
definition of Ecclesiastical Excommunication, they ought, according to their
nature, and definition, debar the faithful only from this or that
Ecclesiastical communion in particular (because every species, or particular
must be contained sub genere, or under the general, as it is evident to every
Logician) and not from civil communion, which is directly and ex diametro
opposite to Ecclesiastical.

137 And this is signified sufficiently by the very name of Excommunication, as
Suarez affirms: For a man is therefore called excommunicated, because he is
separated, or excluded from communion. And it is grounded in the words of our
Savior Matthew. 18. But if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as
the Heathen and the Publicane, that is separated from the Church. Thus Suarez.
Vbi supra.
Neither is it forbidden by the law of Christ, that the faithful shall not
ciuilly converse with Heathens, publicanes, or notorious sinners, unless some
spiritual danger as of scandal, or of infection, which by the law of Christ
and nature they are otherwise bound to eschew, shall arise from such civil
conversation, as also Becanus does expressly affirm. In opusc. de fide
Haereticis seruanda. cap. 8. number. 3.
See also Abulensis q. 50. in cap. 9. Matthew.

138 Moreover, this also is gathered from the very light of natural reason:
For as in the whole Christian world there be two only common wealths,
kingdoms, or Societies distinguished by their proper acts, functions, and
dignities, ad not depending one on the other in those things, which are proper
and peculiar to each one of them, to wit, the spiritual kingdom, or Church of
Christ, by which precisely and per se we receive only spiritual graces, and
benefits, and temporal common wealths, Societies, and kingdoms, by which
precisely we are made partaker only of temporal goods, Greg. Tholos. in
Syntagmat Iuris lib. 31. cap. 8. number. 3.
and benefits: So also there be two only communions, the one in spiritual, the
other in temporal, and civil affairs; and two only Excommunications in
general, as Gregorius Tholosanus, and I also observed above; Part. 2. cap. 2.
number. 7.
the one Ecclesiastical, which excludes from Ecclesiastical communion, as
from Sacraments, Suffrages, or other sacred things, the other civil, which
excludes from civil communion, which punishments the Civil Lawiers account
imprisonments, confinings, relegations, deportations, and banishments, by which
the person excommunicated is debarred from the communion of some certain
company, town, City, Country, or kingdom: and as civil Excommunication
precisely, and of it own nature does not debar a man from any spiritual
good, grace, or communion^, so neither spiritual Excommunication precisely,
and of it own nature does debar a man from any temporal good, benefit, or
communion.

139 Nevertheless, albeit the intrinsecall, per se, and necessary effects of
Ecclesiastical Excommunication are only to debar one from Ecclesiastical,
or spiritual communion, yet because our Savior Christ has given to the
spiritual Pastors of the Church authority to impose, but not to inflict
certain temporal punishments upon persons excommunicated, all those temporal
punishments, which the spiritual Pastors of the Church, have according to
different times, and occasions adioined by way of commandment to the Censure
of Excommunication, may be called extrinsecall, or accidental effects of
Ecclesiastical Excommunication, or rather temporal effects and punishments
annexed by way of command to Excommunication. But this with all ought greatly
to be considered, as Suarez does well observe, Suarez tom. 5. disp. 8. sec. 1.
in fine and sec. 2. in principio.
that when Excommunication is said to exclude from Ecclesiastical communion,
it is necessarily to be understood of that communion, which depends upon the
power, and will of the Church, and over which she has right, power, or
authority. Whereupon those temporal punishments, which spiritual Pastors
may annect to Excommunication, must be such as by the institution of Christ
they have authority to impose. And therefore if it be a controversy among
learned Catholics, as in very deed it is, whether spiritual Pastors have
authority to absolve subjects from the temporal allegiance, which they owe to
their temporal Princes, and to deprive temporal Princes of their temporal
dominion, administration, or Jurisdiction, these temporal punishments can
never, so long as this controversy remains undecided, be truly said to be
necessary effects annexed to Excommunication by the spiritual Pastors of the
Church.

140 Secondly, I showed also in that place, that the spiritual Pastors of the
Chuch have authority in order to spiritual good to command, and impose
certain temporal punishments, and so also to annexe them to Ecclesiastical
Excommunication as not to eat, or drink with excommunicated persons, or
notorious malefactors, not to salute them, or to converse ciuilly with them,
except in such cases, wherein they are bound by the law of God, or nature
ciuilly to converse. And so the spiritual Pastors of the Church have power to
command us in order to spiritual good to abstain from certain meats upon
certain days, to give alms to the poor, not to converse ciuilly with
excommunicated persons, or notorious sinners, if otherwise by the law of God,
or nature we are not bound to converse ciuilly with them, and the aforesaid,
and such like temporal things to annexe by way of commandment to
Excommunication, whenever they shall prudently judge it to be necessary to
the salvation of souls. And this only is confirmed by the institution, and
custom of the Church approved by perpetual tradition, and grounded in the
holy Scripture, 1. Cor. 5. With such a one not so much as to take meat, and 2.
Ioh. 1. Nor say to him, God save you.

Neither is there any difficulty among Catholics concerning the power of
spiritual Pastors to command, and impose temporal things, when it shall be
necessary to the spiritual good of the Church, for that to command and impose
a temporal thing in order to the spiritual good, is not a temporal, but a
spiritual action, as I have often said: But all the controversy among
Catholics is concerning the coerciue power of spiritual Pastors, and their
authority to punish temporally by way of temporal constraint, or, which is
all one, to inflict temporal punishments. For if, contrary to the
commandment of our spiritual Pastors, we will neither fast, nor give alms,
nor abstain from civil conversation with excommunicated persons, the question
is how far then the Ecclesiastical power can by the institution of Christ
proceed against us, by way of temporal constraint, to the inflicting of
temporal punishments. For in this power to punish temporally, or to inflict
temporal punishments, does consist the whole controversy betwixt me and my
Adversaries. For I contend, that the doctrine, which Almaine and very many
Doctors, as he affirms, do maintain, is not repugnant to Catholic faith,
or the approved grounds of true Divinity, to wit, that the spiritual power of
the Church can not inflict any temporal punishment, as death, exile, privation
of goods etc. nay, nor so much as to imprison, but that her power does only
extend to the inflicting of spiritual punishments, as Excommunication, or some
such like spiritual Censure, and that all other temporal punishments, which
she uses to inflict, do proceed from the pure positive law, or, to use
Gersons words, from the grant of Princes.

142 And therefore thirdly I showed also in that place, that because Secular
Princes have granted many temporal privileges to the spiritual Pastors of
the Church, as to imprison, to confine, to impose or inflict pecuniarie mulcts
and such like all those temporal punishments, which to inflict the spiritual
Pastors of the Church have received authority from the grant and consent of
temporal Princes, may by the Pastors of the Church be adjoined to
Ecclesiastical Excommunication, and in this sense be called accidental
effects of Excommunication, or rather punishments accidentally or per accidens
annexed to the Censure of Excommunication. And so the Pope, being now by the
grant and consent of Secular Princes, and Christian people, become also a
temporal Prince, may annexe to Excommunication all temporal punishments,
which he, as a temporal Prince, has power to inflict.

143 Whereupon albeit I do utterly deny, that Excommunication either of it
own nature, or by any necessary consequence deduced from thence, abstracting
from the grant and consent of temporal Princes, has sufficient force to
deprive one of any civil dominion, Jurisdiction, or conversation, yet I do
willingly grant, that an inferior Magisrate, who by the sentence of a
spiritual Judge is declared to have incurred the Censure of Excommunication,
is by the express civil laws of some kingdoms, and in some others by the
tacit consent of the Prince deprived of civil Jurisdiction, and their acts
reputed to be of no force in law; yea and that by the Imperial law, In noua
Constit. Frederici.
if for a whole year he remain excommunicated, he is in the nature of a
proclaimed outlaw, or Bandite. But to command subjects not to obey their
lawful and Sovereign Prince in temporalls, and to absolute subjects from that
civil and natural allegiance, which by the law of God, and nature they owe to
their rightful Prince (seeing that according to Suarez, Above nu. 121
the power to command in the Prince, and the bond of obedience in the subjects
are correlatiues, and one depends on the other, and that to deny obedience to
a Prince, so long as he remains Prince, is plainly repugnant, says Card.
Bellarmine, to the law of God) it is not in the power of spiritual Pastors,
unless they have authority to depose Princes, and to make Kings no Kings,
which whether it be in their power to do, or no, is the very question, about
which I with all my Adversaries do now contend, and concerning which the
Schoolmen are now at variance, and as yet the controversy is not decided by
the Judge, says John Trithemius In Chron. Monast. Hirsang* ad an. 1106.
.

144 To those Canons, Nos sanctorum, Iuratos, and Absolutos, which Suarez
brought for his chief ground to prove, that the absoluing of Subjects from
the temporal allegiance, which by the law of God* and nature they owe to their
Sovereign Princes, is now a punishment annexed to the Censure of
Excommunication, I have heretofore answered, and among other answers this was
one, that those Canons are not to be understood of Sovereign Princes, but
only of inferior persons, who indeed by the consent of their temporal
Sovereigns do loose their temporal Jurisdiction, after the sentence is
publicly declared, yea and in the territories of the Empire, if for a year
they persist excommunicated, are, as I said, in the nature of persons
prescribed out laws, or Bandites.

145 This in effect, and much more to the same purpose did I answer
heretofore, by all which the force of my answer to Card. Bellarmines
argument, taken from the example of King Ozias, and the reason why I denied his
consequence, supposing for Disputation sake the antecedent to be true, as it is
not, may evidently appear. For in the old law the dwelling of lepers, after
they were declared so to be by the Priest, in a house apart from the rest of
the people, was expressly ordained by the law of God, and therefore supposing
now with Card. Bellarmine, that the dwelling of a King being infected with
leprosy in a house apart from the rest of the people should by any necessary
consequence infer, that he is consequently deprived of his kingdom, or the
administration thereof, it is no marvel, that the Priests of the old law had
authority to deprive such Kings per accidens and consequently, that is, to
declare them deprived by the law of GOD, of their kingdoms, or of the
administration thereof. But in the new law neither the deprivation of a
temporal kingdom, or of the administration thereof, nor the loss of any
temporal Jurisdiction does by the law of GOD, or by any other necessary
consequence follow spiritual leprosy, or any intrinsecall property of
Ecclesiastical Excommunication, neither is it in power of spiritual Pastors,
as Almainus said, to inflict any temporal punishment, as death, banishment,
privation of goods, etc. nay nor so much as to imprison, as very many Doctors,
says he, do affirm, but only to inflict spiritual Censures, or
punishments: And therefore the similitude of Cardinal Bellarmine betwixt
corporal and spiritual leprosy in the old and new law, is this defective,
and so the consequence of his argument is altogether insufficient. Thus much
touching my first answer to the consequence of his argument.

146 Mark now how slightly this Doctor would shuffle over my second answer
and reason, which did clean overthrow Card. Bellarmines consequence grounded
upon the nature of a figure, and the thing figured, even according to his own
grounds. For whereas I answered, as you have seen, that because a figure, as
Card. Bellarmine says, is always less perfect, and of an inferior degree
then the thing which is figured, it does not follow, that heresy, which is
figured by corporal leprosy; must be punished with a temporal punishment,
because corporal leprosy was punished therewith, but with a punishment of a
higher degree, to wit, with a spiritual punishment, D. Schulckenius replieth
thus: I answer, says he page 552.
, As heresy, which is a spiritual leprosy, is far more pernicious, then
corporal leprosy, so Excommunication is a punishment of a higher degree, then
the separating of lepers. For Excommunication does not only deprive of the
company, and living together of men in one house, but also of participation of
Sacraments, and Suffrages of the Church. But that Excommunication besides does
deprive of civil administration, and sometimes has annexed the deprivation of
temporal goods, and also of the kingdom it self, does not diminish, but
increase the greatness and excellency of the punishment of spiritual leprosy
above the punishment of corporal leprosy. Wherefore it is most true, that the
thing figured is of an higher degree then the figure. And in this manner the
Eucharist is of an higher degree then manna, or the Paschall lamb, because
these do nourish the body, that nourishes the soul, although also those
accidents of the Eucharist are profitable to the nourishment of the body.

147 But observe the egrigious fraud of this Doctor. For that proposition of
Card. Bellarmine, Figures must of necessity be of an inferior order and
excellency, then the things figured, is to be understood of figures formally,
as they are figures, for it little imports, that those things, that are
figures, be materially of an equal, or not inferior order and excellency,
then the things figured, so that formally as they are figures, or in that they
are figures, they are less perfect, and excellent, then are the things
figured. Now this Doctor does craftily take here figures, and the things
figured not formally, and according to that, wherein they are figures, but
materially: for otherwise, as you shall see, he says nothing to the purpose,
and to the confuting of my answer. For neither Manna, nor the Paschall lamb
are figures of the Eucharist, as the accidents of the Eucharist do concur to
the nourishing of the body, but only as they are profitable to the nourishing
of the soul: Neither was corporal leprosy, or the separation of lepers from
civil conversation a figure of spiritual leprosy, and of Ecclesiastical
separation, or Excommunication, as corporal leprosy does infect the body, and
Excommunication does separate from civil conversation, but only as spiritual
leprosy does infect the soul, and Ecclesiastical Excommunication does
separate from Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual communion: for that a figure must
in all those things, wherein it is a figure, be more noble, and excellent, then
is the thing which is figured. And therefore as Cardinal Bellarmine very well
observes, Lib. 1. de Missa cap. 7.
to fulfill a figure is not to do that very thing, which the law prescribes
to be done, but to put in place thereof some thing more excellent, which to
signify that figure did go before, as Christ did not fulfill the figure of
Circumcision, when he himself was circumcised, but when he ordained Baptism
in the place thereof. Thus Card. Bellarmine.

148 From whence it evidently follows, that the separation of corporal
lepers in the old law from civil conversation could not be a figure of the
separation of spiritual lepers, also from civil conversation: for that civil
conversation is one, and the self same thing, and not another thing more
excellent, which according to Cardinal Bellarmines doctrine must succeed in
place of the figure, but the fulfilling of this figure must be the separating
of spiritual lepers from spiritual, or Ecclesiastical conversation. And
therefore although Ecclesiastical Excommunication has by the laws of the
Church annexed unto it, in that manner, as I have before declared, the
excluding by way of commandment from civil conversation, if otherwise by the
law of GOD, and nature, we are not bound ciuilly to converse, yea and also
according to Cardinal Bellarmine the depriving of temporal kingdoms, or at
leastwise of the administration thereof, yet the separating of lepers in the
old law from civil conversation, or the depriving them of temporal kingdoms,
or administration could not, according to Cardinal Bellarmines grounds, be a
figure of Ecclesiastical Excommunication in the new law, as Excommunication is
pretended to work the same effects, but only as it works more excellent
effects, to wit, the separating of the faithful from spiritual conversation,
and excluding them from the kingdom of heaven.

149 Wherefore, if we do respect only the nature and property of a figure,
it is evident that Cardinal Bellarmine according to his own principles has
not any way proved, that because corporal leprosy and the punishments
annexed thereunto in the old law, to wit, the depriving of temporal kingdoms,
Jurisdiction, or administration, as Cardinal Bellarmine contendeth, was a
figure of spiritual leprosy, and of the punishments annexed thereunto in the
new law, therefore the same punishments, to wit, the depriving of temporal
dominion, Jurisdiction, or administration were figured by them, and
consequently may now by virtue of the figure be ordained against spiritual
lepers: for this were not according to Cardinal Bellarmines doctrine, to
fulfill the figure, and to put in place thereof something more excellent, but
to put that very same thing, which the law in that figure prescribed to be
done. And therefore Cardinal Bellarmine must bring better arguments, unless
he will quite discredit himself and his cause, drawn from other heads, then
from the figure of leprosy, and of separating lepers from civil conversation,
which, according to his own principles, does, as you have seen, make clear
against him, to prove that spiritual Pastors either by virtue of
Excommunication, or in any other manner, have authority to deprive temporal
Princes of their kingdoms and dominions, or of any temporal administration or
Jurisdiction.

150 Lastly, whereas in the end of this my answer I affirmed, as you have
seen, that Cardinal Bellarmine did not truly, and entirely set down the
words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. And all these things chanced to them in
figure, for that he left out that word [these] which is a relative, and has
relation only to those things whereof the Apostle spoke before, among which
corporal leprosy is none, and he affirms him to say, And all things
chanced to the Jews in figure, this Doctor makes much ado, and labors in
vain to excuse Card. Bellarmine: And first he answers, page 553.
that Cardinal Bellarmine did not produce the words, but the sense of St.
Paul, but it is certain that the Apostle did not intend to say, that those
things only which he mentioned in that Chapter did chance to the Jews in
figure, but those, and other like to them.

151 But first this answer is not agreeable to Card. Bellarmines own words:
The Apostle says 1. Cor. 10. (says Cardinal Bellarmine) that all things did
chance to the Jews in figure, and what I pray you is to say, that the Apostle
says so, then to produce the Apostles words? Secondly, although it be
certain that the Apostle did not intend to say, that those things only, which
he mentioned in that chapter did chance to the Jews in figure, yet it is
certain, that the Apostle in that chapter did only say, that all these
things, and not all things absolutely, as Cardinal Bellarmine affirms him to
say, did chance to the Jews in figure. Thirdly, albeit S. Paul knew right well
that not only all those altogethere mentioned, but many other such like dio^ce
to the Jews in figure, yet it was sufficient for his purpose in that place
only to affirm, that all those things there mentioned, and not that all
things absolutely did chance to the Jews in figure: neither was it necessary,
that the Apostle should in that chapter say all he knew, it was suffient for
him to say in that chapter, only that which did suffice for his present
purpose. Wherefore this Doctor must distinguish betwixt knowledge, which is in
the understanding, and meaning which is in the will, and so he may see, that
the Apostle knew right well, that not only those things there mentioned, but
those and other such like did chance to the Jews in figure, and yet only
meant to say, in that place, that all those things there mentioned, and not all
those, and other such like did chance to the Jews in figure. Neither did St.
Paul mean otherwise then the words, which he spoke, did signify, but it is
manifest, that those words of the Apostle, And all these things chanced to them
in figure, do not signify the same that these words do, And all things
chanced to them in figure.

152 His second answer is, that the ancient Fathers, and especially S.
Chrysostom lib. 3. de Sacerdotio do teach, that the judgment of the Priests
in the old law concerning corporal leprosy was a figure of the judgment of
the Priests in the new Testament concerning sins. But no man denies this;
for I make no doubt, but that corporal leprosy and the judgment thereof in
the old law, was a figure of spiritual leprosy and of the judgment belonging
thereunto in the new law. That which I contend is, that Cardinal Bellarmine
did not truly, entirely, and faithfully set down those words of Saint Paul
1. Corinthians. 10. And all these things chanced to them in figure, for that he
left out that word [these] and that the Apostle did not say in that place, that
corporal leprosy, and the judgment thereof in the old law was a figure of
spiritual leprosy, and of the judgment belonging thereunto in the new
Testament: and of this there needs no other proof, then to peruse the words,
and text of the Apostle in that Chapter.

153 Thirdly, this Doctor answers, that S. Thomas, Prima secundae q. 104 ar.
1.
and S. Aug. In lib viginti and vnius sentent. l. 16. contra Faustum cap. 28.
and l. 18. c. 6. and l. 22. c. 24.
in many places do cite those words of S. Paul in that manner, as Card. Bell.
does: and therefore C. Bell, cannot be reprehended for citing the words of
the Apostle not entirely, and sincerely, unless they also with him be
reprehended. But first, this is not to take away the aforesaid imputation from
Card. Bellarmine, but to lay it upon others. Secondly, it is not true, that St.
Augustine cites those words in that manner, as Cardinal Bellarmine does,
but he expressly sets down in all the later places [All these things] as it
is in Saint Paul. Only in that book Viginti, and vnius sententiarum he cites
indeed those words of the Apostle as Cardinal Bellarmine does, leaving out
that word [these] yet D. Shulckenius being so well acquainted with Cardinal
Bellarmine, and his doctrine could hardly forget, that Card. Bellarmine
himself expressly denies De Scriptoribus Ecclesiast. ab anno 400. ad 500. in
obseruat. ad ^om. 4. S. Augustini page 187.
that book viginti and vnius sententiarum to be S. Augustius work, or to have
in it any grave thing, or worthy S. Augustine.

154 Nevertheless I do not deny, but that S. Austin, S. Thomas, or any other
might by an other consequence gather from that saying of S. Paul, that all
things for the greater part did chance to the Jews in figure. For although S.
Paul does only say, That all these things did chance to the Jews in figure
yet seeing that there is no more reason, why those things mentioned there, and
not also many other things not mentioned in that place, as the Sabbath,
Circumcision etc. which are named by S. Augustine, should chance to the Jews
in figure, we may from those words of S. Paul rightly infer by an other
consequence, that all things for the greatest part did chance to the Jews in
figure. But, as I said, that only which I contend, is, that Card. Bellarmine
did not truly entirely and faithfully relate those words of S. Paul, neither
has this Doctor, as you have seen, brought any colorable argument to
confute the same.

155 Thus thou see, good Reader, that Card. Bellarmines argument taken from
the example of King Ozias is most weak and insufficient, and my answer
thereunto to be sound, and irreprooueable, and D. Schulckenius Reply to be very
fraudulent, and in all points to be shaken and quite overthrown, and to have
wrapped in sentences with unskillful and ambiguous words. Now you shall see,
how weakly and nakedly, my unlearned Adversary Mr. Fitzherbert,
notwithstanding he had seen my aforesaid answer to this example, urges
again the same. But he brings nothing in confirmation thereof but what I
answered before in my Apology, except the authority of S. Chrysostom, whose
words and meaning nevertheless he does most fowlly corrupt, and to which also
in my English Theological Disputation, in the Admonition. nu. 23. and seq.
which was published long before his Treatise against me came forth, I did
most clearly answer.

156 Ozias was so far, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Cap. 5. nu 19. page 79. and
Suppl. page 19.
from being supreme head over Priests in spiritual matters, that he was
subject to them therein, and bound to obey them no less then was the meanest
subject he had. This is manifest by the plaine-words of the Scripture in this
place; where the high Priest having rebuked Ozias for his presumption, did not
only command him to depart, saying, Egredere de Sanctuario etc. Go out of the
Sanctuary etc. 2. Paralip. 26.
but also thrust him out of the same, as soon as the leprosy was discovered
in his forehead; Festinato, says the Scripture, expulerunt cum, They thrust
him out in all have: besides that it is manifest in the same place, that God
punished him as well for his disobedience in resisting, and threatening the
Priests, as for presuming to Sacrifice; and therefore though he had the Censar
in his hand to burn the incense, yet he was not stricken with leprosy until
he had threatened the Priests; Minabatur Sicerdotibus, says the Scripture,
statimque orta est lepra in front eius etc. He threatened the Priests, and
forthwith there arose a leprosy in his forehead: wherein was fulfilled the
menacing admonition that God gave to the people in the 24. of Deuteronomie, as
I have declared before, when he commanded them exactly to obey the Priests of
the Leuiticall stock, bidding them remember how Mary was punished with
leprosy for murmuring against Moses. Moreover whereas there was a general
law given to the people in Leuiticus whereby all men without exception were
bound in case of leprosy, to under go and obey the judgment of the Priests,
and at their arbitrament to be separated from the company and conversation of
other men, it is manifest by this example, that the Kings were no less subject
to this law, and bound to obey the Priests, then every other man; in which
respect Ozias was forced by the sentence of the Priests (according to the
prescript of the law) to live in a house apart so long as he lived. And I can
not omit etc. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

157 But what is all this to the purpose, or how from hence does it follow,
that the Priests of the old law had authority to depose temporal Princes, and
had a Sovereignty over them not only in spiritual, but also in temporal
causes, as this man pretends. For all that Mr. Fitzherbert here has said, is
briefly this? First, that the Kings in the old law were in spiritual matters
subject to the Priests and bound to obey them in spirituals; and that the
Priests might rebuke Kings, and command them to depart out of the temple, if
contrary to the law they should presume to offer Sacrifice: and that it
belonged to the Priests to declare the law of God, and to judge according to
the signs and tokens prescribed by the law, whether one were infected with
leprosy or no, and if he were infected, to declare or judge him to be
separated from the rest of the people according as the law of God ordained: All
which were spiritual actions, and therefore not exceeding the limits of
Priestly function.

158 But secondly he seems to make some force in those words of the
Scripture, And they thrust him out in all haste etc. as though he would
signify thereby, that they thrust him out by head, and shoulders, as the
proverb is, or by laying violent hands upon his sacred person, which can not
sufficiently be proved to be so, but only that they thrust him out, not by
violence, for he himself made haste to go out, but only by their
commandment or admonition, and by denouncing Gods wrath against him, and by
crying against him, and perchance with clapping of hands, as against an
unclean and polluted person, who by the law of God was forbidden to enter, or
remain in the Sanctuary; in that manner as before they did endeavor to
resist and under him from burning of incense, not by force of arms and
violently taking the Censar out of his hands, but by their words and
admonition, commanding him to go out of the Sanctuary, and not to contemn
the law of God. 2. Paralip. 26.
And they resisted the King, says the Scripture, and said, It is not thy
office Ozias, to burn incense to our Lord, but to the Priests; go out of the
Sanctuary, contemn not, because this thing will not be reputed to thee for
glory by our Lord. But Ozias contemned their words, and bring angry, and
holding in his hands the Censar to burn incense, be threatened the Priests. And
forthwith there arose a leprosy in his forehead before the Priests in the
house of our Lord before the altar of incense. And when Azarias the high Priest
had beheld him, and all the rest of the Priests, they saw the leprosy in his
forehead, and in haste they thrust him out, to wit, by their admonitions,
outcries and exclamations, whose words and admonitions he himself, being now
sore afraid, did willingly obey. Yea and himself being sore afraid, says the
Scripture, made haste to go out, because he felt forthwith the plague of our
Lord.

159 And that only by their words and admonitions, and not by force and
violence they thrust him out, Josephus. lib. 9. Antiquit. cap. 11.
Josephus in the words cited above nu. 106.
does plainly signify; The Priests, says he, after they perceived the
leprosy in the Kings face etc. they admonished him, that as a polluted, and
unclean person he would go out the City; And he with the shame of his
calamity obeyed etc. or, as the Scripture says, he being sore afraid made
haste to go out. And what need had they to thrust him out by force and
violence, when he himself made haste to go out? The same also S. Chrysostom
in the place here cited by Mr. Fitzherbert, Chrysostom. hom. 4. de verbis
Isaia, vidi Dominum.
does most clearly signify in these words: Et egrossus est Rex etc. And the
King went forth being made an example to all, and the temple was purged, and he
was cast forth no man thrusting him forth, Nemine propellente.
and whereas he would arrogate to himself the Priesthood, he lost that which
he had (to wit, his corporal health and liberty to come and remain in the
Temple and City) and he departed out of the temple.

160 And the reason why the Priests ought not to lay violent hands on the Kings
person, and to compel him by force of arms, S. Chrysostom did give a little
before in those words: But King Ozias did not obey his admonisher, but puffed
up with arrogancis he opened the temple, and entered into the Sanctuary with
intention to offer incense. But what did God? After the Priest was contemned,
and the Priestly dignity trodden under foot (mark the words following) nec
quicquam prateras potuit Sacerdos, (Nam Sacerdotis tantum est arguere etc.
Neither could the Priest do anything more, For it is the office of a Priest
only to reprove, and to give a free admonition, not to raise arms, not to
use targets, not to shake a lance, not to shoot arrows, not to cast darts,
but only to reprove and to give a free admonition) After therefore the Priest
had reproved, and yet the King did not yield, but took weapons, shields, and
s^, and used his power, thou the Priests said to God, I have done that which
belonged to my office, I can do no more, help thou the Priesthood, which is
trodden under foot, etc. Thus S. Chrysostom. And a little above, The King,
says he, does compel, or force, the Priest exhort, the King by necessity, the
Priest by counsel, the King has sensible armor, the Priest spiritual, the
King makes war against Barbarians, the Priest against Devils. So you see
that according to S. Chrysostom it belongs not to the Priest to use sensible
weapons, and to force by corporal violence, but by counsel, admonition, or
commandment.

161 Thirdly, although a leper was by the law of God bound to live apart out of
the Camp, or City from the rest of the people, yet as I observed in my said
Theological Disputation, In Admonit nu. 28.
it cannot be sufficiently proved, that is belonged to the Priests of the old
law to thrust lepers by force and violence out of the Camp or City, but only
by judging them to be lepers, and by declaring that by the law of God they were
to be separated, seeing that the Kings, and not the Priests were the
executours of the law against offenders, and by force and corporal violence
to punish them, who did not observe the law, as I declared above Nu. 80.
out of Abulensis. But that the Priests after they had declared one to be
infected with leprosy, and had charged him to depart, and commanded them who
were to execute the law to perform their duty and what the law did prescribe,
had any farther authority (as they were Priests) to thrust him out by violence,
it cannot be proved out of the old law. Even as now in the new law it
belongs to spiritual Pastors, to declare whether one be infected with
spiritual leprosy, but after they have declared one to be infected with
heresy, and have excluded him from the Ecclesiastical conversation of the
faithful, leaving him now to the Secular Court, they have no further power by
the law of Christ (as they are spiritual Pastors) to use any corporal
violence against him, and if it shall please the temporal Prince to pardon his
life, the spiritual Pastors, have no authority to take it away, as out of
Dominicus Bannes I showed in that Disputation Cap. 7. sec. 2. in fine.
.

162 But what if I should grant to Mr. Fitzherbert, that the Priests of the old
law might lawfully thrust by violence an unclean person out of the Temple, if
he will not otherwise depart, or that they might lawfully have taken by force
the Censar out of the Kings hands, or have held his hands, that he should not
have offered incense, as also that in the new law it is lawful for Priests to
thrust an excommunicated person out of the Church in the time of Divine
service, or if in case a King would in his rage and fury run his sword
through the body of any innocent man, should grant that his Chaplain, or any
other of his subjects attending upon his Royal person, may lawfully hold his
hands, and so keep him from committing so wilful a murder, could Mr.
Fitzherbert, trow you, gather from hence, that either Priests or subjects had
any authority or superiority over the Kings person to hold his hands, or to
force him by corporal violence? No. But from hence it only can be gathered,
that every private man may, and ought by the law of God and nature, and by the
bond of charity, to keep as much as lies in him his neighbor from doing
evil, which argues no authority or superiority, but only a bond of charity.

163 Now you shall see in what fraudulent manner Mr. Fitzherbert urges the
authority of S. Chrysostom: And I cannot omit also, says he, Page 80. and
seq.
to touch here by the way, what S. Chrysostom observes further in this
example, to wit, that whereas Ozias being leprous did not only dwell in the
City (though in a house apart) but also reign still for some years until he
died, he ought to be cast both out of the City, and also out of the kingdom;
and that almighty God was so highly offended because the same was not
performed, that he withdrew the spirit of Prophecy from Esaias and other
Prophets, during the life and reign of Ozias.

164 Exivit, Hom. 4. de verbis Isai. vidi Dominum.
says S. Chrysostom, cum lepra, etc. The King went out of the Temple with a
leprosy, and yet they did not cast him out of the City for the respect they
bare to the Kingly diadem, but he still sat in his throne breaking again
the law of God. What then? God being angry with the Jews interrupted the
Prophecy. So he. And again a little after, speaking in the person of God, Ego,
says he, quod mei muneris feci, etc, I have done my part ( that is to say, I
have stricken Ozias with leprosy) and you are afraid to cast him being
unclean out of the City. You bear reverence to his Kingly dignity, violating
the law of God, etc. I do therefore speak no longer to the Prophets, neither
do I give any more the grace of the spirit, etc. Silet spiritus gratia, and
non est ostensus Deus, eo quod sub impure illo non erat gratis; The grace of
prophetical spirit was silent, or ceased, and God did not show himself,
because that under that unclean man there was grace. Thus says S. Chrysostom
upon occasion of these words of the Prophet Esaias, Et factum est anno quo
mortuus est Ozias Rex, vidi Dominum, etc. For whereas all the Prophets used to
declare the time, and year of the Kings reign when they prophesied, S.
Chrysostom notes, that Esaias here omitted that custom and did not speak of
the life, and reign Ioathan, in whose time he had his vision, but of the death
of King Ozias, during whose reign the spirit of prophecy had ceased for the
causes before declared.

165 Well then hereby it appears that God was offended, not only because
Ozias was not cast out of the City, but because he was suffered still to
reign, Consedit in throno, says the holy Father, legem Dei rursus
transgrediens; He sat still his throne transgressing again the law of God,
that is to say, as he had broken the law of God before in presuming to
Sacrifice, and threatening the Priests: so also did he again transgress, and
violate the same, in retaining his kingdom, being leprous; and because the
same was permitted, and more respect borne to his Kingly dignity, then to the
execution of Gods law, therefore says S. Chrysostom, God punished the whole
state, not permitting his Prophets to prophecy, as they were want.

166 Whereupon I infer, that seeing the express law of God ordained, that
the cause of leprosy should be judged and determined wholly by the Priests,
and that Ozias was subject to this law, it follows, that as he was expelled
out of the Temple by the Priests, and forced by their sentence to live in a
house apart (though within the City) so ought he also to have been, by their
sentence, cast out both of the City, and his Kingdom. And if we consider, but
only that, which was done by the Priests in this case of Ozias, it cannot be
denied, but that they had a judicial power over his person, seeing that they
both commanded him to go out of the Temple before he was leprous, and
afterward thrust him out, yea and confined him to live in a house apart: for
though the Scripture does not express that this confining, and separation was
ordained by them, yet it could not be otherwise, seeing that the law had
ordained expressly, Leuit. 13. Matthew. 18. Mark 1. Luke 17.
that every leprous man should be brought unto the Priest, and that Ad
arbitrium eius separabitur, He shall be separated by his judgment, or
arbittement, which our Savior himself acknowledged, when he remitted the
leprous (whom he cured) to the Priests.

167 Therefore I will conclude upon the premises, that forasmuch the law of
God assigned a sovereignty in judgment to the high Priests, and their
consistory, as well in temporal, as spiritual causes, and to that end
honored them with a particular, and most excellent privilege of infallibility
in their doctrine, and judicial sentences (as I have See before nu. 10. 11.
12. 13. etc.
amply proved) and seeing that the Kings of the old Testament were not any way
exempt from the law (as appears no less by diverse reasons alleged by me
before, Number. 24.25. and 26.
then by these two last examples of Athalia, Number. 29. and 30.
and Ozias Number. 31.32.33. and seq.
) it follows evidently, that they were not supreme heads of the Priests, but
subject to them, and to their tribunal; and consequently, that if an Oath had
been proposed by any of these Kings to his subjects, whereby they should have
sworn, that he was free from all subjection, and temporal chastisement of the
high Priest, this oath must needs have been repugnant to the law of God in
the old Testament. Thus far I have thought good to lay down the words of my
Supplement touching the law of God in the old Testament, etc.

168 To this authority of S. Chrysostom, I did answer in my English
Disputation of the oath long before Mr. Fitzherbert Reply come forth: And all
the force of his argument taken from this authority seems to consist in
those words of S. Chrysostom, Consedit in throno legem. Dei ri^sus
transgrediens, He sat in his throne transgressing again the law of God. From
whence this man infers, that God was offended, not only because Ozias was
not cast out of the City, but also because he was suffered still to reign:
whereas this only can be gathered from those words, and these other, and you
are afraid to cast him being unclean out of the City, you bear reverence to
his Kingly dignity violating the law of God etc. I do therefore speak no
longer to the Prophets etc. That God was offended and speak no longer to the
Prophets, for that Ozias being a leper, and unclean was not cast out of the
City, as it was ordained by the law, which also S. Chrysostom in the next
homily does more plainly declare.

169 Ego vero, says this holy Father, si vnum quiddam adhuc addidero etc. But
if I shall add yet one other thing, I will make an end of my speech. And what
is this? That which not long ago from the beginning we did demand. What is
the cruse that seeing in external things, and in prophecies all are went to
set down the time, wherein the Kings did live, this Prophet Esaias ommiting
that, expresses the time wherein King Ozias dyed, speaking in this manner: And
it came to pass in the year, wherein King Ozias dyed. And yet he might have
expressed the time of the King then reigning, as all Prophets usually did. But
he did not so. For what cause did he not so? It was an ancient custom to
expel a leprous out of the City, both to the end that those who lived in the
City, might be in better health, and that the leprous should not give to men,
prone to use reproachful words, an occasion of scoffing and derision, but that
he abiding out of the City, might have solitarines in steed of a veil, or
cover against reproachful calamity. And this ought this King to have suffered
after his leprosy, but he did not suffer it, those that were in the City
reuerencing him for his Soueraignitie, but he remained at his house secretly.
This (to wit, that he remained at his house secretly, and went not forth of the
City) provoked GOD to wrath, this hindered the prophecy etc. Thus says S.
Chrysostom: whereby it is manifest, that S. Chrysostom does not affirm, that
God was offended, because Ozias was not thrust out of his kingdom, or deprived
of his right to reign, but because he lived secretly at his house in the City,
and did not depart out of the City, according as the law in Leuiticus did
ordain.

170 Wherefore the meaning of those words of S. Chrysostom, He sat in his
throne breaking again the law of God, is made more plain by these later
words, which I did now relate. For as before he being no Priest trangressed the
law of God by presuming to offer Sacrifice upon the Altar of incense contrary
to the law, so now again he being for his former offense stricken by GOD with
leprosy transgressed the law by presuming to remain in the City, which the
law did forbid. Allo Mr. Fitzherbert may perchance use some cunning translating
those words of S. Chrysostom, Sedebat to thr^^^ etc. He sat still in his
throne breaking again the law of God, as though Ozias had offended again by,
remaining still in his throne, or, which I take for all one, by continuing
still to reign, and by keeping still his Royal dignity, and authority, or
right to reign, and not resigning it over wholly and fully to his son
Ioathan. Wherefore taking those words, He sat still in his throne, in this
sense, that word [still] may be equivocal, and of purpose thrust in by Mr.
Fitzherbert to signify, that he offended for keeping still his Royal
authority, and right to reign, whereas the words of S. Chrysostom only are,
that he sat in his throne, breaking again the law of God, not for that he
brake again the law of God, because he sat in his throne, or, which I take
for all one, kept still his Royal authority, and right to reign although his
son Ioathan did govern the kingdom in his name and by his authority, and
as his Deputy, Lieutenant, or Viceroy, but for that he departed not our of
the City, as S. Chrysostom himself expressly declares. But if Mr. Fitzherbert
will have S. Chrysostom to take that word [throne] for the material Royal
seat, or chair of estate, which remained in the City, for so also the Latin
word may be Englished, then this sense is in effect all one with the first,
which I contended to be Chrysostomes meaning, to wit, that Ozias transgressed
the law again for remaining in the City: for leprosy did not debar him by
the law from sitting in a chair of estate out of the City, or from any jot of
his Kingly right, power, or authority, as I showed before.

171 But lastly it is worth the noting to observe, how well, forfooth, Mr.
Fitzherbert agrees with Card. Bellarmine in urging this example of King Ozias.
For Card. Bellarmine contendeth, that Ozias was thrust out both of the City,
and also of his kingdom; but this man labors to prove, that according to S.
Chrysostom, he was neither cast out of his kingdom, nor out of the City.
Others with Josephus affirm, that he lived in deed out of the City, but
withal that he still reigned, or remained King, although Ioathan in his name
and authority, or as his Deputy, Lieutenant, or Viceroy administered the
kingdom. Nevertheless Abulensis, Abulens. q. 29 in Cap. 25. Exodi.
although he greatly commends Josephus, as a most skillfull Historiographer
of the Jews, of whom also he writes, Q 9 in cap. 15. lib. 4. Reg.
that it is likely he know all the particular facts of those Kings, yet he
leaves the opinion of Josephus in this point: Sometimes, says Abulensis, Q.
10 in cap 13. ^euit
the plague of leprosy was perpetual, and then the leper remained until his.
death out of the Camp separated from the rest, and this was, unless perchance
he was a man of great excellency, as the King, who if he fell into leprosy,
did not go out of the camp, but remained therein, but he was in a certain
separate house, as we read 4. Reg. 15. Of King Ozias, who there is called
Azarias; for he fell into leprosy being stiken by GOD in the forehead, because
he would burn incense to our Lord as Priests, where it is said, And our Lord
stroke the King, and he was a leper until the day of his death, and he dwelt
in a free house apart, but Ioathan the Kings son governed the Palace and
judged the people of the Land. But from hence it cannot be convinced, that this
free house a part was in the City, but rather apart out of the City, and
therefore the opinion of Josephus seems to be more agreeable to the words of
holy Scripture Number. 5. And our Lord spoke to Moses saying, Command the
children of Israel, that they cast out of the camp every leper.

172 Therefore, I will conclude upon the premises, clean contrary to Mr.
Fitzherberts inference, that for as much as the law of GOD assigned no
Sovereignty in judgment to the High Priests, and their consistory in
temporal causes, but only in mere spiritual, as was to declare the law of
God, and to judge one to be infected, or not infected with leprosy according
to the signs and tokens prescribed by the law, and to declare them that were
infected, to be separated and cast out of the camp according to the Prescript
of the law, which is the plain meaning of those words, [and ad arbitrium
illius separabitur, and he shall be separated at his arbitrament, or iudgement]
that is, if the Priest do declare or judge him a leper, he shall be separated,
and cast out of the camp, and seeing that the executing of the law concerning
temporal punishments, and the separating of lepers by force and temporal
constraint, did not belong to the Priests, but to the supreme temporal
authority, which did reside in the Kings, and not in the Priests who were
subject to the Kings in temporalls, and might be punished by them with
temporal punishments, as I have amply proved in these two Sections, and the
aforesaid words Number. 5. Command the children of Israel, [he does not say,
command the Priests although then the Israelites had no King, neither did the
supreme temporal authority reside in the Priests but rather in the people]
that they cast out of the Camp every leper: it follows evidently, that the
Priests were not the supreme heads of the Kings in temporalls, nor Kings
therein subject to them, and their tribunal, nor to be punished by them with
temporal punishments, but contrariwise; and consequently that if an Oath had
been proposed by any of these Kings to his subjects, whereby they should have
sworn, that he was free from all subjection in temporalls, and from all
temporal chasticement of the high Priest by way of temporal constraint [I say
by way of temporal constraint, and putting in execution the law of God wherein
temporal punishment were ordained, and not by way only of declaring the law of
God, which, as it have sufficiently proved, was a spiritual, and not a
temporal action] the said Oath must needs have been conform, and not
repugnant to the law of God in the old Testament. And thus much concerning the
arguments taken from the old Testament.

SECT. III.
Wherein all M. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the new Testament are
examined: and first his comparison between the old law, and the new, the
figure and the verity is proved to make against himself: 2. Those words of
our Savior whatsoever thou shall loose etc. And feed my sheep are declared,
and the arguments drawn from thence, and from the nature of a well instituted
commonwealth are satisfied, and D. Schulckenius Reply proved to be fraudulent,
and insufficient. 3. the authority of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. affirming that
he and the rest were ready to revenge all disobedience, is answered, Mr.
Fitzherberts fraud in alleging the authority of S. Austin is plainly
discovered, and the conclusion of his Chapter showed to be both false, and
fraudulent.

NOw from: the old Testament Mr. Fitzherbert descends to the new, and upon a
false supposall as I have already convinced, to wit, that he has effectually
proved, that the Priesthood of the old Testament had a supreme and sovereign
authority to create, punish, and depose Kings, he labors in vain, from the
number 25 to 32. to prove, that the like authority must needs be acknowledged
in the Priesthood of the new law, not for that he think th, that we are now
bound to retain the ceremonial or judicial part thereof, but to deduce, as
he says, Number. 25. page 83.
a potent argument from thence, as from the figure to the verity, to prove
that the like authority must needs be acknowledged in the Priesthood, and
especially in the chief Priest in the law of Christ. And for proof hereof he
sets down two positions, as the only grounds of this his potent argument.

2 The first is, that the old law, and Testament being but a figure, Number. 26.
page 84.
and a shadow of the new, was no less inferior there to in authority,
dignity, and perfection, then Moses to Christ, the dead, and killing letter to
the quickening spirit, or the Priesthood of Aaron to the Priesthood of
Melchisedech, which was Christ's Priesthood, he should rather have said, which
prefigured the excellency of Christ's Priesthood. See S. Thomas and the
Schoolmen. 3. part. q. 22. ar 6.
This position, to wit, Hebr. 10.
that the old Testament was a figure and shadow, and not inferior to the new
he proves by the authority of S. Augustine, In Psalm. 119.
who affirms, that vetus Testamentum promissiones habet terrenas etc. The old
Testament has earthly promises, an earthly Palestine, an earthly Jerusalem,
an earthly salvation, to wit, conquest of enemies, abundance of children,
fertility of soil, and plenty of fruits; all these things are earthly
promises, and it is to be understood spiritually in figure, how the earthly
Jerusalem was a shadow of the heavenly Jerusalem, and the earthly kingdom of
the heavenly kingdom. So S. Austin.; and thereupon concludes, that if the
old Testament was a shadow of the new, non mirum quia ibi tenebrae, it is no
marvel though there were darkness there, pinguior^s enim vmbrae sunt
tenebrae, for thicker shadows are darkness. Thus argues S. Augustine
proouing the imperfection of the old law in respect of the new, which the
Apostle also proves amply in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 7.
saying, that the old law was abolished propter infirmitatem eius, and
inutilitatem, for the infirmity, and invtilitie of it. Nihil enim ad perfectum
adduxit lex, for the law brought nothing to perfection.

3 His second position is, nu. 26.28.
that the defects of the old law, and Synagogue of the Jews can not serve for
a president to the new law, and the Church of Christ, and therefore though the
Kings in the old Testament should have had authority over Priests, yet it
would not follow, that Christian Kings should have the like, for that the
defects and imperfections of the Synagogue, (which S. Austin calls terrenum
regnum, an earthly kingdom) were not to be transferred to the Church of
Christ, which is called every where in the Scripture Regnum Caelorum, the
kingdom of heaven, though on the other side the consequent must needs be good,
that what excellency, dignity or perfection soever was in the Synagogue, the
same must needs be far more eminent and excellent in the Church of Christ, as
the Apostle taught expressly, 2. Cor. 3.
arguing thus: Si ministratio damnationis etc. If the ministration of death
with letters figured in stones was in glory, that the children of Israel could
not behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance, which is
euacuated; how shall not the ministration of the spirit be more in glory? For
if the ministration of damnation be in glory, much more the ministry of
justice abounds in glory. Thus argues S. Paul, proouing a fortiori the
supereminent dignity and glory of Christ's law, by the great and eminent
glory of the Mosaicall law; Hebr. 6.7.8. and 9.
whereto tends also his argument to the Hebrews concerning the imperfection
and infirmity of the Leuiticall Priesthood, in regard of the most excellent
and high perfection of the Priesthood of Christ.

4 Whereupon it follows evidently, says Mr. Fitzherbert, nu. 29. 30 31. 32.
that seeing the Priesthood of the old Testament had such a supreme and
sovereign authority to create, anoint, punish and depose Kings (as appears
in the former examples) the Priesthood in the new Testament can not have less
power and authority, for it can not be with reason imagined, that God having
taken upon him our humanity, and honored the same with a peculiar and mere
excellent Priesthood then that of Aaron, yea ordained a visible succession of
Pastors and Priests for the government of his Church to continue (as the
Apostle witnesses) 1. Cor. 11. Ephesians. 4. Matthew. 28. Luke 10. Matthew. 18. Heb.
13.
until the end of the world, commanding also, that they should be heard and
obeyed as himself; it were, I say against reason to think, that he would give
less honor and privilege to these his own substitute in his own kingdom,
then he gave to the successors of Aaron in the old law, whereby the shadow
would be more worthy and perfect, then the body, the figure then the verity,
the Leuiticall or Aaronicall Priesthood, then the Priesthood of Christ, and
finally the Jewish Synagogue then Christ's own spouse, and mystical body,
which is his Church, of the glory and majesty whereof the Prophet I say
foretold speaking in the person of God thus, Ponam te, says he, in superbiam
seculorum, etc. Isay 60.
I will place thee as the pride of all worlds or ages, a joy to generation and
generation, and thou shall suck the milk of nations, and shall be fed with
the paps of Kings; and the children of those who have humbled thee, shall come
crouching to thee, and shall adore the footsteps of thy feet, and thy gates
shall be open continually, and they shall not be shut day nor night, that the
strength of all nations, and their Kings may be brought unto thee. For the
Nation and the Kingdom, which shall not serve thee shall perish, etc.

5 Thus promised almighty God by his Prophet, to raise and advance the Church
of Christ above the power of all Nations, and kingdoms, insomuch that he
threatened ruin and destruction unto them, Matthew. 18.
if they did not serve her; whereby it may easily be judged, what an
excellent, and eminent power our Savior gave to S. Peter and his Successors,
when he not only promised to build his Church upon him, as upon a rock, and
that the gates of hell should not prevail against it, but also gave him such
ample authority to bind and loose, that whatsoever he should bind, or loose
on earth, should be bound and loosed in heaven, yea and finally made him
supreme Pastor of his flock, commanding him thrice to feed his sheep, and
lambs, that is to say, to govern those, that should any way pertain to his
fold the Catholic Church. Thus said I in my Supplement. Whereby it may
appear, that the Popes power to chastise Princes temporally, is most conform
to the law of God, not only in the old Testament, but also in the new,
according to Saint Paul's argument a fortiori before mentioned, drawn from the
figure to the verity. And therefore now to declare how I proved the same
further by the new law, etc. Thus argeth Mr. Fitzherbert.

6 Mark now, good Reader, what a trim disourse this man has made agains
himself, and what grounds he has laid to overthrow his own argument he
groundeth thereon. For first I do willingly grant his first position, to wit,
that the old Testament was a figure of the new, the earthly Jerusalem a shadow
of the heavenly Jerusalem, and the earthly kingdom of the Jews a figure of
the heavenly and spiritual kingdom of Christ the eminent glory of the
Mosaicall law a figure of the supereminent dignity and glory of the law of
Christ, the Priesthood in the old law far inferior in authority,
excellency, and perfection to the Priesthood in the new law, yea and that all
things for the most part chanced to the Jews in figure, for that nihil as
perfectum adduxit lex, The law brought nothing to perfection. But secondly,
concerning his second position, it follows evidently from hence, that not
only the defects of the old law cannot serve for a president to the new law,
and the Church of Christ, but also that all things in the old law being
compared to the law of Christ were defective, and imperfect, for that the law
brought nothing to perfection, and that all the authority, excellency, and
perfection of the old law was a figure and shadow of the authority,
excellency, and perfection of the law of Christ.

7 Whereupon it follows evidently, that although we should suppose only for
Disputation sake, because the contrary we have sufficiently proved before,
that the Priesthood of the old Testament had a supreme, and sovereign
authority to create, anoint, punish, or depose Kings yet we cannot from
thence, as from the figure to prove the verity, conclude, that therefore the
Priesthood in the new Testament must have the same authority, for this were
not to fulfill the figure, as Cardinal Bellarmine before affirmed, but that it
must have a far more noble and excellent authority over Princes to create,
anoint, punish, and depose Kings in another more excellent degree: to wit,
that considering the promises of the old law were earthly, and of the new law
heavenly, the kingdom of the Jews was temporal, and the kingdom or Church
of Christ eternal and spiritual, from hence as from the figure to the verity
we may deduce a good argument to prove, that as the Priests of the old law had
authority to cleanse corporal uncleanness, which did bar men from entering
the earthly tabernacle made by the hands of men, so the Priests of the new law
have authority to cleanse the soul of spiritual uncleanness, which does
bar men from entering the Celestial tabernacle created by God alone, and as
the Priests the old law had authority, according to my Adversaries false
Doctrine, to create, anoint, punish, and depose earthly Kings, so the Priests
of the new law have authority to create, anoint, punish, and depose
spiritual Kings, to create, institute, and make them heirs to the kingdom of
heaven by the Sacrament of Baptism, to anoint them with the oil of grace by
the sacrament of Confirmation, to punish them with spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Censures, to depose, or exclude them in some sort from the
kingdom of heaven by denying them sacramental absolution.

8 In this manner should Mr. Fitzherbert have argued from the figure to the
verity, by which we can only prove, that the Priests of the new law can
create, anoint, punish, and depose Kings in a more higher, Bell. lib. 1. de
Missa cap. 7.
and not in the same degree; for as Cardinal Bellarmine well observed, to
fulfill the figure is not to do that very thing which the law prescribes to
be done, but to put in place thereof some thing more excellent, which to
signify that figure did go before, as Christ did not fulfill the figure of
Circumcision, when he was circumcised himself, but when he ordained Baptism
in place thereof; and so the Priests of the new law do not fulfill the figure
of the Leuiticall Priesthood by creating, anointing, punishing, and deposing
earthly Kings in the same material manner, as the Priests of Leui did, but
when they create, anoint, punish, and depose spiritual Kings, to wit,
Christians, who by Baptism are made heirs to the kingdom of heaven, with
spiritual creation, unction, chastisement, and deposition, as I have declared
before. And by this the Reader may clearly perceive, that Mr. Fitzherbert has
not sufficiently proved, either that the Priests of the old Testament had
authority to create, depose, or punish temporally their Kings by way of
temporal constraint, (for no man makes doubt, but that the Priests hoth of
the old, and new law have authority to anoint Kings, it being only a sacred,
and religious ceremony, and to punish temporally by way of command, and by
declaring the law of GOD, as to enjoin fastings, almes-deedes, and other
corporal afflictions, etc. and to declare that this, or that King shall be
deposed, if GOD shall so reveal, because all these are mere spiritual
actions) or else, that albeit we should grant as my Adversaries untruly
suppose, that the Priests of the old law had the aforesaid authority, to
create, depose and punish Kings temporally, yet therefore from thence any
probable, and much less a potent argument, as this man pretends, can be
drawn, as from the figure to the verity, to prove, that the Priests of the
new law must have authority to do the same things, but only to do things
more excellent, and of an higher degree, and order, as the body is more
excellent, and more perfect then the shadow, the verity then the figure, Christ
then Moses, the new Law then the old, heavenly kingdoms then earthly, and
Ecclesiastical or spiritual Censures are of another nature, order, and degree
then temporal or civil punishments.

9 Now Mr. Fitzherbert goes on to prove also out of the new Testament, that
the Priests of the new law, especially the chief Pastor of the Church of
Christ, have authority to punish Princes not only with spiritual, but also
with temporal, and corporal punishments. And therefore now to declare, says
he, nu. 32. p. 87.
how I proved the same further by the new law, it is to be understood, Psalm.
77. Isa. 44. Psalm. 2. Matthew. 2. Apoc. 19. Aug. in Joan. Bell. l. 1. de Romans Pont
c. 12. ad 6. object.
that I urged Suppl. vbi supra nu. 59.
to that end the commission given by our Savior to St. Peter not only to
bind, and loose, but also to feed his sheep, showing by many texts of
Scripture, as also by the authority of S. Augustine that Pascere, to feed, is
taken for Regere* to govern, whereupon I drew certain necessary consequents
in those words, etc.

10 But concerning the authority given by Christ our Savior to S. Peter to
bind and loose, or, which, even according to Card. Bellarmines doctrine, is all
one in substance, with to feed his sheep ( for that by those words, I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind,
etc. was only promised to S. Peter, says Cardinal Bellarmine, not given the
power to bind, and loose, and the keys of the kingdom, which keys he as
the principal, and ordinary Prefect, Prelate, or Governor then only
received when he heard, Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep) I answer first, that
not only S. Peter, but also all the Apostles, received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and power to bind, and loose, and to feed the sheep of
Christ's flock, seeing that, as Christ said to Saint Peter whatsoever thou
shall bind, etc. so he said to the rest of the Apostles, what things soever you
shall bind, etc. albeit I will not deny, that Saint Peter was the first of the
Apostles, but in what consists this prioritie, principality, primacie, or
superiority of S. Peter over the rest of the Apostles, as likewise of the Pope
over all other Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and Bishops of Christ's
Church, there is yet a great controversy betwixt the Divines of Rome, and of
Paris, and perchance hereafter I shall have occasion to treat thereof more at
large. But that which for this present I intend to affirm is this* that
considering in those words of our Savior Tibi dabo claues, etc. I will give
thee the keys, etc. Saint Peter represented the whole Church, and not only to
him, but also to the rest of the Apostles, and to the whole Church and
Priesthood, which Saint Peter did represent, were promised the keys, and power
to bind and loose, as the holy Fathers, and ancient Divines do commonly
expound, As (to omit Origin tract. 1. in Matthew. 16. Eusebius. Emis. hom in Natali
S. Petri. Theophylac. in 1. Mat. 16.) S. Ambr. in psa. 38. and lib. 1. de
Paenit. c. 2. Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iouinian. Aug. tra. 50. and 124. in Joan.
and tract. 10. in Epi. Joan. and in psalm. 108. Leo sermon. 3. in Anniu. assumpt.
Fulgentius de fide ad Petr. and l. 1. de remis. pec. c. 24. Beda, and Ansel. in
Mat. 16. Euthym. c. 33. in Matthew. Haymo hom. in fest. Petri, and Pauli. Hugo de
S. vic. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 26. and alibi. Durand. in 4. did. 18. q. 2. ^yra
in Mat. 16 Walden. tom. 2. doct. fid. c. 138. Cusanus. l. 2. de Concord. Cat.
c. 13. and 34. and commonly all the ancient Doctors of Paris.
if from the power to bind and loose promised to Saint Peter it does
necessarily follow, that S. Peter, and his Successors have authority to
create, depose, and punish Princes temporally, it does likewise follow, that
the rest of the Apostles, and their Successors have the same authority over
Kings and Princes, who are subject to them spiritually.

11 Secondly, those words of our Savior, whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. are
to be understood, as I answered in my Apology nu. 36. of spiritual, not
temporal bindings, and loosings, to absolve from sins, not from debts, to
unloose the bonds of the soul, not of the body, to open, or shut the gates of
the kingdom of heaven, not of earthly kingdoms, to give, or take away
spiritual goods, graces, and benefits, not temporal goods, lands, kingdoms,
or lives. When it was said to S. Peter, says S. Augustine, I will give thee
the keys, and whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. he signified the universal
Church. The rock is not from Peter, but Peter from the rock: upon this rock,
which thou have confessed, Aug. trac. 124. in Joan.
I will build my Church. The Church therefore, which is founded on Christ,
receives from Christ the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is power to
bind, and loose sins. And again beneath says S. Augustine, Peter the first
of the Apostles received the keys of the kingdom of heaven to bind, and loose
sins. So also S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Fulgentius, Ambr. lib. 1. de
paenit. c. 2. Chrysostom. and Theoph. in Mat. 16. Fulgent. and Eus. Emiss. vbi
supra. Bernard. l. 2. c. 6 de considerat. Hug. Vict. tom. 2. sermon. 64. Just.
Monast. Laurent. Just. de casto connub. verbi, and animae. c. 10.
Eusebius Emissen. Theophylact, S. Bernard, Hugo de S. Victore, Laurentius
Iustinanus, and infinite others understand those words of our Savior of
binding, and loosing souls, and sins. Neither is there any one of the
ancient Fathers, or Doctors before Pope Gregory the seventh, that wrested
them to the giving, or taking away from any man whatsoever according to their
deserts, Empires, Kingdoms, Princedomes, Dukedomes, Earledomes, and the
possessions of all men; Quia si potestis, says he, In the Excommunication of
Henry the 4. in the eight Roman Council held by him in the year 1080.
Iansenius c. 148. Concord. Theophy. in c. 21. Joan. Basil. in l. de vita
solitar. c. 23.
in caelo ligare, and soluere, potestis in terra, Imperia, Regna, Principatus,
Ducatus, Marchias, Comitatus, and omnium hominum possessiones pro meritis
tollere vnicuique, and concedere.

12 I grant likewise* that Pascere, to feed is taken also for Regere, to
govern, but not as a King governs his kingdom, but as a Shepherd
governs his flock, as well observes Iansenius upon this place of S. John.
Christ, says Theophylact, does not make Peter a Lord, nor a King, nor a
Prince, but commands him to be a Shepherd. Wherefore, as those words,
whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. are to be understood of spiritual, not
temporal bindings, and loosings, and were spoken not only to Saint Peter, but
also to the rest of the Apostles, so also these words, Feed my sheep, are to
be understood of spiritual feeding, or government, and do belong not only to
S. Peter, but also to the rest of the Apostles, whom S. Peter did represent.
Atque hoc ab ipso Christo docemur, etc. says S. Basil, And this we are
taught by Christ himself, who appointed Peter the Pastor of his Church after
him. For Peter, says he, do thou love me more then these? Feed my sheep:
and consequently he gives to all Pastors, and Doctors the same power,
whereof this is a sign, that all do equally bind, and loose, after that
manner as he. Feed my sheep, says S. Ambrose, which sheep, and which
flock, Amb. de dignit. sacerd. c. 2.
not only blessed Peter did then take to his charge, but he did take charge of
them with us, and all we took charge of them with him. For not without cause,
Aug. de agone Christiano c. 30.
says S. Augustine, among all the Apostles Peter sustained the person of this
Catholic Church; for to this Church the keys of the kingdom of heaven were
given, when they were given to Peter, amd when it is said to him, it is said to
all, Do thou love, Feed my sheep. Let Bishops, and Preachers of the word
hear, says Theophylact, what is commended to them, Theoph. in c. 21. Joan.
Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 12. in fine. Edit. Ingolstad. anno 1580.
Feed says Christ, my sheep, etc. Certain things, says Cardinal
Bellarmine, are said to Peter in regard of the Pastoral office, which
therefore are understood to be said to all Pastors, as Feed my sheep, and
confirm thy brethren, and whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. But of this my
second answer more beneath, nu. 21. and seq.
where you shall see in what fraudulent manner D. Schulckenius replyeth to the
same.

13 Now you shall see, what necessary consequents Mr. Fitzherbert has drawn
from those words of our Savior, spoken to S. Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind
etc. and Feed my sheep. For as much, says he, nu. 33. p 87 Suppl. nu. 61.
at there can be no good government of men without chastisement (when just
occasion requires) it follows that Christ giving the government of his
Church to S. Peter (and so consequently to his Successors) gave them also
power to chastise, and punish such as should deserve it; Whereupon it
follows, that seeing all Christian Princes are sheep of Christ's fould, and
to be governed and guided by their supreme Pastor, they cannot exempt
themselves from his just chastisement, when their own demerites, and the
public good of the Church shall require it. And this, I say, not only of
spiritual, but also of temporal and corporal correction.

14 But first, I willingly grant, that Christ giving the government of his
Church to S. Peter, and also to the rest of his Apostles (and also consequently
to their Successors) gave them also power to chastise and punish all those
that are sheep of Christ's fould, and consequently also all Christian Princes,
when their demerites, and the public good of the Church shall require it. But
I utterly deny, that this chastisement is to be understood, as Mr. Fitzherbert
says, not only of spiritual, but also of temporal and corporal correction.
For as Christ our Savior has instituted his Church a spiritual, and not a
temporal Commmon-wealth, and consequently granted her power to give only
spiritual goods, graces and benefits, not temporal goods, lands or
kingdoms, so also the spiritual Pastors or Governors thereof have
authority by the institution of Christ to chastise and punish spiritually, not
temporally, or, which is all one to inflict spiritual, not temporal
punishments, and to deprive their spiritual sheep, and subjects of those
spiritual goods, which they have received from the Church, and by being
Christians, and not of those temporal goods, which they had before they became
Christians, and which they receive not from the Church, but from the temporal
kingdom, or Commonwealth. And therefore small credit is to be given to Mr.
Fitzherberts bare, I say, unless he could more sufficiently prove and make
good what he says.

15 Mark now secondly, how well he confirms this his, I say; For if bad
Princes, says he, could not be temporally chastised by their Pastor, when
they contemn the spiritual rod of Ecclesiastical Censures (as wicked Princes
commonly do) Christ had not sufficiently provided for the government of the
Church. But this consequence, which is so barely, and without any proof at all
affirmed by him, I utterly deny. For to the good government of a spiritual
kingdom or Commonwealth, as is the Church of Christ, it is sufficient for the
Pastors and Governors thereof to have authority to punish spiritually, not
temporally, or to inflict spiritual, no^ temporal punishments; as also to the
good government of temporal kingdoms or Commonwealths it is sufficient, that
their Kings, Princes and other Governors have authority to punish temporally,
or to inflict temporal, not spiritual punishments. But of this consequence
more beneath, nu. 21. and seq.
for in effect it is all one with Card. Bellarmines second reason, which D.
Schulckenius, as you shall see, labors in vain to make good, against the
answer, which in my Apology I brought thereunto.

16 But this may yet be more evident, says Mr. Fitzherbert, if we consider,
that the greatest inconvenience and harm that can happen to the Church of God,
grows commonly by the negligence, opposition, rebellion or apostasy of
Christian Princes; who so long as they remain obedient and dutiful to the
Church, are (as the Prophet calls them) her Nutritij, that is to say, Isay.
59.
her Foster-fathers, or, as it were, her Arms, not only to defend her against
all foreign enemies, but also to retain all her subjects in their due
obedience, executing her laws and decrees, and confirming the same with her
own constitutions; and therefore we see that in a Christian Country, where
the Prince is Catholic, if any subject do contemn or resist an
Excommunication, or other Censure of the Church, he is even by the temporal
and public laws, and by the authority of the Prince forced presently to do
his duty, or else is severely punished; so that while the Prince remains
obedient to the Church there is no doubt or danger of disobedience in his
subjects, or of any other great inconvenience to ensue on their parts. But if
he become disobedient himself, and fall into heresy, Schism or Apostasy,
what remedy has the Church against him by a bare Ecclesiastical Censure?
does he not contemn it? and by his authority and example, draw his subjects
for the most part to a general revolt from the Church? shall we then say, that
Christ left not to his Church sufficient authority to remedy this?

17 If a Christian Prince become disobedient to the Pastors of the Church, and
shall contemn all Ecclesiastical Censures, fearing not to be declared, as a
Heathen and Publican, and to be delivered over to Satan by Excommunication,
which is a greater punishment, says S. Augustine, then to be stricken with the
sword, to be consumed by fire, Augustine. lib. 1 contra Aduersar. leg. and
prophet. cap. 17.
or to be exposed to the devouring of wild beasts, the Church has no other
punishment to inflict upon him; and therefore in this case she, having
performed her office, and inflicted her last punishment, has no other remedy,
then to leave him to the judgment and punishment of almighty God, who will
ever protect his Church, and to fly to prayer, fasting, almsdeeds, patience
and such kind of spiritual armor or weapons, which are proper, says the
Gloss, ad Ephesians. 4.
to the soldiers of Christ; neither must she therefore usurp temporal and
civil weapons, or armor (as are the depriving of temporal and corporal
goods) which do not belong to spiritual Pastors, but to temporal Princes,
Kingdoms and Commonwealth* Thus I answered in my Apology: nu. 184.
and the reason hereof I gave a little before; for that Excommunication, or
such like spiritual Censure, is the last and only punishment which the
Ecclesiastical or spiritual power, by the institution of Christ, can inflict,
Joan. Paris. de potest. Reg. and Pap. cap. 14. Almain. in lib. de dominio not.
ciu. and Eccles. conclus. 2. Bell. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 19. ad secundum.
as Ioannes Parisiensis, Iacobus Almaine, and very many Doctors, says
Almaine, do affirm.

18 And what if a wicked Pope shall afflict the Church, and seek to overthrow
the spiritual good thereof, and to draw souls into perdition, what
authority, think you, has Christ our Savior, the spouse, Protector and
King of the Church, according to Card. Bellarmines doctrine, left to his Church
to remedy this? I answer, says he, that it is no marvel that the Church in
this case remains without any effectual humane remedy seeing that her
safety does not chiefly rely upon the industry of m^n, but upon the
protection of God, who is her King. Therefore although the Church has not
power to depose the Pope, yet she may and ought to pray humbly to God, that he
will bring some remedy. And it is certain, that God will have a care of her
safety, who will either convert such a Pope, or else take him out of the way,
before he destroy the Church. And yet against this answer, which may in like
manner be applied to wicked Princes persecuting the Church, and contemning
Ecclesiastical Censures, Mr. Fitzherbert dare not conclude, that therefore
Christ our Savior has not sufficiently provided for the government of his
Church.

19 But what think you, does D. Schulckenius reply to that which I answered,
that if wicked Princes shall contemn all Ecclesiastical censures, the Church,
having used her last punishment, cannot proceed against them by inflicting
temporal punishments? Even as he usually does throughout his whole book, by
cunningly shifting of the difficulty, and flying from one argument to an
other, and in the end to his accustomed railing, Schulcken. page 359. ad nu.
184.
and slanderous speeches. I answer, says he; The temeritie of this man, who
will have himself to be accounted a Catholic, is wonderful. A general
Council of the Christian world says, that Princes favoring heretics, and
contemning Excommunication, are to be deprived of their dominions by the Sea
Apostolic: and one man does freely contradict and affirm, that the Church
has no other thing to do, but has performed her office, after she has
thrown the dart of Excommunication. To whom ought Catholic men give credit,
whether to the universal Church giving testimony of her authority received
from God, unto one, I know not whom, who lying hid under another man's name
lasheth out words?

20 But first to return him back his bitter inuectiue, truly I cannot but
admire the fraudulent, and uncharitable dealing of this Doctor, who would have
himself to be accounted so good, sincere, and zealous a Catholic, and yet
lies lurking, and schulking under another man's name, of purpose as it seems,
to lash out more freely contumelious words, which in his own name he would
blush to utter: for otherwise he needed not to disguise himself for fear of
incurring the displeasure of Princes, for the doctrine he teaches so
prejudicial to their temporal Sovereignty, which also he will needs have,
to be, forsooth, an undoubted point of Catholic faith; both for that he being
a man of so high a rank, and place, and living out of their dominions, and
subjection, can by their indignation taken against him receive but little
harm, and also for that he teaches here little or nothing in prejudice of
their Sovereign authority, which he did not long before in his own shape, and
name, without putting on any mask, or vizard in very plain words maintain:
But in what an exorbitant manner the Court of Rome does proceed against those
Catholics, who, for desire to know the truth in matters of greatest moment,
speak, or write any thing (be it with never so great submission) which seems
in their opinion to derogate from that authority, which some Popes of late
years have claimed as due to them, although it is, and ever has been
contradicted by learned Catholics, it is too too manifest, and their
proceedings against me, and my books, in commanding me under pain of
Censures to purge my self forthwith, and yet giving me no notice of any
crime, which I have committed, or any bad doctrine, which I have taught, albeit
I have oftentimes with great instance desired to know the same, protesting to
purge, and recall whatsoever I ought to purge, and recall, does sufficiently
confirm the same. But now secondly to the matter, from whence the virulent
speeches of this Doctor has caused me to make this digression.

21 Card. Bellarmine in his Controversies labored to prove from the nature of
every perfect, and well instituted Commonwealth, Bell. lib. 5. de Romans Pont.
cap. 7.
which ought to have all sufficient, and necessary authority to the attaining
of her end, that the Church of Christ must have authority to use, and dispose
of temporalls, and consequently to inflict temporal punishments, and to depose
temporal Princes, for that this authority is necessary to her spiritual end,
which is the salvation of souls, because otherwise wicked Princes might
without punishment nourish heretics, and overthrow Religion.

To this argument I answered in my Apology, Apolog. 176. and seq.
granting to Card. Bellarmine, that every perfect, and well instituted
Commonwealth ought to have always sufficient authority, for as much as
concerns the authority it self, to the attaining of her end, although she
has not always sufficient power* force, means, or ability actually to
obtain the same, and to remove all impediments, which may hinder the same.
And so the Church of Christ, being a perfect, and well instituted spiritual
Commonwealth, has all sufficient spiritual authority, forasmuch as
concerns the authority it self, to the attaining of her spiritual and,
which is the saving of souls albeit she has not always sufficient power,
means, or ability actually to bring all men to salvation, and to take away all
the lets, that may hinder the obtaining thereof. But withal I denied, that the
authority to use, and dispose of temporal things, or to inflict temporal
punishments is necessary in spiritual Pastors to the saving of souls, but
that the authority to use, and dispose of spiritual things, and to inflict
spiritual Censures, or punishments is sufficient in spiritual Pastors to
bring souls to salvation, forasmuch as concerns the authority, and
punishment themselves.

22 Neither does it therefore follow, as Card. Bellarmine pretended to
conclude, that if the Church has not authority to use and dispose of
temporalls, and consequently to depose temporal Princes, wicked Princes might
without punishment nourish heretics, and overthrow religion. For the Church
by her spiritual authority may punish them grievously with Ecclesiastical
Censures, which punishments are so great and dreadful, that of themselves they
are able to terrify any Christian Prince, and to withdraw him from evil. But
if some Christian Prince, for want of due consideration be not terrified with
Ecclesiastical Censures, the spiritual authority of the Church cannot inflict
upon him any temporal, or civil punishment, for that the only and last
punishment, which the Church, or, which is all one, the spiritual Pastors
thereof by the institution of Christ can inflict, is Excommunication, or some
such like spiritual Censure or punishment. Thus I answered in my Apology.

23 Now D. Schulckenius to confute this my answer, flies from Card.
Bellarmines reason grounded upon the nature of every perfect, and well
instituted Commonwealth, which reason I took upon me in that place to
confute, to the Decree of the Council of Lateran, which is his common skar
crow. For when he cannot confute the answer, which I give to any reason, or
authority brought by Card. Bellarmine, to prove the Popes power to depose
Princes, then his custom is to fly from that reason, or authority to the
Decree of the Council of Lateran, as though that only Decree of the Council
of Lateran, of which Card. Bellarmine in his Controversies made no account at
all, were now a sufficient proof to make good all his other reasons and
authorities: which Decree nevertheless he expounds according to his private
spirit, contrary to the words and true meaning of the same Council: and in
stead of the Lateran Council, which I do not impugn, he would thrust upon
Catholics his own opinion, which he violently wresteth from the words of the
Council.

24 For as I have often told him, I am a true and sincere Catholic, yea and a
far truer, then he himself is, if he build his Catholic faith upon such
weak, and fallible grounds, which some Catholike^ understand in one sense, and
some in another: it being well known to all learned Catholics, that the
Catholic faith, which is infallible, cannot be built upon uncertain, and
fallible grounds, and which are in controversy among Catholics, but upon
undoubted grounds, and so acknowledged by all true and learned Catholics. So
likewise I have often told him, that I do give all dutiful honor and respect
to all the Decrees of any approved Council either touching faith, or manners,
and I do reverence every one of them in their due place and order, but every
exposition, which either Card. Bellarmine, or any other private Doctor, who
may both deceive, and be deceived, makes of any Decree of the Council of
Lateran, or of any other Council, especially when other Doctors expound that
Decree otherwise. I do not account to be any good ground, or rule of a true
Catholic faith. And therefore it is not true, that I do freely contradict the
Decree of the Council of Lateran, but I do freely contradict his private
exposition of the Decree of that Council, it being contrary to the true sense
and meaning of the words thereof, and no sufficient proof to confirm his new
invented Catholic faith touching the Popes power to depose Princes, as I will
at large make plain beneath Chap. 9. and seq.


25 Secondly, it is also untrue, that I only am the man, who denies the
spiritual Pastors of the Church, to have authority by the institution of
Christ to inflict temporal punishments, and consequently to proceed to no
other temporal chastisement, after they have cast the dart of Excommunication.
Many other learned Catholics, as I have showed above Part. 2. per totum.
do also deny the same, and Almaine affirms, that it is the doctrine of most
Doctors, that the Ecclesiastical power cannot by the institution of Christ
inflict any temporal or civil punishment, as death, exile, privation of
goods, etc. Yea nor so much as to imprison. With what face therefore dare this
Doctor, to terrify simple Catholics, cry out so often, Only Widdrington, or
ely Widdrington, as Card. Bellarmine did only Barclay, only Barclay, do
oppose themselves against all Catholics. But God be praised, that my
Adversaries themselves have lived to see, what little credit is given by
Catholics to their vaunting words, and with what disgrace their books have
been handled by the State of France. For Card. Bellarmines book against D.
Barclay was condemned and forbidden by the Parliament of Paris under pain of
treason, this Doctors book against me was disgacefully burnt by the hangman
before the great stairs of the Palace, and the same fire, but by a more
public sentence and in a more solemn manner, Fa. Suarez book also hat passed.

26 Thirdly, this Doctor very learnedly, forsooth, carpeth at me for abusing
words in calling deposition, and killing, temporal armor, or weapons. My
Adversary Widdrington, says he, Cap. 8. page 375.
abuses words, when he affirms deposition and killing to be temporal
armor, or weapons. F. who ever heard, that deposition or killing are armor,
or weapons? They are effects of armor or weapons, but they themselves are not
armor, or weapons. But first this Doctor has so vigilant on eye over my
words and writings to carpe at them, that he quite forgets what words he
himself does use. For he himself here confesses, that Ecclesiastical
Censures are spiritual armor, or weapons, whereupon in this very Chapter he
callet Cap. 8. page 360.
Excommunication a dart; and Card. Bellarmine in his book against Barclay Cap.
19. page 185.
calls Ecclesiastical Censures the spiritual sword: and yet
Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical Censures are according to his own
doctrine effects of spiritual armor, or weapons, to wit, of the
Ecclesiastical power, which he calls Page 386. 387. and in tract contra
Barclai. cap. 19. page ^88.
the spiritual sword. And if spiritual Censures, or punishments may be called
spiritual armor, or weapons, although they be an effect of the spiritual
power or sword, why may not, I pray you, temporal censures or punishments, as
are deposition, and killing, be called temporal weapons, or armor although
they be effects of the temporal power, or sword? If therefore I abuse words in
calling temporal Censures, or punishments, temporal armor, or weapons, how
can he excuse himself from abusing words in calling spiritual Censures, or
punishments, spiritual armor, or weapons?

27 Secondly, it is usual among Philosophers to nominate, and describe a thing
by the name of the cause, whereupon they divide a definition into a formal,
and causall definition, or description: as the Eclipse of the Moon is commonly
described to be, an interposition of the earth betwixt the body of they Sun,
and of the Moon, not for that the Eclipse of the Moon is formally that
interposition, for it is formally nothing else, then a want of light in the
Moon, but for that it is caused by that interposition: and Thunder, according
to the opinion of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, is defined to be a quenching of
fire enclosed in a cloud, See Aristotle lib. 2. Meoteor. sum. 3. cap. 1. and 2.
but according to the doctrine of Aristotle a violent breaking out of a fiery
exhalation enclosed in a cloud, not for that Thunder is formally the aforesaid
quenching, or breaking forth, for it is formally a sound, or noice, but for
that this sound is caused from thence: so likewise spiritual and temporal
Censures may be called spiritual and temporal armor or weapons, not for that
formally they are so, but for that they are effects caused from thence. But
lastly what man is so ignorant, who knows not, that the same thing may be
both an effect, and also a cause being considered diverse ways: and so the same
spiritual or temporal Censure and punishment, as it proceeds from the
spiritual, or temporal power, which is rightly called the spiritual, or
temporal sword is an effect, and not to be called a sword, weapon, or armor,
yet as it is a cause to bring great grief to the person so punished, or to
redress great evil, it may well be called armor offensive, or defensive: yea
and grief it self may without abusing of words be called a sword, according
to that of the holy Scripture Luc. 2. And thy own soul a sword shall pearce.
And thus you see how weakly, and fraudulently this Doctor has impugned my
answer.

28 Now to return to Mr. Fitzherbert: He, forsooth, brings an other reason
but as insufficient as his former, to prove that the Pastors of the Church have
authority to inflict temporal, or corporal punishments, upon heretical, or
schismatic Princes, if they shall contemn Ecclesiastical Censures. For
otherwise, how is that, says he, Number. 35. page 89. 2. Cor. 10.
fulfilled, which the Apostle said of the most ample power, that he, and other
Apostles had to destroy Munitions and Counsels, and all Altitude, or
Lostinesse, extolling it self against the knowledge of God; yea and to
revenge, (or punish) omnem inobedientiam, all disobedience; Which words S.
Augustine, August. ad Bonifac. Com. epist. 50.
understands of the authority left by our Savior to his Church, to compel
her rebellious, and disobedient children to perform their duties: and the same
is also acknowledged by some of our principal Adversaries, namely Calvin,
Calvin upon this place.
who not only expounds this place of the coercitiue, and coactiue power that
is in the Church, but also groundeth the same upon the words of our Savior to
his Apostles. Quicquid ligaueritis super terram, Matthew. 18.
erit ligatum and in caelis etc. Whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.

29 Whereupon I infer, that if the Ecclesiastical authority d^d not extend
it self to the chasticement of disobedient Princes in their temporal states,
the Church should not have the power whereof S. Paul speaks, that is, to
revenge all disobedience, seeing that the disobedience of absolute Princes to
Ecclesiastical Censures should be incorrigible, and remediless. Whereupon it
would also follow, that the authority, and power of the Church should be no
better in effect then a cobweb, which holds only the little flies, and
serves to no purpose against the great ones, sufficing to correct all
inferior persons, and to prevent, and remedy all the inconveniences that may
grow from them, but not to redress the most dangerous, and pernicious
disobedience, that may be; to wit, the rebellion of Princes against the Church
from whence the greatest danger, and damage to souls may, and commonly does
arise; if this then should be without remedy, it must needs follow (as I have
said) that Christ has not sufficiently provided for the government of his
Church, yea much worse then temporal Kings are wont to provide for the
administration of the Provinces, or States subject to them; who when they
appoint Lieutenants, or Deputies any where, do give them authority over all
sorts of subjects, and so much power as may suffice for the remedy of all
inconveniences (and specially of the greatest) which may occur in the States
where they govern.

30 Therefore it must needs be granted, that our Savior Christ, ordaining a
government in his Church, gave to the Governors thereof sufficient power and
jurisdiction to redress all kind of inconveniences in all sorts of subjects,
as well the highest, as the lowest, and when spiritual correction will not
suffice, then to chastise them also in their temporalities, so far forth, as
shall be necessary for the public good of the Church, and for the due
execution of their office, and charge. For as the Lawler says, Cui iurisdictio
data est, Iauolen. leg 2. ^. de Iurisdict.
ei quoque concessa esse videntur, sine quibus iurisdictio explica^i non
potuit; To whomsoever jurisdiction is given, those things do seem to be
granted withal, without the which the jurisdiction could not be explicated:
and this is also conform to the axiom of the Philosophers, qui dat esse, dat
consequentia ad esse, he which gives being, gives also those things, that are
consequents thereof, or necessarily required thereto.

31 But first I would demand of Mr. Fitzherbert, what remedy the Church has
against a most potent Christian Prince, who shall contemn, not only an
Ecclesiastical Censure, but also every sentence of deprivation, or of any of
other temporal or corporal chasticement denounced against him by the Pope?
does he not contemn this Censure, and sentence? and by his authority, and
example draw his subjects, for the most part, to a general revolt from the
Church? shall we then say that Christ left not to his Church sufficient
authority to remedy this? How then is that fulfilled, which the Apostle said
of the most ample power of the Church to revenge, or punish all disobedience,
seeing that the disobedience of absolute Princes to this sentence of
deprivation should be incorrigible, and remediless? Whereupon it would also
follow, that the authority and power of the Church should be in effect no
better then a cobweb etc. Let Mr. Fitzherbert satisfy this demand, and he
will forthwith see, that in the like manner his own argument may be answered.

32 Secondly, as every well instituted temporal common wealth, and the chief
governors thereof have always sufficient temporal power, taking temporal
power for authority to punish with temporal punishments all treasons,
rebellions, and contempts whatsoever, although they have not always sufficient
power, taking power, for might, force, or effectual means to redress
actually all disorders that shall arise in the common wealth, for that if the
perturbers of the common wealth be more potent, and strong then the rulers, and
governors thereof, they will little regard any sentence or declaration either
of exile, loss of goods, and liberty, or also of life that the Governors of
the common wealth shall denounce against them, and yet no man will deny, that
the chief Governors of the common wealth have sufficient authority,
forasmuch as concerns ^he authority it self, to punish with temporal
punishments every particular contempt of these seditious, and wicked subjects,
and to redress all inconveniences that possibly may arise: So likewise the
chief Pastors, or Governors of the Church, or spiritual kingdom of Christ,
have always sufficient spiritual power, taking spiritual power for
authority, to punish with spiritual punishments all heresies, schisms, and
other crimes whatsoever, although they have not always sufficient spiritual
power, taking power for force, might, or effectual means to redress actually
by spiritual punishments all inconveniences, and disorders that shall arise in
the Church of Christ: For if the disturbers of the Church be perverse,
obstinate, and wilful they will little regard and Censure sentence, or
declaration that the Pastors of the Church can possibly denounce against them;
and yet no man will deny, that the chief Pastors or Governors of the Church
of Christ, have sufficient authority, for as much as concerns the authority
it self, to punish with spiritual Censures every particular contempt of these
disobedient persons, and that these spiritual Censures, are of themselves
sufficient to terrify any Christian whatsoever, and to withdraw him from
sin, seeing that they are far more grievous and dreadful as S. Augustine
affirms, then any temporal punishment whatsoever.

33 Thirdly, I answer, that S. Paul had indeed through the gift of miracles,
which Christ our Savior gave to him, and to the rest of the Apostles, not only
a most ample and extraordinary authority, but also power, might, force, and
effectual means, to punish or revenge all disobedience, even with temporal
and corporal punishments. Whereupon, as S. Chrysostom observes upon this
place, Chrysostom. in 2. Cor 10. Act. 14. Act. 2^. Act. 13. Auselni. in 2. Cor.
10.
he did one time cure a lame man, an other time he raised one from death to
life; and an other time he punished Elymas the Magician with depriving him of
his sight. And S. Anselme numbreth among this spiritual armor, whereof the
Apostle here speaks, the doing of miracles. For we, says S. Anselme
speaking in the person of S. Paul, do not war, or fight according to the
flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but spiritual and mighty
to God our King, for whom we war, or fight. For we do not bear a material
lance, or sword, but we do more mightily overthrow our enemies with the word,
then others do with carnal weapons. For our weapons are the word of
preaching, wisdom, miracles, charity, and other virtues etc.

34 Wherefore S. Paul speaks not only of authority to fight, or punish, but
also of might, force, or effectual means to overcome his enemies. Our
weapons, says he, are mighty to God to destroy munitions, that is, says S.
Anselme, secular doctrines, arguments, and subtilities, by which perverse men
do strengthen their hearts, that the word of truth may not be able to touch
them, because the art of Apostolical preaching does mightily pearce, and
overthrow through the virtue of spiritual grace these kind of munitions. And
we have also in readiness, that is in manifest, and speedy effect, to revenge
all disobedience, that is, to punish the offenses of them, who would not obey
us, that they might correct themselves: Which we will do, when your obedience
shall be fulfilled, that is, when all the rest of you shall by love be obedient
in all things. Thus S. Anselme. Now what learned man will thus conclude, that
because S. Paul and the Apostles had a most ample, extraordinary and
miraculous authority, power, might, and effectual means to convert men to
the faith of Christ, and to revenge or punish all that were disobedient with
temporal punishments even by death, as S. Peter did Ananias and Saphyra, or by
depriving them of their sight, as S. Paul did Elimas the Magician, or by
delivering them to Satan to be visibly tormented by him, as S. Paul did the
incestuous Corinthian, that therefore the ordinary Pastors of the Church have
now either an extraordinary, or ordinary authority, power, might and
effectual means to do the like.

35 I omit that S. Ambrose or whosoever is the Author of those Commentaries,
expounds those words, to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience shall
be fulfilled, of the Corinthians themselves, who being perfectly converted
shall punish in themselves their former disobedience. It is manifest, says S.
Ambrose, that he reuengeth disobedience, when he condemns it by obedience,
then destroying it, when he brings to the faith those, who do resist, or
disobey, that infidelity may be condemned by them, by whom it was defended.
The same also does S. Anselme insinuate, as you have seen above.

36 But S. Augustine, says Mr. Fitzherbert, understands those words of the
Apostle [hauing in a readiness to revenge all disobedience] of the authority
left by our Savior to his Church to compel her rebellious and disobedient
children to perform their duties. True it is, that S. Augustine applies those
words of the Apostle to the authority of the Church to compel heretics by
temporal punishments to return to the faith of Christ, taking the Church, as
it contains all the faithful, and consists both of temporal and
spiritual power, but it is not true, that he understands them of the
authority of the Church, as the Church is taken for Churchmen, or the
spiritual Pastors of the Church. Wherefore Mr. Fitzherbert does herein
egregiously abuse his Reader. For S. Augustines maine drift both in that 50.
epistle, and in the former 48. epistle is only to prove against the Donatists,
that heretics may lawfully be compelled with temporal punishments by the laws
of Christian Emperors to return to the Catholic faith, and that the Pastors
of the Church did well in requesting Christian Emperors to make such laws.
Wherefore the argument of the 48. epistle to Vincentius is, that S. Austin was
once of opinion, that we must not deal with heretics by violence, but only
with the word of God, but afterward being overcome with the doctrine and
example of others he changed his opinion, and taught that it is lawful to
implore the laws of Princes against the enemies of the faith, so that it be
done with an intention to correct, and not with a desire to revenge: And the
argument of this 50. Epistle is, that S. Augustine shows with what moderation
heritickes may through fear of Imperial laws be reduced to the communion of
the Church. And in his second book of Retractations, Cap. 48.
mentioning this Epistle to Bonifacius he writes thus: At the same time I
wrote also a book (meaning this 50. Epistle) concerning the correction of the
Donatists by reason of those, who would not have them to be corrected by the
Imperial laws. This book begins thus: Laudo, and gratulor, and admiror
fili dilectissime Bonifaci.

37 Judge now, good Reader, what a shameful fraud is this of Mr. Fitzherbert
to make ignorant Catholics believe, that S. Augustine brings those words of
the Apostle to prove the authority left by our Savior to his Church, that is,
to Churchmen, or to the spiritual Pastors of the Church (for so he
understands the word Church in all this his Discourse) to compel her
rebellious, and disobedient children by force of temporal punishments to
perform their duties, whereas S. Augustines intent only is to prove the
lawfulness of the Imperial laws compelling heretics by temporal
punishments to return back to the faith, and that Churchmen, or the
spiritual Pastors of the Church may lawfully implore the Imperial laws, and
desire Christian Princes to compel heretics to forsake their heresy by
force of temporal punishments, so that they desire it with intent to correct
them, and not with a desire of revenge.

38 But if the Ecclesiastical authority, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 90.
, did not extend it self to the chastisement of disobedient Princes in their
temporal states, it must needs follow that Christ had not sufficiently provided
for the government of his Church, yea much worse then temporal Kings are went
to provide for the administration of the Provinces, or states subject to them,
who when they appoint lieutenants, or deputies any where, do give them
authority over all sorts of subjects, and so much power as may suffice for the
remedy of all inconveniences (and specially of the greatest) which may occur
in the States where they govern, etc. But this consequence I have ever denied.
For, as I have often said, to the good government of the Church of Christ,
which is a spiritual, and not a temporal kingdom, or commonwealth, it is
only required, that the Pastors, or Governors thereof have authority to
inflict spiritual, and not temporal punishments, and this authority,
forasmuch as concerns the authority, and punishments themselves, is
sufficient to redress all inconveniences, neither is it necessary either in a
spiritual, or a temporal kingdom, that the chief Governors thereof should
have that power, might, or effectual means whereby all inconveniences must
actually at all times be redressed.

39 And therefore, as temporal Kings do give to their Lieutetenants,
Deputies, or Vice-Royes sufficient temporal authority over all sorts of
subjects in the Provinces, or States where they govern, but not always so
much power, (taking power not for authority or jurisdiction, but for might,
force, or effectual means) as may suffice for the remedy of all
inconveniences, for this power the Kings themselves do often times want in
those Dominions, where they themselves do personally govern; so Christ our
Savior ordaining in his Church a spiritual, and not a temporal Government,
gave to the spiritual Governors thereof sufficient spiritual authority and
jurisdiction, to redress all kind of inconveniences in all sorts of subjects,
as well the highest, as the lowest, but not sufficient power, might, or
effectual means actually to redress the same: And as the Lieutenants,
Deputies, or Vice-Royes of temporal Kings, if they offend, cannot be punished
with temporal punishments by any subject in the States where they govern, but
by the King alone, to whom only they are subject in temporalls: So likewise if
temporal Kings themselves do offend, they cannot be punished with temporal
punishments but by God alone, to whom only they are subject in temporalls. Now
to give to temporal Commonwealths the use of the spiritual power, sword,
weapons, or armor, and authority to inflict spiritual Censures or
punishments, or to the Church of Christ, as it is a spiritual commonwealth,
the use of the temporal power, sword, weapons, or armor, and authority to
inflict temporal Censures, or punishments, it were both to confound the acts,
functions, authority, sword, weapons, and armor of the spiritual and
temporal commonwealths, which Christ our Savior has distinguished, and it
is also repugnant to the express words of the holy Scripture, 2. Cor. 10.
nam arma militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt, for the weapons or armor of our
warfare are not carnal, etc. to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, who
affirm, that Emperors and Kings are in temporalls next to God in authority,
and consequently to be temporally punished by God alone, and to the general
practice of the primitive Church.

40 Wherefore that comparison, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings here of the
cobweb, which holds only the little flies, and serves to no purpose against
the great ones, etc. is idle, and to no purpose. For Ecclesiastical Censures,
which are the punishments belonging to the Church of Christ, are common both to
Princes, and Subjects, and of themselves they are so dreadful, that they are
able, and sufficient of their own nature to hold and keep in awe all
Christians whatsoever, and to correct, amend, and bring all sinners, as they
did the Emperor Theodosius, to true repentance. But if some persons do not
fear these Censures, and be not amended by them, this is not to be attributed
to the weakness, defect, or imperfection of the Censure, which of it self is
most dreadful, yea and more horrible, says S. Augustine, then any corporal
death, but to the indisposition of the offender, who does not duly consider the
greatness, and dreadfulnesse of that Ecclesiastical Censure. As likewise
temporal punishments, as is the sentence of death, exile, imprisonment,
whipping, confiscation of goods, etc. are of themselves able, and sufficient to
withdraw any man from sinful life, yet they do not actually correct, and
amend all malefactors, but this is not to be attributed to the weakness, or
insufficiency of the temporal sword, but the rashness, passion, malice, or
inconsideration of such malefactors, who for want of due consideration, are
not afraid of that temporal punishment, which of it self is able to terrify
any prudent man, and to redress all kind of inconveniences in all sorts of
subjects, as well the highest, as the lowest.

41 Neither is it necessary for the public good of the Church, as this man
supposes, or for the due execution of the office, and charge of spiritual
Pastors, that they should have authority to chastise temporally, or, which is
all one, to inflict temporal punishments, and to use the temporal sword,
which is only proper to temporal Princes, or commonwealths, and by the law
of Christ forbidden spiritual Pastors, as they are spiritual Pastors, who
have only spiritual, and not temporal authority, as I proved above by the
authority of S. Bernard. Wherefore that axiom of the Lawyer, Cui iurisdictio
data est, etc. To whom jurisdiction is given those things also do seem to be
granted without which the jurisdiction could not be explicated; and that other
of the Philosophers, Qui dat esse, etc. He that gives being, gives also
those things that are consequent to being, or necessarily required thereunto,
are unaptly applied to this purpose: For spiritual jurisdiction can very well
be exercised without using temporal weapons, or inflicting temporal
punishments; and to use temporal weapons, or to inflict temporal punishments,
is not a consequent, or necessarily required to the spiritual authority or
jurisdiction of spiritual Pastors, as Mr. Fitzherbert untruly supposes.

42 Now you shall see in what manner he concludes this Chapter. Thus then,
says he, page 91. nu. 38.39.
thou see, good Reader, how I proved in my Supplement by the law of GOD,
that the Pope has power to chastise Princes in their temporal states, and
dignities, when the necessity of the Church shall require it; which I also
prosecuted further there, inferring the Popes power over the bodies, and
temporal goods of Christians by the power he has over the soul, according to
the two axioms, Qui potest maius, potest minus, He which may do the more, may
do the less, and Accessorium sequitur principalis naturam, The accessorie
follows the nature of the principal, which I have amply d^bated before with
my Adversary Widdrington, in the second, and third chapters, having also laid
down there the words of my Supplement touching the same, and therefore I
think it needelesse to repeat them here.

43 Now then I remit it, good Reader, to thy judgment, whether my Adversary
Widdrington has not notably abused me in two things, the one in affirming (as
you have heard before in the first Chapter) that I grounded all my discourse
against the Oath in my Supplement, See Chapter 1. nu. 3. 7. and 9.
upon a bare supposition, that the Popes spiritual authority is abiured
therein; and the other that I have effectually proved nothing else by the law
of GOD, but that the temporal power in spiritual things, and in temporal (as
they are reduced to spiritual) is subject to the spiritual power, so far forth
as concerns the authority to command and a spiritual manner of correction,
not temporal (for so you have heard him say in the beginning of this chap.)
though it be evident by the premises, Supra nu. 1.
that I have grounded my arguments against the oath (not upon any such
supposition, as he mentions) but upon the very substance of the law of God in
the old, and new Testament, and that I have deduced from thence by most
pregnant reasons, and necessary consequents, that the Pope has power to
proceed to the temporal correction of Princes, when the spiritual will not
suffice and the necessity of the Church does require it.

44 Whereupon it follows evidently, that the new Oath, which impugneth this
power of the Pope, is repugnant to the law of GOD. So that, you see, how
probable my Adversary Widdringtons answers are, or rather how fraudulent
seeing that he dissembleth all the substance, and pith of my arguments, abusing
therein his Reader, no less then me, seeking to breed in him a false conceit
of the substance, and effect of my discourse, and then framing his answer,
according to his own forgerie. So as, in fine, he answers nothing of mine,
but his own vain conceits, as it will also further appear by that, which
rests to be debated betwixt us, concerning the Laws of Nature, and Nations.

45 But contrariwise thou see, good Reader, that Mr. Fitzherbert in his
Supplement neither has sufficiently proved by the law of GOD, as he here
untruly affirms, either that the Pope has power to chastise Princes in
their temporal States, and dignities except by way only of direction, or
commandment, or that the necessity of the Church does require, that
spiritual Pastors should by their spiritual authority have power to use the
temporal sword, and to inflict temporal punishments; nor has rightly
concluded the Popes power over the bodies, and temporal goods of Christians
from the power he has over their souls, by those two axioms, He that may
do the greater, may do the less, and The accessorie follows the nature of
the principal, the true sense and meaning whereof I have amply declared before
in the second, and third Chapters, and have laid open Mr. Fitzherberts fraud,
and ignorance in urging those axioms.

46 Wherefore to conclude with him this Chapter, I remit it good Reader, to thy
judgment, whether I have any way abused Mr. Fitzherbert in two things, as he
says I have done, the one in affirming (as thou have heard before in the first
Chapter) that he in his Supplement does first of all suppose, that the Popes
power to excommunicate Princes is abiured in this Oath; and the other, that he
has effectually proved nothing else by the law of God, but that the temporal
power is in spiritual things, and in temporal, as they are reduced to
spiritual, subject to the spiritual power, so far forth as concerns the
authority to command, and a spiritual manner of punishing by way of coercion,
and not temporal. For, as I have most amply showed in this Chapter, he has
not brought any one pregnant reason, or necessary consequent, grounded upon
the law of GOD either in the old Testament, or in the new, to prove, that the
Pope has power to proceed by way of temporal coercion, or which is all one,
by inflicting temporal punishments, to the temporal correction or punishment
of any Prince. Neither also has he brought any one pregnant reason, or
argument to prove, either that spiritual punishments are not of themselves
sufficient, (although by reason of the indisposition of the person so punished
not always effectual) to redress all inconveniences, and to correct, or
amend all the disobedient children of the Church; or, that the necessity of
the Church, as it is instituted by Christ to be a spiritual, and not a
temporal commonwealth, does at any time require, that the spiritual
Pastors, or Governors thereof must have authority to use temporal weapons,
or, which is all one, to inflict temporal punishments: whereupon it evidently
follows, that this new Oath, which denies this authority of the Pope is not
repugnant to the law of God.

47 Thus then thou see, that I have soundly answered all Mr. Fitzherberts
arguments without dissembling the substance, or pith of any one of them, and
have most clearly showed, that I have neither abused him, nor the Reader in
those two things, which here he mentions, but that he has notably abused
me, and bewrayed his manifest fraud and dissimulation, in falsely relating the
supposition, whereon he groundeth his whole Discourse, as I have at large
declared in the first Chapter, and therefore I think it needelesse to repeat
here the same again.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein Mr. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the Law of Nature are confuted:
and first it is showed, in what manner temporal things are by the Law of
Nature subordinate to spiritual, and the temporal Commonwealth to the Church
of Christ. Secondly, that Religious Priests by the Law of Nature cannot punish
temporal Princes temporally, and that in the Law of Nature the civil Society
was supreme and disposed of all things as well concerning Religion as State,
and that therefore the new Oath, denying the Popes power to depose Princes, is
not repugnant to the Law of Nature. Thirdly, the difference betwixt the
directive and coerciue power, and how temporal things become spiritual is
declared, and from thence proved, that the Church may command, but not inflict
temporal punishments, and diverse replies of Mr. Fitzherbert and D.
Schulckenius are confuted.

MY Adversary, T. F. a man, as most of our Countrymen know, unskillful in
Philosophy, and Schoole-Diuinitie, as being sciences, which he has little
studied, has in this sixth Chapter taken a hard task upon him, and which few
men, except such as are like to himself, would adventure; but, as our English
proverb says, who is so bold, as is blind Bayard. For he will, forsooth, show
in this Chapter, that he has effectually proved in his Supplement by the law
of Nature, that the Pope has power to chastise Princes temporally, and
consequently that the new Oath of Allegiance, which denies the Popes power to
depose Princes, is repugnant to the law of Nature. But how unsoundly he has
proved this, and that by the law of Nature it may rather be convinced, that
Religious Priests were subject to temporal Princes, and might be deposed by
them, and that all things both concerning State and Religion, and the public
service of God did in the law of Nature depend upon the authority of the
temporal commonwealth, you shall anon most clearly perceive.

2 First therefore Mr. Fitzherbert Page 94. nu. 2
sets down the words, which he wrote in his Supplement in this manner. It
is evident by the light of natural reason, that in all things, wherein there
is any natural composition or combination, there is a due subordination and
subjection of that which is less perfect to the more perfect, and of the
inferior to the Superior, as of the means to the end, which is evident in
the Hierarchies of Angels, in the Orbs or Spheres, in the Elements, in the
Powers of the soul, in the Sciences; and (to omit other examples in all
natural Societies of Families, Commonwealths and Kingdoms, in which there is
a superiority, and subjection, the less perfect being inferior and
subordinate to the more perfect, whereby nature gives to every thing the
perfection, which is convenient for it, according to the kind, degree and
quality thereof, wherein we see, nature tends still to greater perfection,
passing, and, as it were, moving by degrees from the lowest, and and most
imperfect creature to man, from man to Angels, and from them to Almighty God,
who, as he is the Creator of all, so also he is the end, consummation and
perfection of all, yea perfection it self, by whom and in whom all natural
things are consummated and perfected.

3 Here, you see, this man has brought diverse examples; wherein one thing is
subject and subordinate to another, but to what purpose he has brought them,
and how from any one of them he can well deduce, that the Pope has power to
depose Princes by the law of Nature, which is the principal subject of this
Chapter, I cannot any way conceive. If he had declared in particular, after
what manner, and with what kind of subjection these things are subordained one
to the other, every man of mean understanding would presently have perceived
the non sequitur of all the consequences which can be gathered from those
examples. Means are subject, and ordained to the end, for that the end cannot
be obtained without them; will he therefore infer from hence, that the Pope
has power to depose Princes? The nine Orders of Angels have a subjection, and
subordination of the inferior to the superior, for that one is more noble,
more potent and more perfect then another, by reason whereof the superior can
illuminate, and move locally the inferior, but will he therefore from hence
conclude, that the Pope has power to depose Princes?

4 The celestial Orbs are inferior one to another in place magnitude and
perfection, as the Sphere of the Moon is the least and lowest of all: and the
Planet of the Sun, although it be placed in the middle Orb, is the chief,
and, as it were, the King of all the seven Planets, and exceeds them all in
magnitude, splendor and actiuitie. The four Elements also are inferior one
to an other in place, magnitude and perfection. Also the powers of the soul
have a kind of subjection one to another, the understanding does guide and
direct, as a teacher or instructour, but the will, as the Mistress does
command. Likewise all sciences have some subordination among themselves, and
Metaphisicke is in some sort the Mistress of them all: but will my Adversary
infer from any of these, that therefore the Pope has power to depose
Princes? Families also are subject to Incorporations, Incorporations to Cities,
Cities to Kingdoms, for that one is included in the other, as a part in the
whole; and therefore he that is Superior or chief Governor of the whole, and
can dispose thereof, is also Superior and Governor of every part thereof: But
the temporal kingdom, speaking formally and in abstracto, is not a part of
the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, nor included therein as a part in
the whole, wherefore from hence it cannot be gathered, that spiritual
Pastors, who are the Superiors and Governors of this spiritual kingdom,
have authority to depose absolute Princes who are the Superiors and
Governors of temporal kingdoms, and in temporalls are subject to none but
God. Lastly, man, Angels and all other creatures are subject to Almighty God,
who, as he is the Creator and Conseruatour of all, so he is the end,
consummation and perfection of all, but how from hence Mr. Fitzherbert can
gather, that therefore the Pope has power to depose Princes, truly it passes
my understanding to conceive.

5 Wherefore all that from this Rhetorical Discourse of my Adversary can be
rightly concluded is this, at the most, that in this world there is nothing to
be found, which is not subject and subordinate to some other thing: and that
every thing, which is subject to another, must be subject only in that degree
of subjection, wherein the other is Superior: and therefore that temporal
kingdoms, whether they be Heathen or Christian, are in dignity inferior and
subject to the spiritual kingdom or Church of Christ, for that spiritual
things are in dignity superior to temporal: and that Christian Princes being
parts and members of the Church of Christ, are subject to the spiritual
Pastors and Governors thereof in spirituals, but not in temporals, for in
temporals, Christian Princes themselves are the supreme Governors, and subject
to God alone.

6 But let us go on with Mr. Fitzherberts discourse: This being so, says he,
page 94. n. 3.
it is to be considered, that seeing in all commonwealths (I speak of such as
are Christian) there is a composition and combination of diverse Societies, all
tending to the perfection of man's nature, as of husband and wife, master and
servant, Prince and subject (of all which resulteth the civil Society:) and
again, seeing that in this civil Society or Commonwealth there is an
Ecclesiastical Society evident and distinct in it self, by different
Magistrates and laws, whereby the civil Society is united with the
Celestial and heavenly Hierarchies, and the members thereof made ciues
Sanctorum, and domestici Dei, the citizens of Saints, and the household servants
of God; Ephesians. 2.
yea united with God himself, and consequently made as perfect and happy as
man can be in this life, it must needs follow that as the Society of the
husband and the wife, and of the master and the servant are ordained for the
family, and again the family for the town and city, and the city for the
whole commonwealth, every one of them tending to a superior and more perfect
Society; so in like manner the commonwealth it self with all her inferior
Societies are naturally ordained for the religious, and Ecclesiastical
Society, that is to say, the Church, tending thereto as to the supreme, and
most perfect Society that is on earth, whereby it, and all other Societies are
perfected, and humane nature finally advanced to that supernatural end, and
felicity, whereto God has ordained it. And this I suppose is so evident in
reason, that no man will deny it; Whereupon it is also further to be inferred,
etc.

7 But fair and softly, Good Sir, be not too hasty to make more inferences,
before you can make good what you have said already. For your comparison
betwixt particular Civil Societies, as families, or Oeconomies, Cities, and
temporal commonwealths, or kingdoms, and between temporal commonwealths
or kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, and also that
your consequence and similitude (which you make in these words, It must need
follow, that as the Society of the husband, and the wife, and of the master,
and the servant are ordained for the family, and again the family for the
Town, and City; and the City for the whole Commonwealth: So in like manner
the Commonwealth it self with all her inferior Societies, are naturally
ordained for the Religious, or Ecclesiastical Society, that is to say, the
Church) are so far from reason, that no man with reason can approve the said
comparison, similitude, and consequence. For the reason, why the Society of
the husband and wife, and of the master, and servant are ordained for the
family, and again the family for the Town, and City, and the City for the
whole Commonwealth, is, for that the Society of man and wife, of master and
servant, are parts and members of the Family, and the Family is a part and
member of the Town and City, and the City is a part, and member of the whole
Commonwealth, or Kingdom, and therefore it must needs follow, that all these
particular Civil Societies are naturally ordained for the whole Civil
Commonwealth, or Kingdom, which they compose, as all parts and members are
naturally ordained for the whole body, which is compounded of them. But no man
with reason can affirm, that in like manner the whole Civil Commonwealth it
self, with all the inferior Societies, or parts thereof, are parts and
members of the religious, or Ecclesiastical Society, which is the spiritual
Kingdom, or Church of Christ, and therefore naturally ordained thereunto. For
it is evident that Christ our Savior, by instituting his spiritual Kingdom,
or Church, has not changed the nature of temporal kingdoms, or civil
commonwealths, from whence it clearly follows that all temporal kingdoms
or commonwealths, whether they consist of Christians, or Pagans, have the same
nature, and are naturally ordained to one and the self same and, which is a
peaceable living in humane Society.

8 True it is, that the same Christian man, as well Prince, as subject, is a
part and member of the true civil commonwealth, and also of the true
spiritual, or Ecclesiastical kingdom, or Church of Christ; as also the same
Paynim is a part and member of the true civil commonwealth, and of a false
Religious, or Ecclesiastical Society: and the reason hereof I declared more
at large above in the second part, because either temporal authority, and
spiritual authority, or temporal authority, and spiritual subjection, or
temporal subjection, and spiritual subjection (to omit spiritual authority,
and temporal subjection) are united and conjoined in one, and the self same
Christian man; by reason of which union and conjunction, the same Christian man
is either a temporal Prince, and also a spiritual Prince, or a temporal
Prince, and a spiritual subject, or a temporal subject, and also a spiritual
subject (to omit now whether the same man may be a spiritual Prince, and a
temporal subject, for this depends upon that question, whether, and in what
manner our Savior Christ has exempted Clergy men, and especially the supreme
spiritual Pastor from subjection to temporal Princes:) As likewise the same
man may be of diverse trades, as a Musition, and a Physician, the same man may
be Citizen of diverse cities, as of London, and York, the same man may be a
King of diverse kingdoms, as of England and Scotland. But from hence it does
not follow, that the temporal kingdom, or commonwealth it self, although
the less noble, and perfect, must be subject, or naturally ordained to the
spiritual Kingdom or Church of Christ, which is the more noble, and perfect
Society. As likewise it does not follow, that because a man has two trades,
the one more worthy, the other less worthy, or a citizen of two cities, the
one more noble, the other less noble, or a King of two Kingdoms, the one more
excellent, the other less excellent, that therefore the less worthy, noble,
and excellent trade, city, or kingdom it self, must be subject, and
subordained to the more worthy, noble, and excellent trade, city, or kingdom.

9 But this only does follow from the light of true reason, that as the same
man, who has two trades or arts, to wit, of Music and Physic, or a
citizen of two cities, as of London and York, or a King of two kingdoms, as
of England and Scotland, must prefer, cateris paribus, the more noble and
excellent, before the less noble, and excellent trade, city, or kingdom; and
that as he is a Musition, he is to be guided and directed by the rules of
Music, and not of Physic, and as he is a citizen of London to be subject
to, and governed by the laws, and customs of London, and not of York, and as
he is King of England to rule and govern according to the laws, and customs
of England, and not of Scotland, but that therefore Music must be subject to
Physic, York to London, or Scotland to England, except in worth, dignity,
or nobility, or contrariwise, it does not follow from the light of true
reason: So in like manner it does follow from the light of true reason, that
the same man, who is a citizen of the temporal kingdom or commonwealth, by
his natural birth, or civil conversation, and also of the spiritual
kingdom, or Church of Christ, by Baptism, or spiritual regeneration, must in
temporalls be subject only to the temporal Prince, and be directed and
governed by temporal authority, which does only reside in the temporal
Prince; and in spiritualls must be subject only to spiritual Pastors, and be
directed, and governed by spiritual authority, which does only reside in the
spiritual Pastors or Governors of the Church. But that the temporal
kingdom it self, or, which is all one, the temporal Prince, as he has
temporal authority, or as he is a temporal Prince, must be subject to the
spiritual kingdom, or, which is all one, to spiritual Pastors, as they have
spiritual authority, but only, as the temporal Prince has spiritual
subjection, this cannot be inferred from the light of true reason. But Mr.
Fitzherbert, forsooth, supposes this to be so evident in reason, that no man
will deny it, to wit, that the temporal commonwealth it self is subject and
subordained to the Ecclesiastical Society, and naturally ordained to her,
whereas in the Second part of this Treatise I have at large against Card.
Bellarmine, and D. Schulckenius confuted the same, and out of their own
grounds clearly proved, that there is no such union, subjection, or natural
ordination of temporal commonwealths to the spiritual kingdom, or Church of
Christ, as they pretend, but that temporal kingdoms, and the spiritual
kingdom of Christ do make two total bodies or commonwealths, supreme, and
independent one upon the other in those things which are proper to either of
them, to wit, that temporal kingdoms are supreme in temporalls, and
consequently not subject therein to the Church of Christ, or the Pastors
thereof, and the Church supreme in spiritualls, and not subject to temporal
kingdoms, or the supreme Governors thereof.

10 Now let us see, what Mr. Fitzherbert infers from the premises.
Whereupon, says he, Page 75. nu. 4
it is also further to be inferred, that as all Commonwealths are subordinate,
and subject to the Church: so also the heads of them all (I mean the temporal
Princes that govern them) are subordinate, and subject to the head of the
Church. For, although they be absolute heads of the States which they govern
in things pertaining only to their temporal States, yet they are but members
of the mystical body of Christ, which is the Church, and therefore no less
subject to the visible head thereof, in matters belonging thereto, then their
own proper Vassalls are subject to them: and therefore as the King, or Civil
Magistrate justly corrects the head of any family, when he passes the
limits, and bounds of true Oeconomie, to the h^rt of the Commonwealth (though
nevertheless a family is a distinct Society from a Commonwealth, having a
peculiar end, with different laws, and manner of government) so the head of
the Church may correct any King, or Civil Magistrate, when he does any thing
to the prejudice of the Church.

page 96. number. 5.
11 For although the spiritual Prince, or Magistrate have no dominion over
temporal States, and the Governors thereof in matters appertaining only, and
merely to State (no more then the temporal Prince has to do with private
families in matters that belong only thereto) yet as the temporal Prince may
give laws to a family, or to the head thereof, when the necessity of the
Commonwealth shall require it; so also the Ecclesiastical Prince, or head of
the Church, may give laws to temporal Commonwealths, and the Governor
thereof, according to the urgent necessity of the Church; the public good
whereof is to be preferred before the particular good of any temporal Prince,
or Commonwealth, by the same reason, and law of Nature, that the good of the
soul is to be preferred before the good of the body, spiritual good before
temporal, heaven before earth, and the service of GOD before the service of
any man, or of all the men in the world.

12 But first although it be true, that Christian Princes, who are the absolute
heads of the temporal States, or kingdoms, which they govern, being also
parts, and members of the mystical body, or spiritual kingdom of Christ,
which is the Church, are consequently subject in things belonging to the
Church, to wit in spiritual matters to the visible Pastors, Governors, or
heads thereof, yet it is not true, that temporal kingdoms, or commonwealths
themselves, being taken properly, formally, and in abstracto, are either parts,
and members of the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, or subject, and
subordained to the Church, or the visible heads thereof; for then it must
needs follow, that temporal Princes, not only as they are Christians, and in
spiritual matters, but also as they are temporal Princes, and in temporal
things are subject to the visible heads, or Governors of the Church, which is
clearly repugnant to Mr. Fitzherberts own words in that place, page 95. number.
4.
who affirms, that temporal Princes are absolute heads of the States which
they govern in things pertaining only to their temporal States, and
consequently in them they cannot be subordinate and subject to the visible
heads of the Church.

13 Wherefore that comparison, which he makes here, and is the chief ground
of his Discourse, betwixt families, cities, and kingdoms, or civil
commonwealths, and betwixt civil commonwealths, or kingdoms, and the
spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, is no fit comparison, and therefore
neither can the Discourse, which is grounded thereon, be sound and sufficient:
For families, and cities, being taken properly, formally, and in abstracto, are
parts, and members of the whole kingdom, or commonwealth, and consequently
subordinate, and subject to the kingdom, and absolute heads thereof, seeing
that they are particular civil Societies, and consequently subject to the
whole civil Society, or commonwealth, as every part is to the whole body,
and to the chief head thereof: but temporal kingdoms or commonwealths,
being taken formally, and in abstracto, are not parts and members of the
spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, unless we will hold with the
Canonists, that the Church of Christ is compounded both of spiritual, and
civil power, and that the Pope is both a temporal, and spiritual Monarch of
the whole Christian world. And therefore although it be true, that spiritual
Pastors have nothing to do in matters merely temporal, and which belong to
civil government, yet it is not true, that temporal Princes have not to do
with private families, and cities in matters that belong to the civil
government of them; for that private families, and cities are true parts, and
members of the whole civil commonwealth, or kingdom, and I hope that the
Prince, who has to do with the whole kingdom, and government thereof, has
also to do with the government of every part thereof.

14 Secondly, no man makes any doubt, but that the spiritual Pastors, and
Governors of the Church may correct any King, or civil Magistrate, when he
does any thing to the prejudice of the Church: and that they may give laws to
the Governors of temporal commonwealths according to the urgent necessity
of the Church; and also that, the public good of the Church is to be preferred
before the particular good of any temporal Prince, or commonwealth; But all
the difficulty consists in these points: first, whether authority to
correct malefactors by the inflicting of temporal punishments, as death,
exile, imprisonment, privation of goods etc. has by the institution of Christ
been communicated to the spiritual Pastors of the Church, or was leaft only
to temporal Princes, and the supreme Governors of temporal commonwealths:
Secondly, whether spiritual Pastors may give laws to temporal Princes, I
do not say, as they are Christians, and have spiritual subjection, and are
parts and members of the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, for of this
no Catholic makes doubt, but to temporal kingdoms, or commonwealths, being
taken formally, and in abstracto, or, which is all one, to temporal Princes,
not as they are Christians, and have spiritual subjection, but as they are
temporal Princes, and have supreme temporal power, which does only reside in
them, and not in spiritual Pastors.

15 Thirdly, whether the particular, or public good of temporal Princes, or
commonwealths, is to be preferred before the particular, or public good of
the Church, for that the temporal, and spiritual power do make one total
body, or commonwealth, which is the Church, as Card. Bellarmine contendeth, in
which total body, the temporal commonwealth is per se, and naturally
subordained, and subject to the Church, or spiritual kingdom of Christ; or
whether the spiritual good is to be preferred before the temporal by all
Christians both Princes, and subjects, for that every man, who is a part, and
member of two cities, or commonwealths, the one more noble, and excellent then
the other, is by the order of charity bound to prefer caeteris paribus the
more noble, and excellent city, or commonwealth, and the good thereof, before
the less noble and excellent city, or commonwealth, and the good of it. These
be the chief heads of this controversy concerning the union and subordination
of temporal kingdoms, or commonwealths among Christians, and the spiritual
kingdom or Church of Christ, whereof I have at large debated in the second
part, where the Reader may see all these points distinctly handled against
Card. Bellarmine, and D. Schulckenius, and also touching all that which Mr.
Fitzherbert does confusedly discourse in this Chapter concerning the union, and
subordination of temporal kingdoms, and the Church of Christ. And therefore
remitting the Reader to my former Treatise, where he may clearly see, in what
manner the temporal, and spiritual power, or the temporal and spiritual
commonwealth are united, and subordained, let us see, what Mr. Fitzherbert
would at length conclude:

16 Whereupon I conclude, says he, Page 96. nu. 6
that seeing this Oath now in question is (as I have proved by the law of God)
prejudicial to the power, and jurisdiction of the head of the Church, to whom
all Christian Princes are subject (even by the law of Nature) it follows,
that the said Oath is no less unlawful, unjust, and repugnant to nature, then
if a husband should exact the like Oath of his wife, or a Master of his
servant, or the father of his children (I mean an Oath which should derogate
from the power, and authority of their temporal Prince.) As for example, if a
head of a family should bind his wife and children to defend him from the
correction of his lawful Prince, when occasion should require, I think no man
will be so absurd to say, that it is a lawful Oath, and correspondent to
nature, though the same should be colored, and shadowed never so much with
pretense of Oeconomicall, and filial discipline, and duty. And no more can
the other Oath be lawful, and agreeable to Nature, though it be never so much
colored with respect of temporal allegiance.

17 But first observe, I pray you, the egregious shufling of this man. For he
pretended to prove in this Chapter, by the law of Nature, that the Pope has
power to inflict temporal punishments, and to punish temporal Princes
temporally, and that therefore the new Oath, which denies this power to be in
the Pope, is repugnant to the law of nature: And therefore I expected, that he
would have brought some effectual argument taken from the law of nature,
abstracting from the positive law of God, to confirm this power of the Pope,
to inflict temporal punishments, and to punish temporal Princes temporally;
and consequently that this Oath is by the law of Nature prejudicial to the
coerciue authority of spiritual Pastors. But now he flies from the law of
Nature to the law of God to prove, that the Oath is prejudicial to the power
and jurisdiction of the head of the Church: and supposing, that he has proved
this by the law of GOD, then it follows, says he, that the said Oath is no
less unlawful, unjust, and repugnant to Nature, then if a husband should
exact of his wife, a maiester of his servant, a father of his children an Oath,
which should derogate from the power, and authority of their temporal Prince.
So that Mr. Fitzherbert does only conclude here, that the Oath is unlawful,
unjust, and repugnant to Nature, supposing that it is by the law of God
prejudicial to the power, and jurisdiction of the head of the Church.

18 Secondly therefore, although we should suppose here with Mr. Fitzherbert,
that this new Oath is repugnant to the law of God, as in very deed it is not,
yet he cannot therefore rightly conclude; that it is also repugnant to the law
of Nature, which he in this Chapter pretends to prove, for that every
transgression of the positive law, or institution of almighty God is unlawful,
and yet not repugnant to the law of Nature: whereupon the Divines do divide
the law of God into the divine natural and the divine positive law: and he
that should deny, that the spiritual Pastors of the Church of Christ have
authority to remit sins, should contradict the law of God in the new
Testament, and so this denial of Priestly authority to forgive sins is
repugnant to the law of God, and prejudicial to the power, and jurisdiction of
spiritual Pastors, and yet it does not from thence follow, that it is
repugnant to the law of Nature, which is naturally grafted in the hearts of
every man, whether he be Jew, or Gentile, infidel, or Christian, as the law
of Nature, is by my Adversaries taken here? Wherefore Mr. Fitzherbert
concluding here, that the Oath is repugnant to the law of Nature, for that it
is prejudicial to the power, and iuridiction given by the law of Christ to the
head of the Church, seems not to understand himself, what is the law of
Nature, and how the law of Nature is distinguished from the positive law of
God. But of this law of Nature more beneath, Number. 90.^. seq. and in the next
chap.
where also you shall see the reason, wherefore the obedience in general,
which a wife owes to her husband, a servant to his Master, and children to
their parents is not properly natural, but civil, and yet the obedience in
general, which subjects owe to their temporal Prince, is not only called
civil, but also natural allegiance.

19 But thirdly it is not true, that this Oath now in question is repugnant to
the law of God, and prejudicial to the power and jurisdiction of the head of
the Church, for that it denies the Popes power to depose Sovereign Princes,
and to inflict temporal punishments: neither has Mr. Fitzherbert proved by
the law of God, that the Pope has any such power, as you have seen at large
in the former Chapter: and to say, that this Oath is repugnant to the law of
nature (taking the law of nature, as it is distinguished from the positive law
of God, or man, and is nothing else, then the dictamen or prescript of true
reason concerning things to be done, which either supposes divine revelation,
and the supernatural light of faith, and is proper only to true believers,
and it is called by the Divines the supernatural law of nature, supernatural,
I say, to man, but connaturall to grace and faith which it supposes; or else
supposes only natural knowledge, and is common to all men endued with
natural reason, and is called properly, and absolutely the natural law, for
that it is connaturall to every reasonable man) is very untrue, as partly I
have showed in the former Chapter, where I have answered all my Adversaries
arguments grounded upon divine revelation; and partly in this, and the two next
ensuing Chapters I will more clearly convince. Now let us go on with the rest
of his Discourse.

20 For as no reason, says he, Page 97. nu. 7. 8.
of Oeconomie, or filial, or conjugal duty, holds, when it is encountered
with the respect of the weal public, or of due obedience to a lawful
Sovereign; So neither can any reason of commonwealth, or allegiance to
temporal Princes ouerweigh, when the same is balanced with the public good
of the Church of Christ, whereto all temporal Princes do owe more respect,
duty and subjection (even by the law of Nature) then their Vassals and
subjects owe to them, because the Religion, or Ecclesiastical Society, which
is the Church, is (as I have said) the supreme and most worthy Society of all
other on earth. In which respect also all Societies inferior to the
Commonwealth, yea every member thereof, have more obligation, and owe more
duty to the Church, which is the highest Society, then to the Commonwealth,
or any other, whereto they are immediately subordinate, as it may also be
observed in humane actions, which tend finally to Religion, as to their last
end; for every humane action ought to be more specially directed to Religion,
that is to say, to the worship and service of God, then to any other inferior
action, whereto it may have a more immediate relation.

21 In which respect the Philosophers themselves, being guided by the law of
Nature, and light of reason, placed the end, not only of men's actions, but
also of every man, and of the Commonwealth it self in Religion; because (as
Plato, Plato in Timaeo and in Epinomide.
and all the Platonists reach) man being made to the Image of God, and capeable
of the knowledge of him, was principally ordained to worship and serve him; and
therefore for as much, as neither one man alone can sufficiently perform the
woorship of God (which is due to him from all mankind) neither yet many men
together, if they should live without Laws, See Marsil. Ficin in argun. Dial.
1. Plat. de Rep.
and Magistrates (for multitude without order would breed confusion) therefore
Nature has inclined men to civil Society, that is to say, to live in
commonwealths, to the end that many men living together in community, may the
better discharge their duty to God, in yielding him the due worship and service
that all mankind owes him. Whereby the Philosophers evidently saw, that the
commonwealth was not only necessary to the perfection of Religion, but also
naturally ordained, and referred thereto, as to the end thereof (I mean not
the next, and immediate end of the commonwealth which is temporal
tranquillity, commodity and sufficiency, but the last end whereto all
temporal commodities are referred. Whereupon two consequents follow directly,
etc.)

22 But what is all this, I pray you, to the purpose? Who makes any doubt,
that the public spiritual good of the Church is to be preferred before the
public temporal good of any temporal commonwealth; and that the Church of
Christ is the highest Society in worth, dignity, and excellency of all other
on earth; and that every Christian man owes more duty to the Church of
Christ, as being the highest and most excellent Society, to which he is
immediately subject in spiritualls, then unto any other civil commonwealth to
which he is immediately subject in temporalls? and that every humane action
ought to be more specially directed, and referred to the worship and service of
God, then to any other inferior action, whereto it may have a more immediate
relation: and finally, that the Philosophers themselves, as Plato, and the
Platonists, guided by the law of Nature, or light of natural reason, thought
that man was principally ordained to worship and serve God, and therefore
placed the end not only of men's actions, but also of every man, and of the
commonwealth it self, in Religion or the service and worship of God: and that
Nature has inclined men to live in civil Society to the end that many men
living together orderly, and guided by Laws, and Magistrates, may the better
discharge their duty to God, in yielding him due worship and service, that all
mankind owes him? All this is conform to the doctrine which I maintain, and
proves, that the Religious Society is more noble, excellent, and worthy,
then the civil or temporal Society, and that in spiritualls, it has supreme
authority, but it does not prove, that the Religious Society is superior in
temporal authority to the temporal commonwealth, or that it has authority
to depose temporal Princes, or to inflict temporal, but only spiritual
punishments.

23 Nevertheless I would desire the Reader to observe some things concerning
this Discourse of my Adversary, The first is concerning filial duty, and the
same may be proportionally applied to conjugal. For, as I observed else where,
In Append. contra Suar. part. 1. sec. 8. number. 12.
there be two bonds or obligations, wherein children stand bound to their
parents; the one is natural, and proceeds from the law of Nature, whereby
children are bound to honor, and reverence their parents: and this bond no
humane power can take away, or release, neither can this dutiful respect which
children by the law of Nature owe to their parents at any time encounter with
any obedience, which is due to temporal Princes: The other Civil, which
depends upon the positive laws of temporal Princes, whereby Parents are
made Tutors guardians, and governors of their children: and this power, which
Parents have over their children, is greater, or lesser according to the laws
and customs of every kingdom: and as it depends wholly upon the civil
power, so it may be increased, diminished, or quite taken away by the supreme
civil power: and this civil duty, or obedience, which children owe to their
Parents, does not hold, when it encountreth with the respect, duty, or
obedience, which they owe to their supreme temporal Prince.

24 The second is, that temporal allegiance, or obedience, which is due to
temporal Princes, if we will speak properly, can never encounter with that
spiritual obedience, which is due to spiritual Pastors. For if a temporal
Prince does command any thing, which is against the service, or worship due to
God, and consequently against Religion, to obey him in this case is not
temporal allegiance, for that the Prince has not authority to command any
such thing; and where there is no authority to command, there is no obedience
due, because, according to the doctrine of all Divines, obligation to obey, and
authority to command are correlatiues, and do depend one upon the other: and
therefore true temporal allegiance can never encounter with true spiritual
obedience, and be prejudicial thereto, nor contrariwise.

25 The third is, that although some Heathen Philosophers by the light of
natural reason did evidently see, that the worship, and service of God, as he
is the Author, and end of Nature, and of all natural things, is to be
preferred before any temporal tranquillity, of commodity, and that therefore
every man both Prince, and subject by the light of natural reason ought to
refer all their actions to the honor, and service of God, and to that
happiness, which according to natural reason does follow the worship, and
service of God, and is the last end of man, although not the last end of all
humane actions, yet no Heathen Philosopher by the light of natural reason did
or could see, that the temporal commonwealth it self, formally and in
abstracto, as it consists of temporal power, is per se intrinsecally, or
naturally ordained, or referred, but only per accidens, and by the intention of
man, to that happiness, which is the end of Religion, and follows the
worship and service of God, although man himself, in whom temporal power does
reside, ought by the light of nature ordain, and refer the use of his
temporal power, and all his other actions to that bliss, happiness, and
felicity, which is the last end of man, and the immediate end of the worship,
and service of God. But of this I have treated more at large above in the
Second part, where I have answered all the arguments, which Cardinal
Bellarmine, and D. Schulckenius have brought to prove, that the temporal
power it self among Christians is per se, and intrinsecally, and not only by
the intention of man ordained, and referred to everlasting happiness.

26 Now you shall see, what Mr. Fitzherbert concludes from his former
Discourse: Whereupon says he, page 99. nu. 9. and seq.
two consequents follow directly, according to Philosophy, the one, that
Religion is far more noble, and worthy, then the Commonwealth (because the
end does far excel the means that tend thereto) and the other, that the
Ecclesiastical Society, (which of all Societies does next approach to GOD,
and unite them with him) is the most excellent, and worthy of all: Arist. l.
1. Meta.
and therefore as Aristotle worthily called Metaphysicke the Mistress, and
Goddess (because it immediately considers the sciences of all things, which
is God) so may we call the Religious, or Ecclesiastical Society, the
Mistress, Lady, Empress, and Goddess of all Commonwealths, and all other
Societies, because it is properly, and immediately dedicated to the service of
GOD, as also because Commonwealths, and other Societies cannot perform their
duty to GOD, nor arrive to perfect felicity, but by the means of the
Ecclesiastical Society.

27 And this is so certain, and evident, that no Philosopher, or learned
Paynim would deny it as it may appear by the institution, and customs of the
best Commonwealths among the Paynims; in the which the Religious Society had
the pre-eminence above the Commonwealth, in all things that any way
appertained to Religion, as I will make it manifest hereafter when I shall
speak of the law of Nations: and now only for the present I wish to be
observed, that in the Roman Commonwealth, the chief Bishop, who was called
Pontifex Maximus, had supreme authority in matters pertaining not only to
Religion, but also to State, when the same was mixed with Religion, in which
case he commanded the Consuls themselves, who were the Sovereign temporal
Magistrates. Valeri. l. 1. c. 1.
This appears in Valerius Maximus, who testifies, that Posthumus the Consul
being a Priest of the God Mars, and intending to go to Afric with his army,
was forced by Metellus the chief Bishop to stay his journey, to attend to his
Priestly function: and therefore Cicero says, that it was most notably, Cicero
pro domo sua.
and divinely ordained by the ancient Romans, that the Bishops should have the
chief command in matters that pertained as well to the Commonwealth, as to
the Religion of the Gods. And no marvel, seeing that the Augures, who were
inferior to the Bishops, had such absolute authority, that they might hinder
the election of Officers, deprive the Magistrates of their Offices, and forbid
the Senate to treat with the people; Cicero de legib. lib. 1. 2.
in so much that nothing lawfully done by any Magistrate at home, or abroad, if
he were contradicted by them; Cicero de Diuiuat. lib. 2.
and which is more the two Consuls, P. Claudius, and Lucius Iunius were
condemned to death for disobeying them.

28 Whereby it appears, that although the Augures, and Pontifices Maximi had
no authority over the temporal Magistrates in matters merely temporal, yet
when consideration of Religion entered together with temporal affairs, the
temporal Magistrate was corrected, and commanded by the spiritual, as
occasion required. And this I say, was the custom of the Romans, because, no
doubt, they held it to be most conform to the law of Nature: in which respect
I may boldly say, that if an Oath had been propounded amongst them, to have
exempted their Consulls, and other temporal Magistrates from the command, and
correction of the chief Bishop (notwithstanding any occasion of religion,
which might occur) they would not have admitted it as lawful. And this is
our very case. Thus I said in my Supplement, and then I concluded concerning
the pretended Oath of allegiance, speaking to M. Barlow in these words. And
thus you see M. Barlow, that the Law of Nature is so far from enioyning, and
justifying the Oath (as you say it does) that it utterly rejects, and
condemns it, except you can turn the world vpside down, and pervert the
whole course of nature, and prove, that things less perfect are to be
preferred before the more perfect the body before the soul, sense before
reason, temporal things before spiritual, policy before religion, earth
before heaven, and the world before God, whereto in very truth your doctrine in
this point directly tends.

29 But these two consequents, which Mr. Fitzherbert deduceth from his last
Discourse, are neither against my doctrine, nor do they any way prove the new
Oath of Allegiance to be repugnant to the Law of Nature. For, as I said
before, I do willingly grant, that Religion, and the service of GOD, and
perfect felicity, which is the immediate end thereof, is far more noble, and
more worthy, then the temporal good, or immediate end of any temporal
Commonwealth, which is his first consequent; and also, which is his second,
that the Religious, or Ecclesiastical Society, is the most excellent, and
worthy of all, and may in some sort be called the Mistress, Lady, Empress,
and Goddess of all Commonwealths, and Societies, because it is properly, and
immediately dedicated to the service of GOD, as also because temporal
Commonwealths, and other Societies cannot perform their duty to GOD, nor
arrive to perfect felicity, but by the means of the Ecclesiastical Society:
But she is not called the Mistress, Lady, Empress, and Goddess of temporal
Commonwealths, for that she can do all the actions, functions, and offices
of them, and inflict the same temporal punishments, that temporal
Commonwealths can inflict, but only for that she can do more noble, and more
worthy actions, functions, and offices, and inflict more grievous, and more
dreadful punishments, to wit, spiritual, agreeable to the nature, and
conditions of a spiritual Commonwealth, and a Religious, or Ecclesiastical
Society.

30 Secondly, I do also willingly grant, that amongst the Paynims, and
ancient Romans, not only the chief Bishop, who was called Pontifex Maximus,
and had the supreme authority in matters belonging to Religion or to the
service of their Gods, but also the Augures, or Soothsayers, who were Priests
inferior to the chief Bishop had great authority, and command in matters
belonging to temporal affairs, in so much, that the young chickens of certain
birds, called pulli Melici, and Chalcidici, were held in such honor, and
estimation among them, that they would keep no assemblies, they would promote
none to any office, or dignity, they would neither make war, nor truce, and
finally neither at home, nor abroad would they undertake any enterprise,
unless they were foretold by those young birds, whose prediction they did
regard as an oracle, and message sent from Jupiter, whose messengers, and
interpreters they accounted those birds to be. The particular manner whereof
you may see in Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 1. cap. 29. But from hence it does
not follow, that those chief Bishops, as they were religious Priests, had
authority given them by the law of Nature, but only by the free grant of the
temporal Commonwealth, to punish temporally any man that should transgress
their command, or otherwise violate the religion of their Gods.

31 Thirdly therefore although it be true, that the ancient Romans, and other
Paynims did prefer Religion, and the worship of their Gods before any other
temporal thing, and in regard thereof, when any thing was to be handled in the
Senate, that which corcerned Religion was first of all dispatched, whereupon
also they gave great temporal authority, honor, privileges, and exemptions
especially to their chief Priest, or Bishop, to whom all other inferior
Priests, as the Flamines, the Salij, the Augures, the Epulones, the Aruales,
the Vestales, yea and he, that was called Rex sacrorum, the King of sacred
things, were subject; in so much that the dignity of the chief Bishop was
accounted the second in the Commonwealth, and the next to Kingly dignity; and
many times the same man was both a Religious Priest, and also a temporal
Magistrate, as Q. Fabius Maximus was an Augure, and a Consul M. Aemilius
Lepidus was Proconsull, and chief Bishop: Nevertheless it is not true, that
the chief Bishop had any temporal authority even over the inferior Priests,
as necessarily due to him by the law of nature, but only from the free grant
of the temporal Commonwealth, or the supreme Governors thereof. And
therefore at sometimes the chief Bishops had greater temporal authority, as
in the beginning when the Romans were governed by Kings, in whom both Regal
and Pontifical authority were conjoined, and by whom as being both Kings and
chief Bishops, all matters as well concerning State, as Religion were
determined and executed: at some times they had less, as afterward, Alexand.
lib. 3. genial. dier. cap. 3. and Sabellicus lib. 2. Ennead. 4. Alexand. ibidem
and lib. 1. cap. 27. Alexand. lib. 3. cap. 27.
when they had put down their Kings, for that they began to tyrannize over
them, and were governed by the Senate, and two Consuls, who at the first were
chosen out of the Nobility, but afterward at the instance of the people, the
Senate was forced to grant, that they might be chosen also out of the
commmunaltie; which Consuls least they should challenge to themselves Kingly
authority could put no Citizen to death without the consent of the people.

32 For to the end that the Kingly name, which was by the Romans fortunately
begun, and for many years happily continued, should still remain, and also
that the Priestly authority, which the Kings had, should not be abolished,
they did create a King, whom they called Rex sacrorum, a King of sacred things,
who had only the name of a King without Regal authority, and should perform
the sacred rites and ceremonies belonging to Religion, which the former Kings
did perform. Which King of sacred things by reason of the odious and suspected
name and authorititie of a King, could have no authority or command over the
army and legions, nor bear any office, or have any temporal government over
the people: but his power and authority was limited to Religion, and contained
only within the temples of the Gods. And this King of sacred things was
subject to the chief Bishop, as all other Priests were, who as they were
Priests, had only to intermeddle in sacred things, but afterward they had
also great temporal authority granted them by the Senate and people. For the
chief Priests or Bishops had not only power given them to punish with
pecuniarie mulcts the inferior Priests, who should disobey their command, but
also they were made Consuls, Captains and chief Magistrates in the
Commonwealth. But all this temporal authority of the religious Priests did
proceed from the free grant of the temporal Commonwealth, and not as
necessarily due to them by the law of Nature, which those words of Cicero cited
by my Adversary do only confirm, to wit, that it was notably and divinely
ordained, that the Bishops should have a chief command in matters that
appertained as well to the Commonwealth, as to the religion of the Gods.

33 But that the temporal Magistrate, says Mr. Fitzherbert, was commanded and
corrected, he means with temporal punishments, as occasion required, by the
spiritual, was the custom of the Romans, because, no doubt, they held it to
be most conform to the law of Nature. But first, those words [to be most
conform to the law of Nature] are equivocal, and may have a double
signification. For as every law, for as much as concerns the directive power
or force thereof (for the coerciue power or force of every law consists
merely in punishing) has one of these three effects, to command, to forbid, to
permit or grant some thing, so the law of Nature, as it is directive, may be
taken, either as it commands, or as it forbids, or as it permits or
grants some thing. If therefore my Adversaries meaning be to signify by
those words, that the law of Nature commands the spiritual Magistrate, or
gives him authority, as he is a spiritual person, to punish the temporal
Magistrate transgressing his commandment with temporal punishments, and that
in this sense the custom of the Romans was conform to the law of Nature,
this, I say, is very untrue, neither can he bring any color of a probable
proof to confirm the same. Nay which is more, he can not prove, as you shall
see beneath, that the law of Nature gave to Religious Priests, as they were
such, authority to command in spirituals, or to punish with spiritual
punishments the supreme temporal Magistrate, for that standing in the law of
nature, there is no public spiritual authority, which is not subject and
subordinate to the temporal Commonwealth, and the supreme Governors thereof.

34 But if he mean, that the law of nature, or the light and dictamen of
natural reason does not forbid, but does permit that temporal Princes or
Commonwealths may give authority to those Religious Priests, whom they shall
appoint to be in their steed public Ministers of sacred rites, to punish with
temporal punishments those that shall contemn their just command, and that in
this sense the custom of the Romans giving authority to their Religious
Priests to inflict temporal punishments was conform, that is, was not
repugnant to the law of nature, but agreeable thereunto as a laudable and
decent custom, but not as necessarily enjoined by the law of nature, this is
very true, but not to the purpose; for that, which my Adversary pretends to
prove, is that Religious Priests have by the law of nature, and not only by
the free grant of temporal Princes or Commonwealths authority to inflict
temporal punishments, which nevertheless he will never be able to prove by
any probable argument, or any probable show thereof.

35 Thirdly therefore for the better clearing of the whole matter, the Reader
may observe out of learned Abulensis, Abulens. in cap. 13. Genesis q. 8. 9 and seq.
that there is a great difference betwixt the Priests of the old law, and of
the new, and the Priests, that were in the law of nature. For in the law of
nature, before the law of God was published by Moses, we may consider every
man either by himself, or as he was a part of some community: If he be
considered by himself, and as dwelling alone in no Society, it was lawful
for every man to offer sacrifice to God of whatsoever was his own, in what
manner he would, and in what place he would because it was not by any law
forbidden any man to do these things: For to offer sacrifice in the honor of
God was of it self a good and commendable act, and it was forbidden no man,
and therefore it was lawful for every man. So that in the law of nature every
man being considered by himself was a Priest in this sense, that he might
lawfully offer sacrifice in the honor of God, of what thing, in what manner,
and in what place he would. But if man be considered, as he was a part of some
community, and as living in civil Society it was far otherwise. For every
civil Community had certain rites and ceremonies for the worshipping either
of the true, or of false Gods; and in the name, and by the authority of the
whole community there were done religious rites and ceremonies in honor of
that God, which that community professed to be God. And because one particular
act could not be done by the whole community, the community appointed
certain Ministers, who in the name and place of the whole community should
do that act. And these Ministers, for as much as concerned the doing of holy
rites, were commonly called Priests: and so some certain men only were
appointed Priests, and all men were not Priests; and to these Priests only it
belonged to do those Sacrifices in the name, and by the authority of the
whole community. And this custom was among all Nations, both Jews and
Gentiles before the law of God was given to Moses, and so among all Nations
there were some persons specially appointed Priests by the community, and all
men were not Priests.

36 But after the law was written, and delivered by Moses to the Israelites,
both the place where sacrifices were to be offered, and the Ministers which
were to offer, and also the sacrifices which were to be offered, and the manner
of offering them were limited, and determined by God himself. Concerning the
place there were two limitations. The first was, that Sacrifices should not be
offered in many places; the second, that they should not be offered in many
Altars. Of the first we may see in Deuteron. Chap. 12. and 16. where it is
said, that the Israelites should not offer sacrifice in every place, but only
in that place, which God should choose to put his name there. And this was
only one City, although it was not always the same. For the Israelites had a
Sanctuary, which by Gods commandment Moses made in the desert, and this was
placed in one City, and this City was that which God did choose to place
there his Sanctuary, as it was first in Sile, then in Nobe, afterward in
Gabaon, and lastly in Jerusalem: and only in that City it was lawful for
the Jews to offer sacrifices, and not in other places, nor in the fields,
because then they should be accounted Idolaters, Leuit. Chap. 17.

37 The second limitation was, that they should not do sacrifices in many
Altars. For albeit there was but one only City, where Sacrifices could be
offered, yet it might be thought, that there were many Altars upon which they
might be offered, especially for that all Israel came sometimes to that place
to offer sacrifices; and yet it was not so. For there was one only Altar, upon
which all things were burned, and blood was offered. And this Altar was not
made by any of them that did offer sacrifice, but it was that Altar, which
Moses made in the desert after the manner and form that God himself did
describe unto him, Exodus 27. and it was called the Altar of Holocaust, Exodus
38. Besides, it was not lawful to offer sacrifice in every part of the City,
but only within the Sanctuary, which remained firm in one part of the City;
and moreover within the Sanctuary Sacrifice was not offered in every place, but
only upon the Altar of Holocaust, which was placed without the door of the
Tabernacle, and to offer Sacrifice in another place it was unlawful, Leuit.
17. and Iosue 22. Nevertheless in the same Sanctuary there were two Altars,
The one was called of Holocausts, which had five cubits in length, and as many
in breadth, and three in height, The other of Incense, which was only one
Cubite in length, and another in breadth, and two Cubits in height, upon the
first all Sacrifices were offered, Exodus 27. and Leuit. 17. upon the second
Sacrifice was never offered, but only Incense was burned every day twice,
morning, and evening Exodus 30. But after that Solomon had built the Temple, the
Tabernacle of Moses, and that Altar ceased, and then was made a greater Altar
of Holocausts, which was of brass, and it had twenty cubits in length, and
as many in breadth, 2. Paralip. 4. which according to the rules of Arithmeticke
contains four hundred cubits square, and was able to comprehend many
sacrifices together: but how great was the Altar of Incense made by Solomon the
Scripture does not mention. The Altar of Incense was within the Temple, but the
Altar of Holocausts was without in the Court of the Temple, which was called
the Court of the Priests.

38 Concerning the persons, who were to offer sacrifice, it is to be
considered, that almighty God to take away occasion of Idolatry, as he limited
the places, wherein sacrifices were to be offered, so also he would have the
Ministers thereof to be limited: for if every man had bin permitted to offer
sacrifice, either Idolatry it self, or the rites and ceremonies of Idolaters
might the more easily have crept in; and therefore he ordained, that only
Aaron, and his sons, and they that should descend from them, should be
consecrated Priests in Israel, to whom he gave authority to do all rites and
ceremonies, as well of Sacrifices, as of other things, which ought to be done
within the Sanctuary, Number. 3.17.18. And he appointed the rest of the Tribe of
Leui, whom, as by a proper name we call Levites, to serve Aaron, and his
sons, Number. 3. For these could do nothing concerning those four things,
which did peculiarly belong to the Priests, to wit, to offer Sacrifice, to
burn Incense, to put upon the Table holy breads, which were called loaves of
proposition, Exodus 25. whereof the Priests only could eat, and to put the
seven lamps upon the golden candlestick, and to have care of them, that they
should give light: for these four offices, or ministeries did belong only to
the Priests: but the office, and ministry of the Levites was to serve the
Priests in their office, and to do those things which are ordained, Number. Chap.
1.3. and 8. as to have a care and custody of the Tabernacle and all the
furniture thereof, of the Arc, Table, Candlestick, Altars, vessels of the
Sanctuary, veil, etc. and to take down, and carry the Tabernacle, when the
camp was to go forward, and to set it up, when the people were to camp
again, etc.

39 Concerning the ceremonies, which were to be used, and the sacrifices which
were to be offered, albeit in the law of Nature, when there was no law of God,
which did restrain, or limit any man to any kind of ceremony or Sacrifice, it
was lawful for every man to do what he would, unless it were evil of it
self, and therefore every man, as being considered by himself, might offer
what sacrifice, or use what kind of ceremony he pleased, but as he was a part
and member of some Community, he could use no other sacrifice or ceremony,
then that which the Community, or the supreme Governors thereof, whose
Minister he was, did appoint; yet in the law written it was otherwise. For as
God himself did limite and determine the places, and ministers to do
sacrifice, so also he determined all the rites, and ceremonies belonging to the
worshipping of him, whereof the whole book of Leuiticus does treat. But
concerning the Sacrifices, God appointed in general three kinds, to wit,
Holocausts, a sacrifice for sin, and a Pacificke host Number. 6. and under
these three were comprehended all other particular kinds of sacrifices, of all
which, and of the ceremonies belonging to them it is treated from the first
Chapter of Leuiticus to the eight. What other authority the Priests of the old
Testament had in expounding and interpreting the law of God, when any doubt or
difficulty should arise, I declared above in the former Chapter, when I
examined that place of Deuteron. 17. Si difficile, and ambiguum, etc. If thou
perceive, that the judgment with thee be hard, and doubtful, etc.

40 Now lastly concerning the law of Christ, wherein all the ceremonial, and
judicial laws of the old Testament do cease, insomuch that no Christian now
is bound to observe any one of those laws, by virtue and force of the law, it
is to be considered, that our Savior Christ has now instituted a new
Priesthood, and a new Sacrifice. And albeit he has determined, and limited the
persons, who are to offer Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice, which is to be offered;
for the persons, or Priests to offer Sacrifice he has appointed only his
twelve Apostles, and those, who are duly consecrated and ordained by them, or
their Successors, and the Sacrifice, which they ought to offer, is one only,
to wit, the unbloody offering of his immaculate body and blood under the
visible forms of bread and wine, by using those words, which he himself in
his last Supper did use and institute, yet he did neither limit the place,
where this Sacrifice should be offered, nor the ceremonies, which were to be
used in the offering thereof, but he left these to the disposition of the
Church, and to the supreme Pastors or Governors thereof, to determine them as
they should think convenient. Besides this authority, which Christ gave to
the Priests of the new law over his true body, he gave them also authority, and
Jurisdiction over his mystical body, which are the faithful, which authority
and Jurisdiction is signified by the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which our
Savior promised to S. Peter, and in his person to the rest of the Apostles,
whom he did represent, of which authority I have spoken somewhat in the former
chapter, and also in my Apology, Theological Disputation, and Appendix
thereunto.

41 And from hence the Reader may easily gather two things; the one is, the
difference betwixt the Priests in the law of Nature, and in the law written:
for that both in the law of Moses, and of Christ, the Priests had not their
authority from men, but from GOD, neither was it in the power of the temporal
commonwealth to extend, or diminish their Priestly authority: but in the law
of Nature the Priests had their authority from the civil Community, or
commonwealth, whereof they were parts, and members, and in whose name, and by
whose authority they were made Priests, and had power to offer sacrifice; and
it was in the power of the commonwealth to extend, or diminish, or to take
quite away their Priestly authority, and to appoint and ordain, in what
manner, and with what ceremonies, and what things they should Sacrifice to God,
and to determine of all things concerning Religion; yea and the commonwealth
did also determine what Gods they were to woorship; and therefore it was
decreed by the Senate of Rome, that no Emperor should be canonized or made
God, Alexand. l ^6. cap. 4.
but by the decree of the Senate.

42 The second, which follows from the former, is, that considering in the
law of nature the Priesthood was wholly subject and dependent upon the civil
Commonwealth, in so much that the Priests in the law of nature were subject
and subordinate, not only in temporals, but also in spirituals, and in all
things, which concerned Religion, and the public service of God to the supreme
Governors of the temporal Commonwealth, from whom they received all their
Priestly authority, Mr. Fitzherbert very unlearnedly concludes, that
according to the law of nature the temporal State and power is subject and
subordinate to the spiritual, and that the supreme temporal Magistrate was
commanded and corrected with temporal punishments, as occasion required by the
spiritual seeing that the quite contrary I have most clearly convinced out of
Abulensis, and the same may very plainly be gathered from the doctrine of
Sotus, Valentia, Suarez, Vasquer, and other Divines treating either of
Sacrifices in general, or of the Sacrifice of the Mass, or of the Priesthood
of Christ. And therefore I may bouldly say, that if in the law of nature an
Oath had been propounded by the civil Commonwealth, wherein the Religious
Priests should have acknowledged, that they might not only for temporal
crimes, but also for spiritual, and which merely concerned Religion be
punished by the supreme temporal Governor with temporal punishments, and
also be deprived of their Priestly function, and authority, the Priests would
have admitted it as lawful; And if an Oath had been propounded by the Priests
to have themselves exempted from the authority of the supreme temporal
Governor even in spiritual or religious affairs, much less in temporal,
the Civil Commonwealth, or supreme Governors thereof would not have admitted
it as lawful, but would have punished the Priests for presuming to usurp such
an authority.

43 Wherefore those last words of my Adversary to Mr. Barlow are a most vain,
frivolous, and idle flourish: For albeit the ancient Philosophers, and learned
Paynims being guided by the law of Nature, and light of natural reason, whose
doctrine also in this point our modern Divines do follow, did clearly see,
that in the law of Nature, when no positive law of God was published, the
Civil commonwealth, or supreme governors thereof had the chief command, and
authority in all matters as well concerning Religion, as State, to whom the
Religious Priests were wholly subject as well in spiritual, or religious, as in
temporal affairs, yet they did not turn the word vpside down, or perverted
the course of Nature, but knew right well, that things less perfect are not to
be preferred before the more perfect, the body before the soul, sense before
reason, temporal things before spiritual, policy before Religion, earth
before heaven, and the world before God. And therefore there is none, but such
ignorant men as my Adversary is, that can, or will affirm the new Oath of
allegiance to be repugnant to the law of Nature, or to the light of nature
reason, for that it denies the authority of spiritual Pastors to punish
temporally ablute Princes, or to deprive them of their kingdoms, or dominions.

44 And by this the insufficiency of the rest of Mr. Fitzherberts Discourse
will easily appear. This was some part, says he, Page 101. number. 12.
of my Discourse in my Supplement concerning the law of Nature, whereby thou
see, good Reader, that I have sufficiently showed two things: the one that
according to the law of Nature the temporal state, and power is subordinate,
and subject to the spiritual, when they are conioined in one body, no less
then the family is subordinate and subject to the Commonwealth in like case,
because the end of the temporal power is subordinate to the end of the
spiritual power, which overthrows my Adversaries false principle, to wit
that the Ecclesiastical, and civil Society are so distinct in nature, and
office, that though they be joined together, yet they have no dependence the
one of the other, upon which false ground, and vain supposition often affirmed
by Barclay, and him, and never proved by either of them, they found all their
false doctrine.

45 But how untrue this is I have already showed. For in the law of Nature the
temporal state, and power was not subject and subordinate to the spiritual,
or Religious, except only in excellency, and nobility, whereof there is no
question, but contrariwise the Priests of the law of Nature were subject in
spiritual and religious affairs to the supreme civil Governor, when they
were distinct persons, neither did they make two distinct Commonwealths, as
they do in the law written, but the civil Commonwealth had authority to
dispose of all matters as well concerning Religion as state, and not only to
make Priests, and to give them Priestly power, but also to increase, diminish,
alter, or to take away from them their Priestly authority, and to determine of
all things both temporal and spiritual, which is not so in the law written,
wherein Priests have their authority from the positive institution and law of
God himself.

46 True it is, that the Heathen Commonwealths gave great authority,
priueledges, and exemptions to those persons, whom they chose and appointed to
be their Priests, especially to the chief Priest, or Bishop (whereof read
Alexander lib. 2. cap. 8. and lib. 3. cap. 27.) to whom the Romans gave such
great honor, that they did esteem him next to the King, or supreme temporal
Prince, and gave him authority to command, and also to punish the King of
sacred rites, and all the other inferior Priests. Yea even to Vestall Virgins,
who were Priests of the Goddess Vesta such honor was given by the Romans,
that if by chance they should meet any malefactor, that was led to death, he
should not for that time be put to death, Plutarch. in Numa Alex. lib. 5. cap.
12.
upon condition that the Virgin must swear, that her meeting of him was
casual, and not of purpose. But from hence it cannot be gathered, that the
religious Priests had by the law of Nature such authority, priueledges, and
prerogatives, but only that the Commonwealth in honor of Religion did grant
them such temporal honor, and authority, and would have them to be obeyed in
some matters of great moment under pain of death.

47 Now in the new law in what manner the temporal Commonwealth, or rather
those persons, who are parts, and members thereof, are subject to spiritual
Pastors I have at large declared above in the second part, where I have
sufficiently proved out of Card. Bellarmines own grounds, that the conjunction
of temporal power, and of spiritual subjection in the same Christian man is
not sufficient to make the temporal, and spiritual Commonwealth among
Christians one total body, or Commonwealth, whereof the Pope is the supreme
visible head for then the Pope must be both a temporal, and spiritual Monarch
of all Christendom, and Christians; and that although they should make one
total body, or Commonwealth, whereof Christ only is the head in that manner,
as I there declared, yet from thence it could not be concluded, that the
temporal power, or Commonwealth is per se, and naturally subject, and
subordinate to the spiritual power, or Commonwealth, but only that Christian
Princes, not as they have temporal power, but as being members of the Church
of Christ they have spiritual subjection, and consequently in spiritualls, and
not in temporalls are subject to the spiritual power, or commonwealth, and
the spiritual Pastors thereof: And there also I answered all the arguments,
which D. Schulckenius brought to prove the contrary. Let Mr. Fitzherbert
impugn that Treatise, and then he may have some cause to brag, that this
doctrine of mine, and Barclaies is a false, and vain supposition of our own;
In the mean time the Reader may clearly see, how vainly, and friuolously he
has proved by the law of Nature, that the temporal power is subject, and
subordinate to the spiritual, and that in the law of Nature Religious Priests,
as they were such, might command, and correct temporally the temporal
Commonwealth, or supreme temporal Prince, whereas the quite contrary is
manifest by the law of nature.

48 The other thing, says Mr. Fitzherbert, that I have showed, is, that by
reason of this natural subordination, and subjection of the laws, and less
perfect Societies to the higher, and more perfect, it is most conform to
nature, that the head of the Church, who is the supreme spiritual Magistrate,
may command, and correct all inferior Magistrates, as well temporal as
spiritual, when the necessity either of the whole body, or of the Church only
(which is the most perfect, and supreme Society) does require it, as in like
case the supreme civil Magistrate (who is Prince, and head of the
Commonwealth) justly commands, and punishes the heads of Families, or
Cities, notwithstanding that the said Families, and Cities are distinct
Societies, and bodies, and have their laws, and Magistrates apart, no less
then the Commonwealth, and Church have theirs.

49 But first it is untrue, that there is any natural subordination, and
subjection of the temporal power, or Commonwealth to the spiritual, except
in dignity and perfection, which is nothing to the purpose, and whereof no man
makes doubt; neither does the dignity and perfection of the more noble, and
excellent Society infer a superiority in command, and authority over the
less worthy, and less noble Society, unless we will have the company of
Goldsmiths to have authority and command over the Pewterers: and I have showed
a little before most evidently, that in the law of Nature the Civil
commonwealth had the whole charge, and command of all things, as well
belonging to Religion, as to State, and that the Priests, or public Ministers
of religious rites, were instituted, ordained, changed, deprived, commanded,
and punished by the civil Commonwealth, upon whom even in all matters
belonging to Religion, and the public worship of God they wholly depended: and
therefore no marvel, that from this vain, and frivolous supposition of the
natural subordination, and subjection of the temporal Commonwealth to the
spiritual often affirmed by Mr. Fitzherbert, but never proved by him by any
one probable argument, none but vain, and frivolous collections can be
gathered.

50 Secondly, I have also sufficiently showed, that there is not the like case
betwixt the supreme civil Magistrate and the heads of Families, and Cities,
and betwixt the head of the Church, and the supreme Magistrate of the civil
Commonwealth, as my Adversary here untruly affirms, for that not only
those persons, who are the heads of Families, and Cities, but also the
Families, and Cities themselves are parts, and members of the whole civil
Commonwealth, and therefore in all civil matters to be directed, commanded,
and temporally corrected by the supreme civil Magistrate: but the temporal
Commonwealth it self, or the temporal Prince, as he has temporal power, or
in mere temporal matters, is not a part, and member of the Church, or
spiritual kingdom of Christ, but only as he has spiritual subjection, and
therefore only in spiritualls, and in such which are reduced to the nature of
spiritualls, he is to be directed, and commanded, and to be spiritually, not
temporally corrected by the supreme spiritual Pastor. And so indeed it is
conform to the law of nature, that is, it is not repugnant to natural reason,
but it is fit, decent, and convenient, although not necessary, that the chief
Religious Priest should have authority granted him, either by the civil
commonwealth, as it was in the law of nature, or by the positive institution
and law of God, as it was in the law written, to punish the transgressors of
religious rites with some kind of punishments, but that the law of nature did
give no authority at all to those who were appointed to be public Ministers
of religious rites, to command or punish at all, the civil commonwealth, or
Sovereign Prince thereof, upon whom both in spiritual and civil matters they
wholly depended, is altogether repugnant to natural reason.

51 But Widdrington himself, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 102. nu. 14.
does not deny, but that I have proved thus much effectually, so far forth,
as concerns a power to command, and a spiritual manner of punishment, seeing
that he says (as you have heard in the beginning of the last Chapter) that I
have effectually proved nothing else by the divine, or natural law, but that
the temporal power is subject to the spiritual in spiritual things, and in
temporal, as they are reduced to spiritual, so far forth as concerns
commandment, and a spiritual, not a temporal manner of punishment. So he.

52 But although I do willingly grant, that he has sufficiently proved by
the law of God, that the Church of Christ, and the sprituall Pastors thereof
have authority granted them by the positive institution and law of God to
command in spiritual things, and in temporal, as they are reduced to
spiritual, all Christians both Princes, and subjects being parts and members
of the Church, and to punish them with spiritual punishments, if they shall
contemn his just command; yet my meaning was never to affirm, that he has
effectually proved, either that there is any natural subjection, and
subordination of the temporal commonwealth to the head of the Church of
Christ, except only in dignity and perfection, or that the law of nature,
abstracting from the positive institution and law of Christ, has granted to
spiritual Pastors authority to punish, or command absolute Princes; for that
all the authority, which spiritual Pastors now have, does either proceed from
the positive institution and law of Christ, or from the grant of Christian
Princes, and not from the law of nature. Wherefore from these words of mine,
which he has related, this only can be concluded, that he has effectually
proved by the law of God, or nature, that the temporal power is subject to
the spiritual in spiritual things, and spiritual punishments; and that he
has proved nothing else. For by what rules of Logic can my Adversary
infer, that because I grant, that he has effectually proved by the law of
God, or nature, that the temporal power is subject to the spiritual, etc.
Therefore I must grant that he has effectually proved by the law of God and
nature, that the temporal power is subject to the spiritual, etc. since that
every Logician knows, that to make an absolute disjunctive proposition to be
true, it suffices that one part of the disjunction be true, and therefore to
make that proposition of mine to be true, that he has effectually proved by
the law of God, or nature, that the temporal power is subject to the
spiritual, etc. it is sufficient that he has proved by the law of God, that
the temporal power is subject to the spiritual in spiritual things, and in
temporal, as they are reduced to spiritual, so far forth as concerns
commandment, and a spiritual, not temporal manner of punishment: for by the
law of nature he has proved no such thing, nor brought any one probable
argument to prove the same.

53 But let us go on with his Discourse: Whereby it appears, says he, Page
102. nu. 15.
that the only question now betwixt us is, whether the supreme spiritual
Superior may punish temporally according to the law of nature, whereof truly
there can be no doubt, if we consider the ground and substance of my former
Discourse, proouing a subordination of all Societies, and communities to the
Church, for thereupon it follows, that the head thereof may by way either of
commandment, or punishment, dispose of whatsoever belongs to all the
inferior Societies, when it shall be absolutely necessary for the
conservation of the Church, by the same reason, that the Superior, Magistrate,
or Prince of the civil Society, or common wealth, may dispose in like case,
and to like purpose of whatsoever belongs to all the Societies, which are
inferior to the commonwealth, or as the soul commands, Chap 2. per totum.
or punishes the body in whatsoever is dependent thereon, or accessorie
thereto, as I have proved before in the second Chapter.

54 But this, as you see, is only a repetition of his former idle Discourse;
and therefore it needs no other answer, then that which I gave before, where
first I have showed, that the supreme spiritual superior of the Church of
Christ cannot punish temporally according to the law of Nature, and that there
is no natural subordination of any Civil Society to the Church of Christ,
except only in dignity, and perfection, which is nothing to the purpose; and
that in the law of Nature it belonged to the Civil Commonwealth it self to
dispose and order all things as well concerning Religion, as Civil matters, as
to ordain Priests, to appoint with what kind of Sacrifices, and in what manner,
and place God should be publicly worshipped, to give, or take away, to extend,
or diminish the authority, dignity, and privileges of Religious Priests, as
the Commonwealth, whose Ministers they were, and to whom they were subject not
only in temporalls, but also in spiritualls, should think expedient; and
therefore to make a natural subordination and subjection not only in dignity,
and perfection, but also in power, and authority of the civil commonwealth to
the Church of Christ is clearly repugnant to nature, and to all natural reason.

55 Secondly, I also showed the manifest difference betwixt families, cities,
and all such like inferior Civil Societies being compared to the whole Civil
Commonwealth, and betwixt the whole Civil Commonwealth being compared to the
Church, or spiritual kingdom of Christ, for that not only the persons of all
inferior civil Societies, but also the Societies themselves, which are only
compounded of civil power, are true parts, and members of the whole civil
Society, or commonwealth; and that therefore the supreme civil Magistrate,
or Prince, who has power to dispose of the whole civil body, or
commonwealth, has power also to dispose of every part, and member thereof:
But the temporal Commonwealth it self, which is compounded only of civil
power, is not a part and member of the Church of Christ, which is compounded
only of spiritual, and not civil, or temporal authority, as Cardinal
Bellarmine himself confesses: Contra Barc. c. 12. p. 137 and in Schulck. page
203.
And therefore it does not follow by the same reason, as my Adversary here
affirms, that the supreme head of the Church of Christ may dispose of
whatsoever belongs to the civil commonwealth because the supreme Prince of
the civil commonwealth may dispose of whatsoever belongs to all other
inferior civil Societies, And whereas he supposes, that to dispose of
whatsoever belongs to the civil commonwealth may be absolutely necessary
for the conservation of the Church is a mere fiction, and idle supposition of
his own brain: and although it were so necessary, yet it should not belong
to spiritual Pastors, who have no civil power, but to Christian Princes to
dispose thereof, as I have showed above. And as for the comparison of the soul
and body, which all my Adversaries do so often inculcate, I have also showed
before Part. 2. c. 8.
most clearly, that it is no fit similitude to prove their purpose, but makes
flat against them; both because the temporal, and spiritual commonwealth do
not make one total body, or compound, in that manner as the body and soul do
make one man, and also because albeit the soul may command the body to punish
it self, yet she her self cannot punish the body without the help, and
concurrance of the body it self; and therefore neither can the Church of
Christ inflict temporal punishments without the help, and concurrance of the
temporal commonwealth.

56 But now Mr. Fitzherbert will make, forsooth, all the matter more clear.
And all this, says he, p. 103. nu. 16
will be yet more clear if we consider the weak reason that Widdrington
gives of his conceit to prove, that the supreme spiritual power cannot
punish temporally. Wid. in Admon. ad Lect. nu. 17.
For thus he says; Atque ita recta ratio dictat, vt superior quicunque, etc.
And so right, or true reason teaches, that every Superior may punish his
inferior with some penalty that is proportionate to his authority, but that
any other besides him, that is supreme Governor of the civil commonwealth
may punish his inferior with the pain or punishment of death or maiming, or
of the depriuatio^ of all his goods, this cannot be deduced from the rule, or
prescript of true reason. Thus says he: But to omit to speak of bloody
punishments by death, or maiming, (which are never used by the Church, and
therefore are idly mentioned here by my Adversary) it is to be noted, that
in the rest he contradicts not only the ancient, and common practice of the
Church, yea the holy Scriptures, as I shall show Iufra nu. 18.19.20. Item cap.
7.9.10.11. and 12. per totum.
after a while, but also his own grant, and concession.

57 If the prudent Reader had not sufficiently seen before the extreme
vanity, palpable ignorance, and irreligious conscience of this my Adversary,
he might easily conceive me to be a very bad, ignorant, and inconsiderate man
for contradicting, as he says, not only the ancient, and common practice of
the Church, yea and the holy Scriptures, but also my own grant, and
concession: but such bragging, and slanderous words are, as you have often
seen, frequent in this man's mouth. First therefore those words of mine, Atque
ita recta ratio dictat, etc. And so true reason teaches, etc. were not brought
by me as a reason, but as a conclusion of that I said before concerning the
authority of Superiors to punish their subjects, or inferiors with some
kind of punishments proportionate to their Coerciue power.

58 Secondly, it is untrue, that bloody punishments by death, or maiming are
idly mentioned here by me: seeing that he himself in the former paragraph
did affirm, that the head of the Church may by way not only of commandment,
but also of punishment, dispose of whatsoever belongs to the Civil
Commonwealth, and consequently both of goods, and bodies, whereof no doubt the
civil commonwealth may dispose: and in the second Chapter also he expressly
taught, that the Pope having power over my soul, and being withal the
supreme Governor of the whole Church has also power over my life, albeit
with the lives of Princes, it being an odious question, he will not meddle,
and a little after he affirms, that the Pope has power over the temporal
goods, states, and bodies of all Christians, and consequently, according to his
doctrine, also of all Christian Kings, and Princes. Why then does he now say,
that bloody punishments by death, or maiming are idly mentioned here by me,
when I affirm, that none but the supreme civil Superior has power to
punish his subject, or inferior with the punishment of death, maiming, or
deprivation of goods? But mark I pray you, his goodly reason; because,
forsooth, bloody punishments by death, or maiming are never used by the
Church: whereas the question betwixt us was not, whether the Church does
actually use bloody punishments, for of this I spoke not one word in this
place, albeit Pope Adrian did ordain in the Canon law, In cap. Delatori 5. q.
6.
that the tongues of some malefactors should be pulled out, and the heads of
others stricken off: but the question was, whether the Pope has power and
authority to use bloody punishments, and he himself, as you have seen,
expressly teaches, that the Pope has such a power, and yet now, forsooth, I in
denying it, do mention idly bloody punishments by death, or maiming.

59 Thirdly, that he may not take occasion hereafter to cauell at my words,
when I affirmed that true reason teaches, that every Superior has power to
punish his inferior with some punishment proportionate to his authority, my
meaning was, as also my words do sufficiently signify, to speak only of
supreme Superiors, who have both directive, and coerciue authority, that is
power both to command, and punish: for a delegate Superior has no other
authority then is granted him by his supreme Superior: And therefore it is
not against the law of Nature, or the prescript of true natural reason, that
such a delegate Superior may have power given him only to command, and not to
punish, or to punish one man, and not another, or to inflict one punishment and
not another, according as his supreme Superior shall think it fit, and
convenient.

60 Now you shall see in what manner Mr. Fitzherbert proves, that I
contradict my own grant, the holy Scriptures, and the ancient, and common
practice of the Church. You have heard Widdrington grant, Supra c. 5. nu 1.
Wid. in Admon. ad Lect. nu. 17.
says he, Page 104. nu. 17.
that the spiritual Superior may command corporal, and temporal things, as
they serve the spiritual, and are reduced thereto. Why then may he not punish
his subject in his body, or temporal goods for the same respect? But first
what contradiction, I pray you, is it, to affirm that the spiritual Superior
may for a spiritual end command, or enjoin temporal penalties, and to deny,
that he may not for a spiritual end inflict temporal penalties?
Contradiction, as all Philosophers know, is an affirming, and denying of the
self same thing, and in the self same manner, but to affirm one thing, and
to deny another is no contradiction at all. Wherefore to prove, that I
contradict my own grant, Mr. Fitzherbert must prove, which he can never do,
that I affirm, and deny the self same thing, as to affirm, and deny, that
the spiritual Superior has power to command temporal penalties, to
affirm, and also to deny that he has power to inflict temporal penalties,
for otherwise to accuse me of contradiction for affirming one thing, to wit,
that the spiritual Superior has power to command temporal penalties, and
for denying another thing, to wit, that he has not power to inflict temporal
penalties, is to accuse himself of most gross, and palpable ignorance.

61 Secondly, I answer his demand with other like demands. Cardinal
Bellarmine, as you have seen above, Part. 2. cap. 8.
affirms, that the soul may command bodily actions, when they are necessary
for the good of the soul, and I also added, which he cunningly concealed, when
they are necessary for the good also of the body; why then may not the soul
her self also exercise bodily actions for the same respect, without the help
or active concurrance of the body it self? Also the soul may command one
corporal member to punish another, if it be necessary for the good either of
the soul, or of the body, as the hands to whip the shoulders, or to cut off
some contagious member, as the fingers, the toes, the feet, or legs if they
be poisoned, why then has not the soul herself for the same respect power to
do the same? Moreover a ghostly father may enioine his penitent for
satisfaction of his sins, and to avoid the danger of falling back into
sin, to give Alms, to build Hospitalls, to afflict his body with fasting,
watching, disciplining, hair cloth, and such like to shun this, or that
company, etc. Why then, if the Penitent refuse to do these things, may not his
ghostly father for the same respect take away his money from him, and give
Alms, and build Hospitalls therewith, and afflict his penitents body whether
he will, or no etc? Why did S. Bernard affirm, that the material sword is by
Christ's commandment to be drawn forth for the Church, but not by the Church,
with the hands of the Soldier, but at the beck, or declaratiue commandment
of the Priest?

62 But the true, and proper reason why spiritual Pastors have authority to
command temporal punishments, and not to inflict temporal punishments, or to
punish temporally, must be taken not from any natural subordination, or which
is all one, from any necessary subjection, which according to the law of
Nature the civil commonwealth, or temporal Princes have to the Religious
Society, or to the Ministers of sacred rites, for that in the law of Nature it
belonged to the civil commonwealth to dispose of all matters as well
concerning Religion, as state, as I have showed before; but it must be taken
from the positive institution of Christ our Savior, and from the nature, and
conditions of the laws, weapons, armor, and punishments, which according to
the institution of Christ are due to the Church, as he has distinguished them
from the nature and conditions of the laws, weapons, armor, and punishments,
which are proper to the temporal Commonwealth. For there is no doubt to be
made, but that our Savior if it had pleased him, might have ordained, that the
chief visible head of the Church should be both a temporal, and spiritual
Monarch, as the Canonists will have him to be, and might have given him
authority to inflict not only spiritual but also temporal punishments, and
not only to command, but also to use the material, temporal, or civil sword,
as also if it had pleased him, he might have given him no power to command at
all, but only to preach the word of God, and to declare his law, and to
minister Sacraments to them that should voluntarily, and of their own accord
demand them; wherefore what power the Pope and other spiritual Pastors have,
we cannot gather from the law of Nature, or the necessary prescript of
natural reason, but only from the positive institution and law of Christ.

63 But this difference betwixt the power to command, and to inflict temporal
punishments will be made more plain and perspicuous, by examining his next
Discourse, and by declaring morefully the true sense and meaning of those
former words of mine. [The spiritual Superior may command corporal and
temporal things, as they serve spiritual, and are reduced thereto:] Which my
Adversary either does not, or would seem not to understand. For seeing that,
says he Page 104. numer. 17.
, the spiritual power to command temporal things in that case, resulteth (as
Widdrington seems to grant) upon their reduction to the spiritual (that is
to say, because they are used and applied to the service of the spiritual
whereby they are reduced to a kind of spiritual nature or quality) why shall
not the same reason hold for the spiritual Superiors power to punish in
temporal things, which are no less used and applied to the service of the
spiritual, in punishment, then in commandment? as when delinquents are
enjoined for the punishment of their sins to give Alms, to build Hospitals,
or Monasteries, to go in Pilgrimage, and to afflict their bodies by fasting,
watching, discipline, hairecloth, and such like, it is clear, that as well the
corporal labors, as the temporal expenses are referred to a spiritual end,
(to wit, to Gods glory, and the benefit of the Soul) no less then if the
same were employed otherwise for Gods service, by the direction or
commandment of the spiritual Superior. Also, when heretics are deprived of
their honor, fame, goods, or lives for the just punishment of their heresy,
See Siluester verb. Haeres. nu. 12. 13. and 14.
according to the custom and Canons of the Church, who knows not that the
same to done for the glory of God, and the great benefit of the Church? So as
there is no less relation or reduction of corporal and temporal goods to the
spiritual in punishing, then in commanding, and therefore Widdrington cannot
with any probability admit the one, and reject the other.

64 The reason why the spiritual Pastors of the Church may command temporal
punishments, and yet may not inflict them, or punish temporally; or, which is
all one, why the directive power of spiritual Pastors is extended to
temporal punishments for a spiritual end, and yet their coerciue power is not
for the same respect extended also to temporal punishments, but restrained and
limited to spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Censures, I fully declared in my
Appendyx to Fa. Suarez, which Mr. Fitzherbert might well have seen, seeing
that it was published the year before this his Reply came forth. See Appendix
part. 1. sec. 4.
For Fa. Suarez argued in this manner: The Ecclesiastical power of the Church,
as it is directive, or commanding is not by those words of our Savior,
Quodcunque ligaueris etc. Whatsoever thou shall bind etc. determined to this
or that manner of directing or commanding, but does without limitation
comprehend all convenient directing or commanding, therefore the same is to be
understood of the coerciue, or punishing power. For we do now suppose as a
thing manifest, and known to every man of mean learning, that in every law
there is contained the commandment, which the Divines call, vis dirigens, the
directive or commanding force or power, and the punishment, for fear of which
we are in some sort compelled and constrained to perform the thing commanded,
which therefore the Divines call vis cogens, or coercens, the compelling,
enforcing or punishing force, or power of the law.

65 This therefore was a part of my answer to the aforesaid argument of Fa.
Suarez, which my Adversaries concealing thereof urges me to repeat here
again, that the Reader may in some sort thereby perceive, that he still urges
the same arguments, which have before beenefully satisfied. Secondly, if that
assertion or argument of Suarez be so understood, that as the Ecclesiastical
power to command is not limited to any certain manner of commanding, so that
it be convenient, and beseeming the nature and condition of an Ecclesiastical
or spiritual body, or Society (as it is by the institution of Christ
distinguished from the civil body or Commonwealth) so the Ecclesiastical
power to punish is not limited to any certain manner of punishing, so that it
be convenient, and beseeming the nature and condition of an Ecclesiastical or
spiritual body, and society (as it is instituted by Christ and distinguished
from the civil Commonwealth then we grant also his comparison, or the
consequence of his argument. But then we affirm, that as only temporal
correction or punishing is convenient and proper to the temporal body, or
Commonwealth; so also only spiritual censures or punishments are by the
institution of Christ convenient and beseeming the spiritual kingdom, or
Church of Christ, as out of many Catholic Authors we have showed a little
before.

66 Wherefore there is a great difference to be observed betwixt the power to
command, and to punnish. For the Ecclesiastical power to command is as it were
unlimited, and may be extended to all things both spiritual and also
temporal, not as they are temporal, but as in regard of the virtue or sin
therein contained, they become spiritual; because the object of the
Ecclesiastical directive or commanding power is virtue, or vice, which may be
found in all things whatsoever, as well temporal, as spiritual: And so the
Ecclesiastical power forbidding a temporal thing as it is a sin, or
hurtful to spiritual good, does nothing which is unbeseeming the nature and
condition of a spiritual body, or Society, but the depriving one of temporal
lands, goods, liberty, or life, are always temporal punishments for what
crime soever either spiritual or temporal they be inflicted, and therefore
are not convenient or beseeming the nature or condition of a spiritual
Commonwealth, as I have showed before.

67 And this distinction or difference betwixt the commanding and chastising
power does evidently appear in the civil Commonwealth, which having for the
object of her directive or commanding power, public peace, or public
disquietnesse, as the Ecclesiastical has virtue or vice, may forbid all
things even Ecclesiastical matters, as they are truly manifest wrongs to the
civil society, and unjust hindrances to the public peace; for that these
unjust oppressions, although principally, and of themselves are spiritual, yet
secondarily and by accident they are temporal wrongs, and in that regard may
be punished by the civil Magistrate, not with spiritual but with temporal
punishments, as before in this Disputation Cap. 7. sec. 2 nu. 17.
I have showed out of those two famous and learned Dominikes, Sotus, and
Bannes.Whereby we may perceive that this manner of arguing, which Suarez uses
in comparing the commanding or directive power, with the punishing or coerciue,
is not allowable; for otherwise we might in like manner conclude, that as the
Civil power to command is not so limited, but that it may sometimes be
extended to Ecclesiastical or spiritual matters; so also the Civil power to
punish is not so limited, but that it may sometimes be extended to punish with
Ecclesiastical or spiritual punishment. Thus I answered in that place.

68 By which the Reader may clearly see, that the difference betwixt the
directive or commanding, and the coerciue, compelling, or punishing power must
be taken (as the natures and differences of all powers ought to be taken) from
their proper acts, and objects; for the acts and objects of the Ecclesiastical
power, as it is directive, or commanding, are the commanding of virtuous, and
the forbidding of vicious acts, whereby the spiritual health of souls, and
everlasting happiness, which is the last end of the spiritual power, is
obtained: So that what thing soever, be it temporal or spiritual, that may be
virtue or vice, that may be necessary or hurtful to the spiritual good of
souls, may also be commanded, or forbidden by the Ecclesiastical or
spiritual power, as it is directive. And this is the reason why the spiritual
power as it is directive, may be extended to temporal punishments, that is,
may command or forbid temporal penalties or afflictions, for that virtue and
vice, which are the object of the spiritual power, as it is directive, may be
found in them.

69 So likewise the object of the civil power, as it is directive, is the
obtaining and conseruing of temporal peace and quietness in the temporal
commonwealth, and her acts are the commanding or forbidding of those things
which are necessary, or hurtful to the public peace, which is the last end of
the temporal power it self, although it be not the last end of the temporal
Christian Prince, as I showed above in the second part; So that what thing
soever, be it spiritual or temporal, that does injuriously disturb the
public peace, may be forbidden by the temporal power, as it is directive. And
this is the reason why the temporal power, as it is directive, may be extended
sometimes to spiritual actions, not as they are spiritual, but as they are
reduced to temporal actions, for that the injurious disturbance of the public
temporal peace, which is the object of the temporal power, as it is
d^rectiue, may sometimes be found in them. As the baptizing of one with
poisoned water, or the ministering of the B. Sacrament, which is also poisoned,
as they are spiritual actions, to wit the ministering of Sacraments, which
work a spiritual effect, are not subject to the directive power of the
temporal Prince, but as they work a temporal effect, which is injurious to
the temporal peace, they are subject to the temporal power, as it is
directive. And so a temporal Prince may forbid a spiritual Pastor, who is
subject to him in temporalls, to minister hic, and nunc the Sacrament of
Baptism, whereby the party baptized shall be poisoned. So also unjust
Excommunications, if they cause tumults, and perturbations in the
commonwealth, or unfit conuenticles by night, with armor and weapons, whereby
probable danger of seditions, or of other temporal wrongs may arise, although
these assemblies be made to preach the Gospel, or instruct the people in the
faith of Christ, may be forbidden by the temporal power, not as they are
temporal actions, but as they are temporal wrongs, and truly injurious to
the public temporal peace.

70 And this doctrine is of it self so manifest and perspicuous, that no man
of any learning can deny it: and to affirm, that it is a doctrine altogether
intolerable and which cannot be uttered, but by one who is given to a
reprobate sense, for that it makes the temporal Prince to be Judge of
spiritual things, and thereby makes him truly the head of the Church, as D.
Schulckenius most rashly affirms Page 7. and 208.
, is an intolerable slander, and which could not be uttered by any learned
man, unless with some vehement passion of ire he had been altogether
transported, and his understanding therewith had been wholly blinded, as I
have showed more amply in the Discovery of his slanders In Appendice ad
Supplicationem 11. calumnia 11.
. For this doctrine does not make the temporal Prince to be judge of
spiritual matters, but of temporal, nor to be the head of the Church, that is
of the mystical body of Christ, and his spiritual kingdom, or of
Ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, but only of the politic body, and
temporal commonwealth, and of civil matters, or which, by reason of some
true temporal wrong, are reduced to civil matters.

71 But the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power, as it is coerciue, compelling
or punishing, does not consist in commanding, but in punishing, and her proper
act and object is the inflicting of spiritual Censures or punishments. For as
Christ our Savior has instituted his Church a spiritual and not a temporal
kingdom, so he has given her correspondent weapons, armor, and punishments
which she is to use, to wit Ecclesiastical Censures, as Excommunication,
Suspension, Interdict, and not civil punishments, as death, exile, privation
of goods, etc. as I have showed before Part. 1. per totum.
out of Almaine and many others, both ancient Fathers and modern Catholic
Divines, and Lawyers: which also is sufficiently grounded in the holy
Scriptures, And if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen, and Publicane Matthew. 18
: and I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven Matthew. 16
, not of earthly kingdoms; and the weapons of our warfare are not carnal 2.
Cor. 10.
.

72 So likewise the Civil power, as it is coerciue, does not consist in
commanding, but in punishing, and her proper act, and object is the inflicting,
or using of temporal punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods etc.
Which S. Bernard Lib. de considerat. ad Eugenium.
called the drawing forth, or using, and exercising the material, or temporal
sword: for although he affirmed the material, or temporal sword to belong in
some sort to the Church, for that it was to be drawn forth, or used for the
Church, but not by the Church, yet he also affirmed, that Christ our Savior
did forbid spiritual Pastors, to wit, as they were such, to draw forth, or
use the material, or temporal sword. And therefore well said Petrus Damianus,
In Epist. ad Firnim.
that the kingdom and Priesthood are by their proper offices, and functions so
distinguished, that the King should use Secular weapons, and the Priests be
girded with the spiritual sword; which in sense is all one with that saying of
Gratian, 2. q. 7. cap. Nos si.
the Compiler of the Canon law, called the Decree, It belongs to Kings to
inflict corporal, and to Priests to inflict spiritual punishments. Now as the
end both of the directive, and also of the coerciue power is temporal peace,
so the end both of the directive, or commanding, and also of the coerciue, or
punishing spiritual power is the spiritual health of souls, and everlasting
happiness, which, as I have showed above in the second part, is also the last
end of every Christian man, to which spiritual Pastors by Ecclesiastical
laws, and spiritual Censures, and Christian Princes by civil laws, and
temporal punishments, are by the law of Christ bound, as much as lies in them,
to bring their Subjects.

73 And by this the Reader may easily perceive both the true meaning of those
words of mine, The spiritual Superior may command corporal and temporal
things as they serve spiritual, and are reduced thereto, but not inflict
temporal punishments; and also what Mr. Fitzherbert can rightly conclude from
that assertion of his, All temporal things, and temporal punishments may be
referred to a spiritual end (to wit, to Gods glory, and the benefit of
souls) and this no less in commanding then in punishing. For corporal or
temporal things to become spiritual things, or to be reduced thereto, is
nothing else, then that in corporal and temporal things there may be found
virtue, or vice, which are the object of the spiritual directive power, and
that therefore all temporal things, and also all temporal punishments, as
they may become spiritual things, or reduced thereto, that is, as by the
rela^ion of them to Gods gloty, and the health of souls, there may reside in
them virtue, or vice, may be commanded or forbidden by the spiritual directive
or commanding power, which has for her acts and objects the commanding of
virtue, and the forbidding of vice: but the act and object of the spiritual
coerciue power is the inflicting, and not the commanding of spiritual
punishments; and no relation of temporal punishments to Gods glory, or to the
health of souls can make them to be spiritual punishments; for that death,
exile, privation of goods, etc. although by the reference of them to Gods
glory, and the health of souls they may become spiritual actions, that is, in
them may reside virtue, or vice, yet they can never become spiritual
punishments: and therefore although they may be commanded, or forbidden by the
spiritual power, for that the object of the spiritual commanding power are
all things wherein virtue or vice may be found, yet they cannot be inflicted by
the spiritual coerciue power, which has for her object the inflicting only
of spiritual, and not of temporal punishments, unless the reference of
temporal punishments to the glory of God, and the health of souls can make
temporal punishments to become, I do not say spiritual things, but
spiritual and not temporal punishments, which is impossible. And therefore
with great reason I did admit the one, to wit, that the spiritual Superior
may command temporal punishments, as they become spiritual things, or are
reduced thereunto, that is, to things, wherein virtue or vice may be found, and
did reject the other, to wit, that the Spiritual Superior may in regard of
the same reference, or reduction inflict also temporal punishments; for that
no reference, or reduction of the inflicting of temporal punishments to Gods
glory, and the health of souls can make temporal punishments to become
spiritual punishments, or the inflicting of temporal punishments to be the
inflicting of spiritual punishments. And therefore you may see, I will not
say, with what probability, but with what palpable ignorance Mr. Fitzherbert
Suprat. 2. nu. 10.
accuses me of contradiction in this point, and calls it before a frivolous
distinction of mine.

74 And from this also which I have said, two other things may easily be
gathered. The one is, that to know what punishments are the object of the
spiritual coerciue, or punishing power, we have no other way a priori, then
the holy Scriptures, wherein the institution and law of Christ is contained:
and the reason is, because there is no natural necessity, that spiritual
Pastors must have authority to inflict temporal punishments, and by the law
of nature, and the ancient Romans, and other Heathen commonwealths, who were
guided by the light of natural reason, I have sufficiently proved before,
that this natural subordination, and subjection (especially in coerciue, or
punishing temporal authority, or authority to punish temporally) of the civil
commonwealth to religious Priests (which my Adversary supposes) is a very
vain and idle fiction, or Chymaera, and feigned without any color or show of
true natural reason. Wherefore seeing that Christ our Savior might by his
absolute power have given to the spiritual Pastors of his Church a greater or
lesser coerciue, or punishing authority, then he has given them, yea and
might have given them no coerciue authority, or power to punish at all so much
as with spiritual Censures, to know what coerciue or punishing power, he has
actually given them, cannot be proved by the law of Nature, or by natural
reason, but only by the holy Scripture, and the ancient Fathers, who are the
sincere Expositours thereof, and lived before this controversy concerning the
Popes temporal authority over temporal Princes arose, and therefore could
neither favor the one side, nor the other.

75 The second is, that there is but little difference except in words betwixt
the doctrine of the Divines, and Canonists concerning the spiritual coerciue,
or punishing power. For although the Canonists do suppose, that all the power
as well coerciue, as directive, which Christ has given to the Pastors of his
Church, is in ordine ad bonum spirituale, in order to spiritual good, or for
the saving of souls, which the Divines call indirectly, yet because the
Canonists hold, that the Pope by the institution of Christ has supreme
authority to inflict as well temporal as spiritual punishments, and
consequently to punish all Christians even temporal Princes as well
temporally, as spiritually, therefore they fear not to affirm conformably to
their grounds, that the Pope is the supreme temporal, and spiritual Monarch
of the whole Christian world, and has true temporal coerciue authority. But
the Divines although in effect grant as much, yet they differ in words, and
that coerciue authority of spiritual Pastors, which the Canonists call
temporal, for that it works the same temporal effect, and has the self
same object, which the temporal, or civil coerciue authority has, will not,
forsooth, call it temporal authority, but spiritual authority in
temporalls, and that not directly, but indirectly, or in order to spiritual
good, whereas the Canonists do also hold, that the Popes temporal coerciue
authority, or his coerciue authority in temporalls is also in order to
spiritual good. But this distinction of directly, and indirectly was purposely
invented by the later Divines to make their doctrine concerning the Popes
authority to dispose of all temporalls, and to inflict temporal punishments
to be more plausible to the vulgar sort, and to be less odious to Christian
Princes, and their loyal subjects, who can not brook to hear any man say,
that absolute and Sovereign Princes are not supreme, but subject in temporalls
to spiritual Pastors, whereas in effect, and very deed the Divines,
notwithstanding this their distinction, do make absolute Princes, whom the
ancient Fathers with uniform consent have ever accounted to be next under GOD
in temporalls, and not to be temporally punished but by GOD alone, to be as
much subject in temporalls to spiritual Pastors, and to be no less temporally
punished by them, then the Canonists do. So that the difference betwixt their
opinions concerning the coerciue power of spiritual Pastors is rather
verbal, and only about words, them real, and in very deed.

76 Seeing therefore that to have power, and authority directly in temporalls
is nothing else then to have power in temporalls, as they are temporal, and to
have power indirectly in temporalls is to have power in temporalls, not as they
are temporal, but, as the Divines say, in order to spiritual good, or, which
is all one with that I said before, as by the order and reference to spiritual
good, that is, to the glory of God, and the health of souls they become
spiritual, that is virtuous, and vicious actions, it is manifest, that
although this distinction of directly, and indirectly may be applied to the
spiriturall directiue^, or commanding power, as I declared before, for that
spiritual Pastors have no power to command temporal actions but in order to
spiritual good, and by that reference become spiritual, and capable of
virtue, or vice, which is the health or hurt of souls, yet it cannot be
applied to the spiritual coerciue, or punishing power, unless it be first
proved, that Christ has given to spiritual Pastors for the health of souls
authority to inflict as well temporal, as spiritual punishments, and that
the objects of the spiritual coerciue power are by the institution of Christ
both temporal and spiritual punishments, which my Adversaries will never be
able to prove from the holy Scriptures, or the ancient Fathers, and impartial
expositours thereof; for to prove the coerciue authority of spiritual
Pastors, and Priests by the law of Nature, or natural reason, who, as I have
showed before, were in the law of Nature subject to the coerciue power of the
civil Commonwealth, is most idle, and frivolous.

77 Now you shall see, how frivolous the second reason is, which Mr.
Fitzherbert brings to prove that I contradict my self, in granting, that the
spiritual Superior may command temporal punishments, and yet in denying,
that he may inflict temporal punishments. Furthermore Widdrington grants,
says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 105. number. 18.
that the spiritual Superior may punish spiritually (that is to say by
Censures of Excommunication, Interdict, and Suspension) but who sees not that
he grants consequently, that the said spiritual Superior may also punish
temporally? For Excommunication does not only deprive a man of the use of the
Sacraments, but also of the communication, and conversation of Christian men,
and of many temporal commodities even according to our Saviors own
commandment, who ordained a temporal penalty of Excommunication, Matthew. 18.
when he commanded, that he which will not hear the Church, shall be taken for
an Ethnike, and a Publican, that is to say, shall be excluded not only from the
participation of the spiritual benefits of the Church, but also from the
temporal company, 1. Cor. 4.2. These 3.
and conversation of the faithful; which was also ordained by the Apostle,
when he commanded the Corinthians, and Thessalonians not to eat with notorious
sinners, and disobedient persons; and by S. John, when he commanded that the
Christians should not receive heretics into their houses, nor so much as
salute them; in all which it cannot be denied, but that the offenders were
punished temporally.

78 But all this, and the rest also, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings in the two
next Paragraphes was before objected by Fa. Suarez, and fully answered by me in
my Appendix: but this man is pleased to repeat still the same objections,
which by me, and others have been before often answered. Wherefore it is true,
that I do grant, that the spiritual Superior may punish spiritually by
Ecclesiastical Censures, but it is not true, that I must consequently grant,
that he may also punish temporally, for this I ever denied, and therefore it is
a mere fiction of his own brain, that I contradict my self in affirming,
and denying the self same thing. For First Excommunication, as I showed
before, In my Appendix against Suarez. part. 2. sec. 4. See also above chap. 1.
nu. 16. and seq. and chap. 5. sec. 2. number. 131. and seq.
does not of it own nature, and by any institution of Christ deprive of civil
conversation, but only of the Ecclesiastical or spiritual participation of
the faithful: and therefore all civil contracts with excommunicated persons,
as buying, selling, changing, lending etc. are valid, and of force, if we
respect only the law of Christ. Secondly, it is also true, that by the law of
the Church some temporal punishments may be annexed to Excommunication by way
of command, and so the Church has power to command, that we shall not ciuilly
converse with excommunicated persons, except in those cases, wherein by the law
of Nature, and Nations we are bound ciuilly to converse with them: So also
spiritual Pastors, as I have showed before, may annexe to Excommunication the
inflicting of those temporal punishments, which from the grant, and
priueledges of temporal Princes they have authority to inflict: But this is
nothing to that, which Mr. Fitzherbert intended to prove; For I never denied,
that the spiritual Superior may punish temporally by way of command, or to
speak more properly, may command and enjoin temporal penalties, and also
inflict them by that civil authority, which he has received from the grant
of temporal Princes, but that which I denied, is that the spiritual Superior
has by the institution of Christ authority to inflict temporal punishments.

79 Thirdly, Mr. Fitzherbert affirming so boldly, that our Savior by his own
commandment ordained a temporal penalty of Excommunication, does err most
grossly, seeing that he cannot prove, that our Savior ordained any penalty at
all, much less a temporal penalty of Excommunication. For if he had but
slightly run over Schoole-Diuinitie, and especially the Treatise of
Ecclesiastical Censures, he could not but have seen, that although the power
to excommunicate is de iure divine, and instituted by the law of Christ, yet
that according to the more common doctrine of Divines neither Excommunication,
or any other Ecclesiastical Censure, or penalty is de iure diuino, and
ordained by the commandment of Christ, but de iure humano, and instituted by
the Church: and that to no sin is annexed any Censure by the law, and
commandment of Christ, who did never by himself immediately ordain, that the
Church should use such, or such a determinate punishment, but he left to the
prudent judgment, and arbitrament of the Church to determine in particular
this or that punishment, according to the authority she has received. Suarez.
tom. 5. dis. 2. sec. 1.
For thus writes Fa. Suarez affirming it to be the more common opinion of
Doctors, and withal he answers all the authorities, which Mr. Fitzherbert
has brought here out of the holy Scriptures.

80 But the contrary doctrine, says Suarez, may seem to have some ground in
those word; Matthew. 18. If he will not hear the Church let him be to thee as a
Heathen, and a Publican. For by those words our Savior Christ does seem to
have sufficiently showed, and instituted the Censure of Excommunication, and
that the Pastors of the Church are here vertually commanded to excommunicate
disobedient, and obstinate Christians: because by no other reason the faithful
can be bound to avoid such kind of men.

But from this place, says Suarez, nothing can be gathered. For otherwise one
might also gather from thence, that whosoever disobeyeth the Church, is
excommunicated by the law of God. Also, for that otherwise the Church does
excommunicate no man, but declare him to be excommunicated by the law of God,
because he does not obey the Church, which how absurd this is, it is manifest
of it self, etc. First, therefore by those words is signified this general
maxim, that those who do not hear the Church, do grievously sin, and
especially if they be obstinate, and that therefore they are to be accounted,
and shunned as grievous sinners, as are Heathens and Publicanes. Secondly, It
is signified that Christ our Lord will give to his Church power to bind and
loose. And so in those words is contained the power to inflict the Censure of
Excommunication, but not the institution of the Censure it self, or a
commandment in particular, but only in general of avoiding sinners, who are
disobedient to the Church, under which general law is comprehended an
accomodate distribution to say so, to wit, a commandment to shun every one
that is disobedient to the Church, according to the degree and manner of the
prohibition and separation which is made by the Church her self. And this is
the common exposition of Interpreters upon that place, and of Divines handling
this matter. Thus Suarez. Whereby it is apparent how disagreeably to Suarez
doctrine Mr. Fitzherbert here affirms, that Christ our Savior by his own
commandment ordained a temporal penalty of Excommunication, when he
commanded, that he who will not hear the Church shall be taken for an
Ethnicke, and a Publicane, seeing that according to Suarez, he ordained here no
penalty or Censure at all of Excommunication.

81 But because some Catholic Doctors, as Almaine, Eckius, Clicthoueus and
Driedo do affirm, whose doctrine in this point both Suarez, and the more
common opinion of Divines do reject, that at leastwise to the sin of
heresy, if it be joined with obstinacy, there is annexed some Censure or
punishment by the law of God and their opinion may seem to have some ground in
those authorities of holy Scripture, whereof some are here urged by Mr.
Fitzherbert: Suarez also answers to these authorities, and affirms, that
they are not forcible. And first, that those words of S. Paul ad Tit. 3. A man
that is an heretic after the first and second admonition avoid, etc. may be
understood of the natural obligation, by which every man is bound to avoid
danger of being infected, and consequently to avoid the person, which is an
occasion to him of sinning; and such is an heretic whose speech spreads as a
Canker, 2. Tim. 2. So also it is said. 1. Cor. 5. But now I wrote to you not to
keep company; if he that is named a brother, be a fornicator, or a covetous
person, or a seruer of Idols, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such an one not so much as to take meat: and Galat. 5. Know you not that
a little leaven corrupts the whole paste? Secondly, although we should grant,
that the Apostle in that place ad Tit. 3. spoke of a proper Censure, it does
not follow, that this institution is divine, but at the most an institution of
the Apostle, because it is the commandment of S. Paul etc. and especially for
that it may be expounded, Avoid, that is, Excommunicate; for the Apostle spoke
to Titus, who was a Bishop, and had power to excommunicate.

82 And according to this sense may be understood those words of S. John Epist.
2. If any man come to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, nor say to him, God save you, although they rather seem to be
understood of a natural commandment not to cooperate with such men, and not
to give them any signs, whereby either we should seem to consent to them, or
that they should be confirmed in their error. And this S. John did signify in
the next words. For he that says to him, God save you, communicates with his
wicked works. As also S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3. said; And if any obey not our word
note him by an Epistle, and do not company with him, that he may be
confounded. In which last word also the Apostle insinuates, that not only to
avoid communication in sin, but also to rebuke our neighbor charitably, it
is sometimes counseled, or also commanded to abstain from his company, that
he may be confounded: of this sort also are those words, 1. Cor. 5. which
words do admit almost all the aforesaid interpretations: And if they be
extended to a proper Censure, they are to be understood, at what time, and in
what manner the Pastors of the Church shall judge, that these kind of sinners
are to be avoided. And so by all these testimonies conferred together it is
evidently gathered, that there is no ground in Scripture for us to say, that
any Censure is by the law of God annexed to heresy, rather then to other
sins: And therefore the contrary opinion is far more probable, and it is
the common opinion of other Doctors. Thus Suarez. And yet, forsooth, Mr.
Fitzherbert makes no doubt, but that Christ our Savior by his own
commandment has ordained a temporal penalty of Excommunication, whereas
Suarez, and the common opinion of Doctors do resolutely affirm, that no
penalty at all of Excommunication is by the commandment of Christ ordained
against those that shall disobey the commandment of the Church.

83 Wherefore lastly, and principally, all that Mr. Fitzherbert, or any other
can conclude from the former places of holy Scripture, or such like is, that
the Church has power in order to the spiritual good of souls to enjoin
temporal punishments, and to command the faithful not to converse ciuilly
with Heathens, Publicanes, or notorious sinners, when otherwise by the law of
nature they are not bound to converse ciuilly with them, whereof I never made
any doubt. And therefore observe, good Reader, the fraud and ignorance of this
man, who pretended to prove, that I contradicted my self in granting that the
spiritual Superior could command temporal punishments, but not inflict them,
seeing that neither from the reduction of temporal things to spiritual, nor
from the nature and effects of Excommunication, nor from those places of holy
Scripture, which he here has brought, he concludes any other thing, then
that Christians are commanded to account him an Heathen, and a Publican, who
will not hear the Church: that the Apostle commanded the Corinthians, and
Thessalonians not to eat with notorious sinners and disobedient persons: that
S. John commanded the faithful not to receive heretics into their houses nor
so much as to salute them, all which I willingly granted, but of the other part
of the contradiction, which was the principal thing he should have proved,
that I must consequently grant, that the spiritual Superior can also inflict
temporal punishments, he speaks not one word.

84 For if a Christian should not observe the aforesaid commandments, and will
not account them for Heathens and Publicanes, who shall not hear the Church,
if he will eat and drink with notorious sinners, and receive heretics into
his house, and salute them, what punishments then can the spiritual Superior
inflict upon such a person? can he deprive him of his temporal life)
liberty, dignities, or goods? can he by temporal force whip him, send him
into banishment or such like, or only exclude him from the spiritual
conversation of the faithful, deprive him of spiritual graces, dignities, and
privileges, and command other Christians to account him as a Heathen,
Publican, and notorious sinner? This is the maine difficulty betwixt us, which
Mr. Fitzherbert cunningly passes over with silence, and yet he would make his
Reader believe, that he has sufficiently convinced me of contradiction, in
granting that the spiritual Superior may command temporal punishments, but
not inflict them, whereas of this second, which was the maine point, and only
question betwixt us, he speaks not one word in this place. And therefore
consider, I pray you, Dear Countrymen, what small reason you have in a
matter, which does so nearly concern your conscience, your temporal
overthrow, and the allegiance, which by the express commandment of Christ,
you are bound to give to God and Caesar, to rely upon so ignorant, and
insincere a man who so palpably, and wilfully seeks to delude you.

85 Now you shall see the rest of his goodly Discourse, wherein he also sets
aside the law of Nature, as he did in the former paragraph, which nevertheless
was the maine subject, whereof he pretended to treat in this Chapter, and
flies to the holy Scriptures, and the practice of the Church, but as
fraudulently, and ignorantly as he has done before. Moreover it is evident,
says he, Pa. 106. nu. 19.
in the holy Scripture, that our Savior himself Joan. 2.
drove the buyers and sellers out of the temple with whips, and Saint Peter
inflicted the punishment of death Act. 5.
upon Ananias, and Saphyra (whereof I shall have occasion to speak more amply
in the next Chapter) Cap. 7. nu. 23 and seq.
and that S. Paul stroke Elymas the Magician blind, Act. 13.
and delivered the incestuous Corinthian 1. Cor. 5.
to the Devil to be corporally afflicted in interitum carnis, says he, vt
spiritus saluus fiat, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved: All which were corporal, and temporal punishments. 1. Cor. 7.
Besides that the said Apostle permitted the separation of man, and wife, when
the same should be necessary for the salvation of the soul of either of them;
and the Church also does, and may in like case permit, and ordain the same,
not only for the benefit of the party innocent, but also for the just
punishment of the offender.

86 But truly it is an intolerable shame, that any Christian subject to
advance so immoderately the Papal authority in so great prejudice of Regal
Majesty should under the cloak of Religion, and of zeal to the Sea
Apostolic use such frivolous, not to say, ridiculous arguments, and from the
miraculous facts not only of the Apostles, but also of Christ himself conclude
in ordinary power in the Pope to do the like. For the only propounding of
these arguments will sufficiently show to any sensible man, how frivolous, and
ridiculous they are. Our Savior Christ, says my Adversary, drove the buyers,
and sellers out of the Temple with whips, Hieronom. epist. 8. ad Demetriad.
Abul. q. 97. in c. 18. Mat. and q. 96. in cap. 20.
and S. Peter inflicted the punishment of death upon Ananias, and Saphyra, or
rather foretold, and prophesied their death, as S. Hierome, and Abulensis do
affirm, and S. Paul stroke Elymas the Magician blind, or at leastwise
foretold his blindness, and delivered the incestuous Corinthian to the Devil
to be corporally tormented by him; therefore the Pope has power to do the
like; as though because Christ, and the Apostles had an extraordinary and
miraculous power to inflict or foretell corporal punishments, we may rightly
infer, that the Pope has an ordinary power to inflict, or foretell the
same. See Abul. q. 96 in cap. 20. Mat.
That these facts of S. Peter and S. Paul were miraculous no man can make any
doubt, and that the driving of the buyers, and sellers out of the temple was
also miraculous S. Hierome does expressly affirm, and the reason, which he
brings, does evidently convince the same: for mark his words.

87 Many men, says S. Hierome are of opinion, S. Hieronyme in Matthew. 21.
that the greatest signs our Savior did, was that Lazarus was raised from
death to life, that he that was blind from his mothers womb received his
sight, that at Jordan the voice of the Father was heard, that he being
transfigured in the mountain showed the glory of a Triumpher. Among all the
signs, which he did this seems to me more wonderful, that one only man,
and at that time contemptible, and so abject that afterward he was crucified,
the Scribes and Pharisees being in a rage against him, and seeing their
commodities destroyed, he could with the strokes of one only whip thrust out
so great a multitude, and overthrow the tables, and break the chaires, and do
other things, which an infinite army had not done. For some certain fiery,
Abul. q. 79. in cap. 21. Matthew.
and starry thing did glister out of his eyes, and the majesty of Deity did
shine in his face. Besides, not only his countenance, says Abulensis, but also
his voice might be terrible to them, as it was to those armed men, whom the
Jews sent to apprehend our Savior, who hearing only those words, Ego sum, I
am he, Joan. 18.
fell backward. Origin also attributes this casting out of the buyers and
sellers to a great miracle. Let us consider, says he, Origin c. 2. I^.
least that perchance it should seem to be out of square, that the son of
GOD taking little coards does make a whip to cast them out; yet one refuge is
left, the divine power of Jesus, that when he would he could stop the anger of
his enemies, although they were innumerable. And again, This present history,
says Origin, does in nothing show less power, then did those things, which
were done by him more miraculously: yea it is manifest, that this does show a
greater power, then the miracle, wherein water was turned into wine, for that
there a matter without life does subsist, but here the wits of so many
thousand men are made tame, or ouerruled.

88 Also no less impertinent is that argument, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings
from the separation of man, and wife: Besides that, says he, the said Apostle
permitted the separation of man, and wife, when the same should be necessary
for the salvation of the soul of either of them. And what then? I grant also,
that spiritual Pastors may do the like. For S. Paul did only permit, that if
the wife, or husband being converted to the faith cannot remain with the other
consort who is not converted, without offense, or injury to GOD, or if the
party, who is not converted, will needs depart from the Christian, it is
lawful also for the Christian to depart, and marry another: and the Church
also may in the like case permit, and ordain the same; for this is only to
declare the law of GOD. But that which Fitzherbert adds, that in the like
case the Church may ordain the same, not only for the benefit of the party
innocent, but also for the just punishment of the offender, is repugnant to the
common doctrine of Divines; for the offender in S. Paul's case was an infidel,
and not a Christian, who only, according to the common opinion of Divines, can
be punished by the Church; for what is it to me, says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5.
to judge of them that are without, for them that are without GOD will judge.
But if Mr. Fitzherb. meaning be, that the Church may permit, and ordain the
same concerning the separation of man, and wife, who both are Christians, which
the Apostle did permit, and ordain concerning the separation of man and wife,
whereof the one is become a Christian, and the other remains still an
infidel, this also is most untrue. For the Apostle did not only permit, that
the converted wife might depart from the company of her husband, who still
remained an infidel, and would not converse with her without injury to the
Creator, but also that she might dissolve the bond of matrimony, although by
carnal copulation it were consummated, and might marry another husband, but
the Church cannot dissolve the bond of matrimony, if it be once consummated,
betwixt man, and wife, who both are Christians, either for the punishment of
the offender, or for the benefit of the party innocent.

89 Nevertheless I do not deny, that when both the man, and wife are
Christians, and the one cannot live with the other without danger of being
drawn into heresy, or some other grievous sin, the Church has authority
to command the party that is in danger of being perverted to leave the
company of the other consort, and so by way of command to punish the offender,
but this is nothing to that, which Mr. Fitzherbert pretended to prove, to wit,
that the Church has power to inflict temporal punishments, and that I
contradicted my self in granting that the spiritual Superior might command
temporal punishments, but not inflict them. For if the wife, or husband in
this case of spiritual danger will still remain with the other consort against
the commandment of the Church, or rather against the law of GOD, and Nature,
which do forbid all spiritual danger, can the Church in this case either
dissolve the bond of matrimony, or deprive them of the right, which either of
them have to perform the acts of matrimony, or else deprive the offender of
his life, liberty, or goods, or only punish him by inflicting spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical censures? This is the maine difficulty, which is not so much
as mentioned in all the arguments, and authorities, which Mr. Fitzherbert here
has brought.

90 But now in the next paragraph it may seem, that he comes somewhat near
to the point of the difficulty. And in like manner, says he, page 106. nu. 20.
there is no doubt, but that the Church may punish an heretic by discharging
his children from their filial, and natural obligation to him, exempting them
from his authority, when it shall be necessary for their spiritual good,
Council. Tolet. 4. can. 59.
as it may appear by a Canon of the fourth Council of Toledo, which
ordains, that the baptized children of Jews shall be separated from their
parents, least they may be infected with their error. See Molina de Instit.
tract. 2. disp. 229.
And the like is to be said of the discharge of slaves, and bondmen from the
power, and authority of their Lords, when the said slaves are Catholics, and
their Lords Heretics: for in that case the Church may not only provide for
the soul of the Catholic, but also justly punish the heretical Lord, by
granting freedom to the slave. And for the same reason the Church has power
to discharge subjects from their bond of obedience, and allegiance to an
heretical Prince, when there is evident danger of their souls, and great
detriment to the Church; for the bond of allegiance to the Prince is not
greater then the obligation of the Son to the Father, the Wife to the
Husband, and the slave to his Lord.

91 But all this I did fully answer in my Appendix Part. 1. sec. 9.
to Suarez, of whom my Adversary has borrowed these arguments. For albeit
there be a natural obligation, whereby children are bound to honor, and
reverence their Parents, and from which without doubt the Church has not
authority to discharge the children of an heretic, Sot. l. 2. de Just. q. 3.
ar. 8. Valentia tom. 2. disp. 7. q. 4. punct. 6. Vasq. in 1am secundae tom. 2.
disp. 179 cap. 2. Suarez lib. 2. de Leg. cap. 14. Salas q. 94. s^. 9
unless my unlearned Adversary will grant, that the Church has power to
discharge one from that, to which he is otherwise bound by the law of Nature,
which is a Paradox in Divinity, as you may see in Sotus, Valentia, Vasquez,
Suarez, Salas, and others who treat of laws; in so much that S. Thomas and
his followers, (whose opinion Vasquez and many others do approve for the more
probable) do affirm, that God himself cannot dispense in the law of Nature,
or in any natural precept contained in the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, as
is this, to honor Father and Mother. Nevertheless, what other natural
obligation there is besides this, by which children are by the law of nature
bound to honor and reverence their Parents, and from which the Church as Mr.
Fitzherbert says, has authority to discharge the children of an heretic, I
think he himself does not well understand, but it seems he takes honor,
or reverence, and obedience, which is due to Parents for all one, which
nevertheless are very much different.

92 For all the power and authority, which Parents have now de facto, to
command their children (considering that both Parents and children are now de
facto, even in things belonging to the particular Family, or Oeconomie, parts
and members of the Civil Commonwealth) is civil, and proceeds from civil
authority, and may be enlarged, diminished, altered, yea, and quite taken away
by the temporal Commonwealth, or the supreme governor thereof: and all
obedience, which children now de facto, being parts and members of the Civil
Commonwealth do owe to their Parents, is civil and depends upon the laws
and ordinances of temporal Princes, by whom it may be enlarged, or restrained,
or quite taken away: And therefore as Molina cited by my Adversary, Molina
tract. 2. de Instit. disp. 237. Glossa ius autem Instit. de patr. potest.
Glossa ibidem. Moli. disp. 228.
and the Gloss upon the Civil law do well observe, the authority, which
Parents have over their children was introduced by the Civil law of the
Romans, from the time, as the Gloss says, of Romulus; the effects of which
fatherly power, authority, or command the Gloss does in brief, but Molina
more at large set down.

93 Wherefore the Reader may by the way observe, that there is a great
difference to be made betwixt the power and authority, which Parents now living
in civil Society have over their Children, and consequently the obedience of
Children answerable thereunto, and the power and authority which the Civil
Commonwealth, or the supreme temporal Prince have over subjects, because all
the authority and command, which Parents have over their children, proceeds
from the Civil Commonwealth, and is wholly depending thereon, and not from the
law of nature, and therefore the obedience which children owe to their Parents,
supposing them to be Parents, cannot properly be called natural, but civil
obedience, but the supreme authority, that the temporal Commonwealth has
over her subjects, supposing the aduniting of men in Civil Society, Bellar.
lib. 3. de Laicis cap. 6.
is even according to Card. Bellarmines doctrine, derived from the law of
nature. Yea, also it is very probable, and affirmed by diverse learned men, as I
have showed heretofore, In Append. co^tra D. Schulcken. calumnia 16. nu. 8.
that the supreme power and authority, which temporal Princes have over their
subjects, does also proceed from the law of nature, and prescript of natural
reason, although their title, or the designing of their persons to be Princes
is not derived from the law of nature, but from the Commonwealth it self: for
which cause we may truly and properly call that obedience which subjects owe
to the civil Commonwealth, or the Sovereign Prince thereof, not only
civil, but also natural obedience, or allegiance, and consequently the bond
thereof to be greater, then the obligation of the Son to his Father, the wife
to the Husband, and the slave to his Lord.

94 Now to Mr Fitzherberts argument, I answered in the said Appendix to Suarez,
that as the power and authority which Parents have over their children, is
granted to them by the civil Commonwealth, so also it cannot be taken away
from them but by Civil authority. And therefore those Canons either of Popes
or Councels, wherein children are exempted from the power, and authority,
which by the Civil law their Parents have over them, do either confirm that
which was first decreed by the Imperial law, or they are made with the
express or tacit consent of temporal Princes; or they do only declare the
law of God and nature, to wit, that children are to forsake the company of
their Parents, when by conuersing with them they are in danger to offend their
Creator. As when the Father is accounted to be dead ciuilly (either by some
great sin committed by him, as heresy, and treason, or otherwise, or if he
make profession in an approved Religion, whereby he is accounted dead to the
world) his Children are discharged by the Civil law from the power which he
had over them, as you may see in Molina, in the place whereto my Adversary
remitteth his reader. For it is a rule of the Civil law that natural and
civil death are equivalent concerning civil acts, as notes the Gloss upon
Leg. si decesserit. ff. qui satisdare. So likewise, if one be ordained a
Bishop, he is discharged thereby from the power and authority which his Father
has over him, Authent. de Sanct. Episcopis, cap. 3.. Si uero contigerit. And
in this particular case which Mr. Fitzherbert here urges, that decree of the
fourth Council of Toledo was made by the authority and consent of King
Sisennandus, as I have showed more at large in that Appendix against Suarez.
Besides the decree of that Council, if it be understood of Children which have
discretion, is only a declaration, as I there observed, of the law of God and
Nature, whereby the baptized children of Jews are freed not from the power or
right which Parents have over their Children, but only from their company, for
that the law of God and Nature forbids all conversation, whereby one may
incur probable danger of reuolting from the faith, or falling into any other
sin.

95 And the like is to be said of the discharge of slaves and bondmen from the
company of their Lords, when the said slaves are Catholics, and their Lords
heretics. For although these slaves, if they be in danger to be perverted, may
by the law of God and Nature absent themselus from the company of their Lords,
until the danger be past: as likewise a catholic wife may depart from the
company of her husband who is an heretic, if she be in danger of being
perverted by his company, and this the Church has power to declare, and
command them under pain of spiritual Censures to perform: Nevertheless the
Church has no authority to dissolve the bond of Matrimony, or to take away the
right or fatherly power, which heretical Parents have over their Children, or
to release the bond of slavery, by which Lords have a right or dominion over
their slaves. And therefore when the danger of being perverted is past, the
wife is bound to return to her Husband, the Child to his Father, and the
bondsman to his Lord, unless, by the authority of the temporal Prince, the
Child be freed, from the right and power which his Father had over him, and
the slave from his bondage. And therefore a fortiori, and by a stronger reason
the Church has not authority to discharge subjects from the bond of obedience,
and allegiance to an heretical Prince, both for that thisis a temporal and
civil punishment, which therefore to inflict does not belong to spiritual
power, and also for that temporal Princes being in temporals next under God,
cannot be temporally punished but by God alone, and also because this bond of
allegiance is natural, whereas the other obligations, by which a wife, a
child, a slave, are bound to obey her husband, his Father, his Lord, is
civil, and derived from the Civil Commonwealth. Nevertheless, I do not
deny that the Church by a declaratiue precept may command the subject to
forsake the company of his Prince, yea, and perchance to depart the land, if by
such staying he be in probable danger to be perverted, yet still he remains
subject to his Prince, and when this danger is past, he is bound by virtue of
his allegiance to return again at the commandment of his Prince.

96 And by this it is manifest how grossly Mr. Fitzherbert is deceived in
affirming so boldly, That the bond of allegiance to the Prince is not greater
then the obligation of the Son to the Father, the Wife to the Husband, and
the Slave to his Lord, Seeing that all the obedience which a Child owes to
his Father, a Wife to her Husband, and a Slave to his Lord, they now living in
civil Society, and being parts and members of the civil Commonwealth, is
civil, and depends upon the authority of the temporal Prince, who may
therefore extend, diminish, or quite dissolve the bond of obedience, although
not of honor, and reverence, which the Child owes to his Father, and
likewise the bond of obedience, although not of matrimony, by which the Wife is
bound to her Husband, and finally, the bond both of obedience, and of
servitude, by which a slave is bound to his Lord: But the bond of allegiance,
whereby subjects are bound to obey the civil commonwealth, as Cardinal
Bellarmine himself does not deny, is natural, and is due by the law of
nature, as the power and authority of the civil commonwealth over every part
and member thereof, is in his opinion de lege natura, due by the law of nature:
And therefore I do not well understand, how Cardinal Bellarmine can according
to his own grounds affirm, that the power, and authority of the civil
commonwealth over every particular member thereof, is de l^ge natura, due by
the law of nature, and consequently the obedience and allegiance of the subject
answerable thereunto, must also be de lege natura, commanded by the law of
nature, and withal maintain, that the Church can deprive an heretical
commonwealth of her civil power and authority and absolve the subjects from
their natural allegiance, unless he will grant, that the Church may absolve
from the law of nature.

97 Now by this which has been said, you may easily perceive the
insufficiency of all the rest, which Mr. Fitzherbert adds in this Chapter.
Now then, says he Page 107. nu. 11.
, in all these examples it is evident, that the Church disposes of that, which
is temporal to spiritual ends, and therefore my Adversary Widdrington has no
probability in the world to deny, that a spiritual Superior may punish
temporally, especially granting as he does, that he may command corporal, and
temporal things, so far forth as they serve the spiritual.

But contrariwise, as you have seen, it is evident, that by none of all those
examples he has proved that the Church, I do not say, commands, but
disposes of that which is temporal to spiritual ends, o^ has authority to
inflict any temporal punishment, or to deprive any man of any temporal right,
power, or authority for what end soever: And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert does
evidently discover his ignorance in affirming, that I have no probability in
the world to deny that a spiritual Superior may inflict temporal
punishments, or which is all one, may punish temporally, and to grant, as I
do, that he may command corporal, and temporal things so far forth, as
they serve the spiritual. For this distinction, which I have sufficiently
declared before, betwixt the directive or commanding, and the coerciue, or
punishing power both of the spiritual and also of the temporal commonwealth,
and the reason thereof a priori, which is taken from their proper acts and
objects (from which, according to the known principles of Philosophy, the
essence, unity, and distinction of every power is to be taken) does make
plain the whole difficulty, and quite overthrows the comparison which Mr.
Fitzherbert makes betwixt the spiritual directive, and the coerciue power, or
which is all one, betwixt the power of spiritual Pastors to command temporal
punishments for spiritual ends, and to inflict them: and which in natural
reason is so clear and perspicuous, that it cannot with any show of
probability be impugned, but the more it is sifted and impugned, the more it
appears plain and manifest, as all true doctrine does, as contrariwise
falsehood, the more it is examined, the more absurd it does still appear.

98 Besides that, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 107. nu. 21.
, Widdrington himself teaches also in his Apology Nu, 153.154. and 15^.
, that spiritual things may come to have the nature of temporal things, and
temporal things of spiritual, by accident, that is to say (as he himself
does explicate) Ratione peccati annexi. By reason of some sin annexed,
whereof he also gives this example, when Ecclesiastical persons do apply
their spiritual power to the hurt of the temporal state, or temporal men
abuse their power to the prejudice of the spiritual; in these cases he says,
the temporal power and state becomes subject to the spiritual, and the
spiritual to the temporal by reason of the injury done, and offense
committed, because temporal things do thereby come to have the quality of
spiritual things, and the spiritual also of temporal. Thus teaches he in
his Apology, and affirms the same in effect in his Theological Disputation.
Cap. 3. sec. 1. nu. 19.


99 That doctrine, which I taught in my Apology, is very true, and cannot with
any probability in the world be denied; neither has D. Schulckenius brought
any one probable proof to impugn the same, but with railing speeches,
slanderous imputations, and fraudulent cauills seeks to ouerbeare it, as I
have most clearly showed Calumnia 10.11.12.
in the Discovery of his Calumnies. For whereas I affirmed, that as the
spiritual power is not subject to the temporal per se but only per accidens,
by reason of virtue, or vice, which are the objects of the spiritual directive
power, and are oftentimes found in temporal actions, so the temporal power is
not subject per se to the spiritual, but only per accidens by reason of the
conseruing, or disturbing of temporal peace, which are the acts and objects of
the temporal directive power, and are sometimes found in spiritual actions,
as in unjust Excommunications, and Interdicts, when by them great tumults and
perturbations do in the commonwealth arise, and in the evil administration
of Sacraments, whereby death, or great corporal harm does ensue: And as the
spiritual Superior may for the evil administration of temporal things, as
they redound to the hurt of souls, punish all his subjects that shall offend
therein, with spiritual punishments, which only are the object of the
spiritual coerciue power, so the temporal Superior (abstracting from the
privileges of Princes, and the Canons of the Church, which do exempt Clergy
men from the coerciue power of Secular Magistrates) may for the evil
administration of spiritual things, as they redound to the perturbation of
temporal peace, punish all his Subjects that shall offend therein, with
temporal punishments, which only are the object of the temporal coerciue
power.

100 Now D. Schulckenius first affirms Page 208. and 292.
, that this doctrine is altogether intolerable, and cannot be affirmed but by
one who is given to a reprobate sense; But how false and intolerable a
slander this is, unconscionable, void of all learning, and which could not be
uttered but by one, who was wholly transported with some vehement passion, I
have sufficiently showed heretofore In Append. calumnia 11.
.

Secondly, he cauilleth at the similitude; for that, says he, as there is not
the same reason of the flesh and spirit, of the body and soul, of sense and
reason, of earth and heaven, of Beasts and Angels, of the sheep and the
Pastor, especially in the comparing of the subjection and dominion, so truly
there is not the same reason of the temporal and spiritual power.

101 But who sees not what a frivolous cavil this is? Who knows not, that
the body, and the soul, sense and reason, earth and heaven, Beasts and Angels,
Kings, and Popes do agree, and are like in somethings, and that in those
things wherein they agree, they may be compared together? What man of judgment
would disprooue him, that should say, that as the body is an imperfect
substance, and is referred to the soul, so the soul is an imperfect
substance, and is referred to the body: as sense is sometimes subject to
reason, so reason is sometimes subject, and captiuated by sense; as the Pope is
head of the Church, and of spiritual power, so the King is head of the civil
commonwealth, and of civil power: and to omit that saying of the ancient
Gloss Patricius est Pater Papae in temporalibus sicut Papa est Pater Patricij
in spiritualibus.
which Cardinal Bellarmine with small reverence to antiquity affirms Bell.
contra Barcla. c. 13. 16.
to be razed out of the Canon law for doting old age, who can justly mislike
the like assertion of the Gloss upon the twelfth Chapter of S. Mark, As the
King of France is subject to the Bishop of Paris in spiritualls, and his Lord
in temporalls, so Christ is the son of David according to the flesh, and his
Lord according to his Dietie? What man of learning can deny, that although
there be not the same reason of Christ, and David, of the Bishop of Paris and
the King of France, of the temporal commonwealth, and the spiritual
concerning the particular manner of subjection and dominion, yet in general
they may agree in this, that the one is superior and subject to the other, in
a diverse kind of superiority and subjection; and that although the King of
France be a sheep, and the Bishop of Paris a spiritual Pastor, and David be
a man, and Christ be God, and the spiritual commonwealth be more excellent
then the temporal, yet they may be compared one with the other in diverse
kinds of superiority and subjection. But in such childish arguments, and
which are not worth the answering, for want of better D. Schulckenius makes
great force.

102 Secondly, how untrue it is which this Doctor so boldly affirms, and
which is one of the chief pillars, whereon his doctrine concerning the Popes
power to depose Princes is supported, that the temporal power is per so
subject to the spiritual, and that the spiritual power, or spiritual
Pastors are not per accident, and by reason of unjust perturbing the public
peace subject to the temporal power, I have showed at large in the second
part, where I have convinced, that this natural subjection and subordination
of the temporal power to the spiritual, except only in perfection, and
excellency, is a mere fiction, and that to affirm, as this Doctor does,
Page 201.
that Bishops are exempted omni iure from the civil power is a most false, and
intolerable doctrine, and generally repugnant both to the doctrine of the
ancient Fathers expounding that place of the Apostle, Omnis anima etc. Let
every soul be subject to higher powers, and to the common opinion of the
Divines, and also the Jesuits, who affirm, that Clergy men are not de facto
exempted from the directive power of temporal Princes, and that they are bound
to observe their laws, not only by force of reason, but also by force, and
virtue of the law.

103 Now Mr. Fitzherbert in like manner being not able to prove, as you have
seen, this his fained natural subordination of the temporal commonwealth to
the spiritual, except only in perfection, worth, and excellency, as
spiritual things are more excellent then temporal, which is nothing to the
purpose, and denied by no man, and having brought not so much as one proof,
that the temporal power, and spiritual do make one body, but barely, and
briefly supposes the same, whereas above in the second part I have evidently
convinced the contrary, even according to Card. Bellarmines own grounds, yet
he fears not to impeach of absurdity and impiety this doctrine, which
denies the aforesaid subordination and union, thinking belike, silly man, that
his bare, I say, is sufficient to satisfy the understanding of the judicious
Reader. But I let pass, says he, Page 108. nu. 22.
Widdringtons absurd, and impious doctrine, destroying the natural
subordination of temporal things to spiritual, when they are joined in one
body, (which I have amply Supra. number. 2. 3. and seq.
proved even by the law of Nature) and I only wish to be observed, that albeit
we should grant it to be true (as it is most false) that spiritual, and
temporal things may take the nature, the one of the other equally, by reason
of some sin annexed, yet it would follow thereon, that the spiritual
Superior may punish even in temporal things, because according to this
doctrine, temporal things do become spiritual, when the consideration of
sin enters, whereby also they are made proper to the spiritual community,
and consequently may be used, and applied by the spiritual Superior to the
punishment of his subjects.

104 But first, to let pass, that Mr. Fitzherbert throughout this whole
Treatise has showed himself to be a very vain, absurd, ignorant, and
fowlemouthed man, and that here he has proved nothing else by the law of
Nature, then that spiritual things are to be preferred before temporal
things, as the more perfect before the less perfect, the soul before the
body, religion before policy, heaven before earth, and God before the world,
and consequently that the temporal commonwealth is in perfection, worth, and
excellency, but not in authority subject to the spiritual, which no man
calls in question, why does he add out of his own brain that word
[equally] except only to cavil, and to persuade his Reader, that I affirmed
that spiritual and temporal things may be compared together not only in
general, but also in every point in particular, and that betwixt them there is
no disparitie at all: seeing that I did not use that word [equally] but the
doctrine which I taught was this, that not only temporal things by reason of
some sin annexed may oftentimes take the nature of spiritual things, and
therefore may be forbidden by the spiritual power of the Church, which has
for the object of her directive power, virtue and vice in what actions so ever
either temporal, or spiritual they are to be found, and consequently may be
punished also by the Church with Ecclesiastical Censures, which only are the
object of her coerciue, or punishing power: but also spiritual things, by
reason of some unlawful disturbance of the public temporal peace annexed
unto them, may sometimes take the nature of temporal things, and therefore may
be forbidden by the temporal power of the Civil commonwealth, which has for
the object of her directive power the procuring, and maintaining of public
peace, and the shunning of all unlawful disturbance of this temporal peace,
in what actions soever either temporal or spiritual they are to be found; and
consequently may be also punished (if we abstract from the priueledges of
Princes, and Ecclesiastical Canons) with temporal punishments, which only are
the object of the temporal coerciue power. For what sensible man can deny,
that temporal Princes have authority, if we regard the nature and objects of
temporal power, to forbid all men whatsoever, that are subject to their
directive power, as also, according to the common doctrine of Divines, are
Clergy men, not to disturb wrongfully the public temporal peace by any
actions whatsoever, and to punish all them, that shall transgress their just
command, and are subject to their coerciue power, with temporal punishments:
and that when the temporal Prince forbids all unlawful poysonings, the
unlawful poisoning of men by spiritual actions, as by baptizing with poisoned
water is not contained under this command?

105 Secondly, it is not true, that granting once as I often do, that
temporal things may take the nature of spiritual things by reason of sin
annexed, it must follow thereon, as Mr. Fitzherbert concludes, that the
spiritual Superior may punish in temporal things, or, which he takes for
all one, may inflict temporal punishments: and the perspicuous reason hereof
I alleged before: for although temporal punishments do become spiritual
things, when the consideration of sin enters, for which they may be subject
to the directive power of the Church, which has for her object virtue, or
vice, and consequently they may be commanded, or forbidden by the spiritual
power of the Church, as it is directive, yet still they remain temporal
punishments which are only subject to the coerciue, or punishing power of
temporal Princes; and therefore cannot be used, or inflicted by the coerciue,
or punishing power of the Church, which has for her object spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical Censures, and not temporal punishments. Wherefore unless the
consideration of sin can make, which is impossible, temporal punishments to
be, I do not say, spiritual things, but spiritual punishments, it can never
make temporal punishments to be the object of the spiritual power, as it is
coerciue, although it makes them to be the object of the spiritual power, as
it is directive. But my Adversary by not distinguishing these two powers, and
their proper acts, and objects would blind the understanding of his unlearned
Reader with a confused reduction of temporal things to spiritual, which this
distinction of the directive, and coerciue power, and the proper acts, and
objects of either of them does make most plain, and manifest.

106 Also if temporal things, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 1. 8. nu 23. 24.
may be come spiritual by reason of sin annexed, why shall they not also
have a spiritual nature, and quality by the connection of some virtue, and
specially when they are applied, as I have said before, to a spiritual end as
to the service and glory of God, which is the end of all things spiritual, and
temporal: to which purpose it may be observed, Romans 12.
that S. Paul exhorted the Romans to exhibit their bodies, hostiam viuentem,
sanctam, Deo placentem, etc. a living sacrifice, holy, and pleasing God; giving
to understand, that our bodies, goods, and what temporal thing soever is
subject to our soul (being dedicated and applied to Gods service, and the good
of the soul) is sanctified thereby, and becomes spiritual: Whereupon it
follows that whenever a spiritual Superior punishes his temporal
subjects in their bodies, or goods for satisfaction of their sins, and for
the service of God, and the Church, and the good of souls, their corporal and
temporal punishments becomes spiritual by reason of the end, and the virtue
annexed, and consequently is most lawful and just even according to my
Adversary Widdringtons own doctrine.

107 Whereto I also add, that whereas Widdrington says, that every Superior
may punish his subjects with penalties proportionate to his authority, he must
needs grant the same in this case: for albeit temporal goods have no natural
proportion with spiritual things, yet they have a moral proportion therewith,
because they are not able instruments of good works, ^. Pet. 2.
in which respect S. Peter calls Alms, and other good works spirituales
Hostias, spiritual Sacrifices, albeit they consist in the use and employment
of temporal things; and therefore when temporal things are necessary to a
spiritual end, they may be disposed of by the Church, as proportionate to the
end whereto they are necessary.

108 No man makes any doubt, but that temporal things may become spiritual
not only by reason of sin, but also of virtue annexed, especially when they
are applied to a spiritual end, as to the service and glory of God, who is the
end of all things spiritual, and temporal: and therefore when one does punish
his body by fasting, discipline, hairecloath, or such like for the satisfaction
of his sins, and for the service of God, although they be corporal
punishments, yet they are virtuous actions, and in that regard spiritual
things, and consequently subject to the spiritual power of the Church as it is
directive: But from hence it does not follow, that these temporal punishments
by reason of virtue annexed do become spiritual punishments, but only
virtuous actions, and in that regard spiritual things; for still they remain
temporal punishments, and therefore not subject to the spiritual power of the
Church as it is coerciue, which has for her object only the using and
inflicting of Ecclesiastical, or spiritual, not temporal, or Civil
punishments. Wherefore a spiritual Superior has no authority by the
institution of Christ to punish in body or goods, for any end whatsoever by way
of constraint, his spiritual subjects, whether they be Clearkes, or Laymen
(whom Mr. Fitzherbert improperly calls his temporal Subjects, for although
they be temporal men, yet comparing them to spiritual Superiors, they are
spiritual, not temporal Subjects) for that the object of the spiritual
coerciue power are not temporal, or corporal, but only spiritual Censures,
or punishments: although he may, as I said, command such corporal punishments,
when they are necessary for the good of the soul, in which case they become
spiritual things, to wit, virtuous actions, which are the object of the
spiritual directive power. But the cause of Mr. Fitzherberts error is, for
that he does not distinguish betwixt spiritual or temporal things, and
spiritual or temporal punishments, and betwixt the acts, and objects of the
spiritual directive, and of the spiritual coerciue power: for although
temporal punishments by reason of virtue annexed do become spiritual things,
that is, virtuous actions, and therefore subject to the spiritual directive
power, yet they do not become spiritual Censures, and therefore not subject
to the spiritual power, as it is coerciue, but they still remain temporal
punishments, which are the object only of the temporal coerciue power.

109 Wherefore that also, which he adds, that every Superior may, according
to my doctrine, punish his Subject with penalties proportionate to his
authority, is very true; but he must still distinguish betwixt the directive,
and coerciue power, or authority, and in what manner temporal punishments are
proportionate to either of them. For because as well temporal as spiritual
punishments may be virtuous, or vicious actions, therefore they are
proportionate to the spiritual directive power, whose proper acts, and objects
are the commanding of virtue, and the forbidding of vice, but because not the
commanding either of temporal or spiritual punishments, but only the actual
punishing with Ecclesiastical censures, or the inflicting of spiritual
punishments, is the proper act, and object of the spiritual coerciue power,
therefore the inflicting only of spiritual punishments, and not of temporal
is proportionate to the spiritual coerciue power. From whence it evidently
follows, that the Church for a spiritual end may command temporal things,
but not dispose of temporal things: may command one to give Alms for the
satisfaction of his sins, but may not take away his purse from him to give
Alms for that end, may command one to punish and macerate his body, when it
rebelleth against the soul, but not inflict upon him corporal punishments for
the same end.

110 And by this also all the rest, which Mr. Fitzherbert adds in this
Chapter is clearly answered, and the manifest absurdity, which he would put
upon me, does manifestly fall upon himself. But now (says he) Page 109. nu.
25.26.27.
if together with all this we consider the natural subordination of temporal
things to spiritual (whereof I have sufficiently treated before Supra number. 2
3.4. and seq.
) Widdringtons absurdity will be most manifest, as well in denying, that the
spiritual Superior may punish his subject in his person, or temporal goods
for a spiritual end, as in affirming that the spiritual power may become
subject to the temporal, no less then the temporal to the spiritual, as
though there were no subordination or subjection of the one to the other;
wherein he peruerteth the whole course of Nature, no less then if he should
say that in some cases the soul may be subject to the body, heaven to earth,
religion to policy, Angels to men, and God to the world; whereby you may still
see what probable arguments, and answers he affords his Reader, for the
assurance and security of their consciences, See Preface number. 9. See also the
answer thereto, nu. 9. and seq.
and that he had great reason to protest (as you may remember I have signified
in the Preface) that his meaning is not to lay down any demonstrations or
infallible arguments for the proof or defense of his opinion.

111 For truly all that he says, does demonstrate nothing else, but the
weakness of his cause, and his own wilfulness, if not of malice, in
defending such an improbable and extrauagant Paradoxe as this is, which he
holds and defends contrary to the universal and continual custom of the
Church, grounded upon the holy Scriptures, the practice of the Apostles, and
the decrees of Popes, and Councels, and finally contrary to the whole course of
the Canon law; as it will evidently appear in the ensuing Chapters: and as
Cardinal Bellarmine against Barclay, and Doctor Schulckenius in his late
Apology for the Cardinal, and diverse others have sufficiently showed: and
amongst our learned Countrymen Mr. Doctor Weston has clearly and soundly
proved it in his book entitled Iuris Pontificij Sanctuarium, wherein he
battereth all the foundations of my Adversary Widdringtons doctrine, and fully
confuteth him, as well in all other points, as in this, touching the Popes
power to punish temporally, which he Quest. 17.18.19.20.21. and 22.
does learnedly and amply demonstrate, as well by the holy Scriptures, as by
many examples of the Churches practice, to wit, by diverse kind of divorces, by
the relaxation of debts, exemption of children from the power of their parents,
the abrogation of temporal and Civil laws, the dissolution of contracts, and
bargains, and finally, by the imposition of temporal penalties, almost
usual, and ordinary in the practice of the Church, as he shows very
particularly by the Ecclesiastical Canons. I forbear for breuities sake to
prosecute these points in particular; only I shall have just occasion to treat
now and then of the infliction of temporal penalties, in answer of my
Adversaries pertinent objections out of the Canons, and Canonists, which I hope
may suffice, for as much as I have undertaken to perform in this brief Reply.

112 But all that my Adversary here obiecteth I have already sufficiently
confuted. And first I have clearly convinced, that there is no natural
subordination of the temporal power to the spiritual, except in nobility, and
therefore that neither the spiritual power, speaking properly, and in
abstracto, is subject to the temporal, nor the temporal to the spiritual,
except, as I said, in worth, excellency and nobility, wherein the spiritual
does excel, but not in authority, wherein they are both supreme, unless my
Adversaries will grant, that temporal Princes are not supreme, and absolute in
temporal matters, and spiritual Pastors are not supreme and absolute in
spiritual causes, which is a Paradox in true Divinity. Secondly, I have proved
also most plainly, that not only temporal Princes, being parts and members of
the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, are subject to spiritual
Pastors in spiritual things, but also spiritual Pastors, being parts and
members of the temporal commonwealth, are subject to temporal Princes in all
temporal things, except wherein the law of God, or man has exempted them: and
to affirm the contrary were to pervert the whole course of Nature, no less
then if one should say, that members are not subject to the whole body, and to
the head thereof, the body and soul to man, heaven and earth to the whole
world, religion, policy, men, Angels, and the whole world to God. Whereby you
still see what improbable arguments and answers my Adversary affoordeth his
Readers for the assurance and security of their consciences in a matter
belonging to their obedience due to God, and Caesar, and which, forsooth, he
will needs have to be a point of faith, to the proof whereof it is not
sufficient to bring probable arguments, but conuincing demonstrations, as
contrariwise it suffices to bring probable arguments, and probable answers to
prove any doctrine not to be certain, and of faith, as I have showed more
amply in the answer to his Preface, whereto here he remitteth his Reader.

113 For truly all the effectual proofs, and clear demonstrations, which
hitherto he has brought, are only to demonstrate both the weakness of his
cause, and also his fraud and ignorance, in dissembling the true state of the
question in almost every particular difficulty, and confounding his Readers
understanding with ambiguous words, and sentences, which being once explained,
and the ambiguitie of them laid open, do forthwith discover either his want
of learning, or sincerity, as you may see almost in every Chapter. Neither is
this his new coined Catholic faith concerning the Popes power to depose
Princes, agreeable to the universal, and continual custom of the Catholic
Church; both for that this custom, I do not say, of the Church, but of some
Popes to depose Princes, began first by Pope Gregory the seventh, Onuphr. lib.
4. de varia creat. Romans Pont.
who was the first Pope, says Onuphrius, that contrary to the custom of his
Ancestors deposed the Emperor: A thing unheard of before that age: and also
for that it has been ever even unto this day contradicted by learned
Catholics; and therefore neither in regard of time, or persons can it be
called universal: neither can it be convinced either by the holy Scriptures,
the practice of the Apostles, the decrees of Popes, or Counsels, or any one
constitution of the Canon law. What Cardinal Bellarmine has proved against D.
Barclay, has been answered by Mr. John Barclay, to whose book neither Card.
Bellarmine, not any other for him can in my judgment make a sufficient Reply;
and what D. Schulckenius has proved against me, you have seen partly in this
Treatise, and partly in the Discovery of his calumnies, wherein I have
clearly showed, all the arguments he brings to accuse me, and my doctrine of
heresy, to be slanderous, and himself to be void of all Christian
sincerity, modesty, justice, and charity.

114 And as for D. Weston, because his zeal is so furious, his railing so
intemperate, and his arguments of so little force, and for that very few of our
Countrymen, for ought I can learn, are greatly moved, but most men much
scandalized with his uncharitable, unlearned, and immodest Reply, howsoever Mr.
Fitzherbert expecting be like the same from him does so exceedingly extol it,
I think it neither needful, nor expedient, (unless I should answer him in
his railing humor, according to the advice of the wise man, respondea^ stulto
iuxto stultitiam suam, which some uncharitable spirits, who seek all means to
disgrace me, would quickly reprehend in me) to make him any formal answer,
especially seeing that all the arguments he has scraped together, (the chief
heads whereof are here in general mentioned by my Adversary, to wit, the
holy Scriptures, and many examples of the Churches practice, as diverse kind of
divorces, relaxation of debts, exemption of children from the power of their
Parents, the abrogation of temporal, and Civil laws, the dissolution of
contracts, and bargains the imposition of temporal penalties, and the right
which spiritual Pastors have, to have corporal maintenance, and to take
water to baptize children) have been by me already either in particular, or
in general sufficiently answered.

115 For first his arguments taken from the authority of the holy Scriptures I
have answered in particular: and secondly all his other proofs, and examples,
which are grounded upon the practice of the Church, and the Canons of Popes, or
Counsels, are to be understood either of the disposing of spiritual things
(as of the conditions, and impediments of Matrimony, which is not a mere
civil contract, but also a Sacrament, and spiritual contract representing the
union and conjunction of Christ our Savior with the mystical body of his
Church: and therefore because it is both a Sacrament, and also a civil
contract, it is now the more common opinion of Divines, See Zanche. lib. 7. de
matrim. disp. 3.
that Secular Princes, if we regard the nature of civil power, have also
authority to ordain the conditions, and impediments of Matrimony as it is a
civil contract: And although the Popes have now reserved to themselves all
causes belonging to Matrimony, in so much that Christian Princes cannot now
lawfully dispose of the conditions, and impediments of Matrimony, yet Petrus a
Soto is of opinion, Petr. Sot. lec. 4 de matrim versus finem.
that the Pope cannot deprive Princes of this their civil authority, but that
they of their own accord, and moved by piety have yielded to this
reservation of the Pope, in regard that marriage is not only a Civil
contract, but also a Sacrament of the Church) or else they are so to be
understood, that they did confirm the Imperial, and Civil laws, or that
they were made by the authority and express, or tacit consent of temporal
Princes, or that they did declare the law of GOD, and nature, by which we are
commanded to avoid all probable danger of sin; or that they did only
command, and enjoin, not inflict temporal penalties; or finally, that they
did only argue a private right to some temporal thing, but not by way of
authority, or superiority to dispose of the same, as not only Priests, but
also private lay men may lawfully take another man's water to baptize a child
in extreme necessity, and spiritual Pastors have a right to be corporally
relieved by them, to whom they minister spiritual things, as Saint Paul
proves, 1. Corinthians. 9. and in the end concludes, So also our Lord ordained
for them that preach the Gospel to live of the Gospel.

116 And can any judicious man persuade himself, that if Mr. Fitzherbert had
thought in very deed these arguments of D. Weston, to be such conuincing
proofs, and demonstrations, as in words he boasts, he would for breuities
sake have forborne to urge some of them in particular, seeing that he did not
forbear for breuities sake to take the greatest part of six or seven chapters
of this his Reply, which contains only seventeen Chapters in all, out of Fa
Lessius, masked under D. Singletons name, concerning the Canon of the Council
of Lateran; and by that decree touching the exemption of Children, which he
has singled out of the rest (for that, as I imagine, it was also greatly urged
by Fa. Suarez) to which above I have fully answered, you may easily conjecture,
what kind of demonstrations are contained in the rest. Wherefore to conclude
this Chapter, if the Reader will but briefly reduce to some syllogisticall
form, or method, all the Rhetorical flourish, which Mr. Fitzherbert has
here made concerning the law of Nature, it will presently appear, that he
has proved nothing else by the law of Nature, then that spiritual things are
more perfect, excellent, and worthy then temporal, and that the temporal
commonwealth is in perfection, worth, and nobility subject, and subordinate
to the spiritual, but that Religious Priests have authority to punish the
Civil Commonwealth or supreme governors thereof, especially with temporal
punishments, he has no way proved by the law of Nature, but the flat contrary
I have most clearly convinced, for that in the law of Nature the Civil
Commonwealth it self had the supreme authority to dispose of all things,
not only concerning State, but also Religion.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein certain places of the old and New Testament are explained: D.
Schulckenius Reply to the answer I made to those words, Whatsoever thou shall
loose, etc. and Cardinal Bellarmines second reason, and Fa. Parsons answer to
the Earl of Salisbury grounded thereon, and other arguments brought by M.
Fitzherbert from the examples of Ananias and Saphyra, and of others, and from
the practice of the Church, and from the person of man, are clearly confuted.

1. THE seventh Chapter Mr. Fitzherbert begins in this manner. Now let us
see, says he, Page 112.
how my Adversary Widdrington proceeds, who having given his reason (though
so weak as you have heard) why he thinks it to be against reason, that a
spiritual Superior should punish temporally, undertakes to answer one place
only alleged by me out of the old law, and four out of the new, omitting to
say any thing else in particular to all the other places, and arguments, which
I urged out of the law of God, and Nature.

2 But first it is not true, as Mr. Fitzherbert says, that I gave any reason
at all, why I thought it to be against reason, that a spiritual Superior
should punish temporally, for I never thought this to be against natural
reason. That which I affirmed only was, that true reason does teach, that
every Superior has power to punish his subject with some punishment
proportionate to his authority, to wit, by depriving him of those goods, which
are proper to that Community, whereof he is Superior; but that any other
Superior besides the supreme Governor of the civil commonwealth has power
to punish his subjects with death, mayming, or deprivation of temporal goods,
it cannot be deduced from the necessary rule, or prescript of true reason;
This was that I said: Now what man of learning that knows the difference
betwixt contra naturam, secundu^ naturam, praeter and supra naturam, that is,
against nature, according to nature, besides and above nature, would affirm,
that because I think, it cannot be deduced from the law of Nature, or the
prescript of true natural reason, as Mr. Fitzherbert pretended to prove, that
a spiritual Superior may punish temporally, therefore I must think, that it
is against Nature that a spiritual Superior may punish temporally; as though
this proposition, It cannot be proved by the law of Nature, that a spiritual
Superior may punish temporally, does according to his logic necessarily
infer, that therefore it is against the law of Nature that a spiritual
Superior may punish temporally. For I make no doubt, but that Christ our
Savior might if it had pleased him, have given authority, as I am fully
persuaded he has not, to spiritual Pastors to punish temporally, and so in
this case he had granted nothing against the law of Nature, or against the
prescript of true natural reason, but only above Nature, and the light of
natural reason, yet in this case it could not be proved by the law of
Nature, but only by the positive institution, and law of Christ, that
spiritual Pastors have authority to punish temporally. Wherefore the law of
Nature has neither commanded, nor forbidden, has neither given, nor denied to
spiritual Pastors authority to punish temporally, but if they have any such
authority, it must be given them by the positive grant of GOD, or man, and
consequently it is neither against, nor according, but above, or besides the
law of Nature, that spiritual Pastors should have any such authority to punish
temporally.

3 Secondly, the reason why I omitted to say something in particular to every
part of his idle Discourse in this Reply of his, but answered only some
certain arguments drawn from those six general heads, to wit, from the old
law, and the new, the law of Nature, and nations, the Canon, and the Civil
law, was not for that I could not answer particularly every one of them, as
the Reader may see by this Treatise, wherein I have answered his whole Reply,
and every part thereof; but the reason was, for that neither the brevity of
such a short Admonition, nor the Printer, who had then finished the whole
Disputation, would hardly permit me to make so long a Discourse, as there I
made, and therefore I chose out of purpose certain arguments drawn from each
one of those six several heads, which I thought to be the strongest, and
which being answered, the judicious Reader might easily perceive how all the
rest might in the like manner be fully satisfied.

4 Now you shall see what he obiecteth against that which I there did answer.
And first he sets down my words, which are these: Fifthly, he that will
diligently consider the under written sentences of S. Augustine, and Cardinal
Bellarmine will presently perceive what a forcible proof can be deduced from
that of Deuteronomie the 17. and such like places of the Old Testament, which
is a figure of the new. Excommunication, Bellar. lib. 2. de Ecclesia cap. 6. S.
August. q. 39. in Deuteronomy.
says Cardinal Bellarmine, has that place in the Church which the punishment
of death had in the Old Testament, and which the Commonwealth has in
temporals. And Saint Augustine says, that Excommunication does this now in the
Church, which killing or death did then in the Old Testament. In which place
he compares that which was said in the 24. of Deuteronomy, He shall be
slain, and thou shall take away the evil from amidst thee, with that which
the Apostle says 1 Corinthians. 5. Auferte malum ex vobis ipsis, Take away evil
from among your selves. S. August. lib. 2. de fide, and operibus cap. 2.
And Saint Augustine teaches in another place, That the material sword which
Moses and Phinees used in the Old Testament, was a figure of the degradations
and excommunications which are to be used in the new law, seeing that in the
discipline of the Church, says S. Augustine, the visible sword shall cease.

5 To this my answer Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth Page 113. nu. 2.
, in this manner. Thus says my Adversary Widdrington, wherein he rather
fortifieth and strengthens our cause, then weakeneth or hurts it any way.
For if you note well what Widdrington says, and infers, he proves nothing
else, but that the penalty of temporal or corporal death is not now inflicted
in the new Testament, as it was in the old, and that the same is now turned to
the spiritual death of the soul by Excommunication, which we deny not. But
will he infer hereupon, that therefore the Church cannot now inflict other
temporal penalties? So should he make a very absurd inference, especially
seeing that the penalty of Excommunication, which, as he himself granted,
supplyeth the place of corporal death, includes a temporal punishment by the
separation of the delinquent from the conversation of men, and from diverse
other temporal commodities, as I have showed in the last Chapter Number. 18.
.

6 But truly I cannot but smile to see the vanity of this man, who though he
see himself altogether vanquished, yet he boasts that he is victorious, and
although he clearly perceives, yea, and almost expressly confesses, that
his argument taken from the words of Deuteronomie the 17. Chapter to be quite
overthrown, yet he braggeth that his cause is not thereby weakened or hurt
any way, but rather fortified, and strengthened. For if you note well what he
grants, to wit, That the penalty of corporal death is not now inflicted in
the new Testament as it was in the old, and that the same is now turned to the
spiritual death of the soul by excommunication, you cannot but clearly see
that his argument taken from Deuteronomy the 17. Chapter, which only text in
particular I undertook to answer, and which speaks only of corporal
death, is quite overthrown: and yet, forsooth, I do hereby rather fortify
and strengthen, then weaken or hurt any way his cause: By which you may
plainly perceive what credit is to be given to the rest of his vainglorious
brags, seeing that in this so manifest an overthrow of his argument, taken from
the words of Deuteronomie the 17. he is not ashamed to boast that I have rather
fortified and strengthened then weakened or hurt any way his cause. But will
Widdrington, says he, infer hereupon, that therefore the Church cannot now
inflict other temporal penalties? So should he make a very absurd inference,
especially, seeing that the penalty of Excommunication includes a temporal
punishment, etc. The inference that Widdrington makes is, that from the words
of Deuteronomy the 17. which speak only of corporal death, Mr. Fitzherbert
has brought no good argument; for that according to the doctrine of Saint
Augustine, and Cardinal Bellarmine, which he himself also will not deny,
The penalty of corporal death is now in the new law turned to the death of the
soul by Excommunication. Neither is it true, that Excommunication, being of it
own nature a separation from the Ecclesiastical conversation of the faithful,
does of it own nature include any temporal punishment at all, as also I have
showed in the last Chapter, albeit I do not deny that the Church has now by
way of command, annexed to Excommunication some temporal penalties, but not by
way of inflicting them, as I declared in that place, for I ever granted that
the Church has power to command, enjoin, or impose temporal punishments, but
not to inflict them: yet these to command, and to inflict, to impose, and to
dispose, my Adversary does commonly confound.

7 Besides that, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 114. numer. 4.5.
it is evident, that in the old Testament even the temporal Princes
themselves were punished by deprivation of their right to their temporal
states, and dominions as 1 Reg. 16.
Saul by Samuel, Athalia 4 Reg. 11.
by Ioiada, Ioram 4 Reg. 9.
by one of the children of the Prophets, who being sent by Elizeus anointed
Iehu King of Israel, to the end he might destroy Iesabel, and all the house of
Achab. Also Ozias was not only corporally expelled out of the temple by the
Priests, and confined by their sentence to live privately is his own house but
(according to the opinion and doctrine of S. Chrysostom) he ought also to have
been wholly deprived of the government, as I have signified before Cap. 5. nu.
21. and 22.
at large. And therefore seeing he tells us how the penalty of corporal
death (which was ordained in the old Testament) is now fulfilled spiritually
in the new; let him also tell us, to what spiritual punishment the deprivation
of Princes right to their states, and other temporal penalties then usual,
are now converted, to the end that we may see the correspondence of the figure
to the verity in matters of punishment and in the mean time let him
acknowledge, according to his own doctrine, and instance here produced, that
the Church may punish temporally, seeing it may excommunicate and consequently
deprive men of many temporal commodities.

8 But this also is very untrue, that the Priests of the old Testament had
authority to punish temporal Princes, by depriving them of their right to
their temporal states, and dominions, as I amply proved above in the 5.
Chapter. Neither do these examples, brought here by Mr. Fitzherbert, prove
any such thing. For to the examples of King Ozias and Athalia, I have answered
above at large. And as for the other two, besides that Samuel, Elias, and
Elizeus, were not Priests, it is manifest, that what they did concerning the
anointing, or deposing of any King, they did it not by their own authority,
but only as Prophets, and special messengers sent by God to that purpose. How
long (says God to Samuel) 1 Reg. 16.
do thou mourn Saul, whom I have rejected, that he rule not over Israel?
Fill thy horn with oil, and come, that I may send thee to Isai the
Bethleemite, for I have provided me a King among his Sons. And again, Go,
(says God to 3 Reg. 19.
Elias) and return into thy way by the desert of Damascus, and when thou art
come thither, thou shall anoint Hazael King over Syria, and Iehu the Son of
Namsi thou shall anoint King over Israel, and Elizeus the Son of Saphat,
thou shall annoint Prophet for thee. And therefore he that was sent by Elizeus
to anoint Iehu, was commanded to speak in the person of God, and not of
Elizeus; And holding (says 4 Reg. 9.
Elizeus to him that was sent) the little box of oil, thou shall power upon
his head, and shall say, Thus says our Lord, I have anointed thee King over
Israel. Now, what man of judgment would make this inference, that because in
the old law some Prophets, who were no Priests, did by the express
commandment of God, make, anoint, or depose Kings, therefore the Priests in
the new law have ordinary power and authority to do the same. Belike Mr.
Fitzherbert, will approve also this argument, that because Elias was commanded
by God to anoint not only Iehu King over Israel, but also Hazael King over
Syria, therefore the Pope has authority to make, and depose, not only
Christian, but also Pagan Kings.

9 Wherefore that demand, which is here made by my Adversary, to what
spiritual punishment the deprivation of Princes right to their States, and
other temporal penalties then usual, are now converted, to the end we may
see the correspondence of the figure to the verity in matters of punishment,
is frivolous; both for that the Priests of the old law had no authority to
deprive Kings of their temporal States, and Dominions, or to inflict temporal
punishments; and also albeit they had such an authority, nevertheless it could
not be proved from thence, by deducing an argument from the figure to the
verity, that therefore the Priests of the new law must have authority to do
the like, but things far more noble, and excellent, for that the verity must
be of a more high and excellent order, then the figure, as in the fifth Chapter
I proved more at large. And therefore as in the old law all the figures,
promises, and punishments were temporal, so in the new law the verity,
promises, and punishments, which correspond thereunto, must be spiritual, not
temporal, for otherwise the figure should be the same with the verity, and
not of an higher nature, and order then the verity: So that temporal life,
must correspond to spiritual life, temporal kingdoms to spiritual
kingdoms, temporal goods to spiritual goods, temporal promises, and rewards
to spiritual promises, and rewards, and temporal punishments to spiritual
punishments; all which spiritual punishments are contained in Excommunication
Mayor, and Minor, and in other Ecclesiastical Censures and punishments. And to
that, which he adds in the end, that I must acknowledge according to my own
doctrine, that the Church may punish temporally, seeing that she may
excommunicate, I have already fully Cap.
answered, and denied his consequence, for that the Church of Christ neither by
Excommunication, nor by any other way, has by the institution of Christ
authority to inflict temporal punishments, but only to punish temporally by
way of command, which no man denies. And thus much concerning the old law.

10 Now to the authorities, which Mr. Fitzherbert brought out of the new
Testament, I answered thus: Sixthly, those places of the new Testament,
Quodcunque solueris super terram, etc. Matthew. 16.
Whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, etc. and Pasce oues meas, Joan. 21.
Feed my sheep, as also the reason which Fa. Parsons brings, to wit, that
otherwise the Ecclesiastical commonwealth should be imperfect, and not
sufficient for it self, are explicated by me elsewhere. And that corporal
killing of Ananias, and Saphira, and the visible delivering of the fornicatour
to Satan, are to be referred to the grace of miracles. Neither will this
Author say, as I imagine, that the Pope has power to kill wicked men, and
malefactors with the word of his mouth.

11 To this my answer Mr. Fitzherbert replieth in the same order: And first to
my answer to those two places, Whatsoever thou shall loose, etc. and Feed my
sheep, which I made in my Apology Apolog. nu. 35. and seq. and nu. 203. and
seq.
, whereunto I remitted the Reader, he replieth thus: Page 115. nu. 6.7.8.
That which Widdrington says in his Apology concerning these two texts
all^dged out of the Gospel, is no other but to prove, that Christ gave
thereby to S. Peter a spiritual authority only, which we willingly grant, as
D. Adolphus Schulckenius Adolph. Schulck. in Apolog. c. 4. Respondeo p. 136
in his answer for Cardinal Bellarmine has declared sufficiently, and told
my Adversary Widdrington withal, how vainly he has labored with a long
discourse, and many idle words to prove that, which neither the Cardinal, nor
any other Catholic will deny.

12 For we willingly grant, says Schulckenius, that the Popes power is
formally spiritual, though virtually it is also temporal, extending it self
to temporal things so far forth, as they are subordinate to the spiritual,
and the necessity of the Church shall require. So he. Ibidem.
and afterward he also explicateth the same in these words; Nam and animus
noster spiritus est, etc. For our soul, says he, is a spirit, and has a
spiritual power, and yet it does not only thereby govern the body which is
subject unto it, but does also chastise it with corporal punishments, as
watching, hairecloth, fasting, and whipping. And therefore if Bellarmine did
say, that the Pope does judge the faults of Princes, and upon their desert
deprive them sometimes of their government by a temporal power, his Adversary
Widdrington should say somewhat to the purpose; but now seeing that Bellarmine
says, that the Pope uses a spiritual power, when he depriueth Princes of
their States, for spiritual and Ecclesiastical crimes (such as heresies and
Schisms are) his Adversary Widdrington does idly beat the air, etc. for he
should have proved, that a supreme spiritual power cannot extend it self to
dispose of temporal things, as they are referred to spiritual things. Thus
says Schulckenius.

13 And thereof my Adversary Widdrington might have taken notice, if it had
pleased him, when he referred me, and his Readers to his Apology for answer
to those places. For albeit he may perhaps pretend that he had not seen
Schulckenius his Apology for the Cardinal, before he had ended his
Theological Disputation; yet it is evident, that he had seen, and read it
before he wrote his Admonition to the Reader, wherein he writes against me.
For he not only makes mention therein of the Apology of Schulckenius, but
also carpeth at him for some things that he handles; and therefore if he had
meant sincerely, he would not have remitted us to his own Apology for this
point, without some confutation of Schulckenius his Answer thereto; I mean of
so much as concerns this matter. For otherwise he may multiply books, and
write of this controversy as long as he lives, and all to no purpose, if he
will still stand upon his first grounds, and dissemble the answers that are
made thereto: and therefore as he remitteth me to his Apology, so I remit him
also to the answer of Schulckenius, which I have partly laid down here, and
may be seen more at large in him. And this shall suffice for this point.

14 But truly it is intolerable, that these men should so shamefully both
abuse me, and delude their Reader, I do not say, only in dissembling the
answer I made to their argument, but in plainly corrupting the words, and
manifest sense thereof, in which manner they may multiply books, and make
Replies with ease, but with shame enough. For it is too too apparently untrue,
that I labored in that place to prove nothing else, as those men falsely
affirm, but that which neither Cardinal Bellarmine, nor any other Catholic
will deny, to wit, that Christ gave to S. Peter a spiritual authority only;
(although it be well known, that the common opinion of the Canonists does deny
the same, who contend that Christ gave thereby to S. Peter not only
spiritual, but also temporal authority, and made him thereby not only a
spiritual, but also a temporal Monarch, and therefore Mr. Fitzherbert is
grossly mistaken, in saying so boldly, that neither Cardinal Bellarmine, nor
any other Catholic will deny that Christ gave thereby to S. Peter a spiritual
authority only.) For I did not contend in that place about the authority
which was given to Saint Peter, to bind and loose (which Cardinal Bellarmine
takes to be all one, with to feed his sheep) whether it was temporal, or
spiritual, or both, as the Canonists will have it, but about the acts and
effects of that power and authority, and I affirm that the effects of that
power which was given to S. Peter to bind, and loose, to wit, the bindings,
and loosings themselves, were spiritual, and not temporal bindings and
loosings. For this was my answer in that place Apolog. ^ 35.36.
.

15 And although it be generally said by Christ our Savior, whatsoever thou
shall bind, etc. yet without doubt neither is that word [whatsoeuer] to be
taken in it whole latitude or generality, or, as the Logicians say, with a
complete distribution, but with some limitatio^, or accommodate distribution,
neither did Christ our Savior speak of every binding, but only of a certain,
and determinate binding. And by the words that go before, to wit [the keys of
the kingdom of heauen] and by those that follow [and in caelis, also in
heauen] it is plain enough, that this bond, which the Ecclesiastical power
may by the institution of Christ, bind and loose, is not a temporal ^^nd, but
that it appertains to a heavenly and spiritual binding. Whereupon the
Interlineall Gloss, expounding those words Matthew. 18. What things soever you
shall bind, with the bond, says he, of Anathema. Which also Franciscus
Suarez, a most famous Divine, of the Society of Jesus does expressly affirm:
But that, which is added, says he, Tom. ^. disp. 1. sec. 2. nu. 5.
Erit ligatum and in caelo, Shall be bound also in heaven, does sufficiently
declare, this power not to be natural, but supernatural, and that bond (mark
this word, bond) to be spiritual, and of a superior, or higher order. And
Ioannes Parisiensis, To that, says he, In Tract. de potest. Regia, and Papa^
c. 15.
which is secondly objected. Whatsoever you shall loose, etc. I answer
according to Chrysostom, and Rabanus, that by this no other power is
understood to be given, but spiritual, to wit, (observe that which follows)
to absolve from the bond of sins. For it were foolish to understand, that by
this is given authority to absolve from the bond of debts. Thus I answered in
my Apology.

16 Consider now. Good Reader, with what face, or conscience these men can
affirm, that I have labored hour even with sweat, and vainly spent many
words only to prove by those two authorities of holy Scripture, that the
Pontifical power is spiritually which neither Card. Bellarmine, nor they do
deny, but willingly grant: whereas I do not contend that the power to bind,
and loose, which was given to S. Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, is
spiritual and not temporal, but that the bond, which the Ecclesiastical
power is to bind, and loose, is a spiritual, and not a temporal bond: which
if my Adversary hence will grant, it must needs follow, that corporal, and
temporal punishments,as watching, haire-cloath; fasting, whipping,
imprisonment, depriving of corporal life, or temporal goods, all which are
corporal and temporal bonds, and punishments, cannot be inflicted by that
Ecclesiastical power, which Christ gave to S. Peter, and the other Apostles.
And therefore with what safety our English Catholics can adventure their
souls, and whole estates upon these men, 1. Tim. 4.
who have, according to the Apostles saying, such wounded, seared, or
canteriate consciences, and in their public writings do so grossly, and
shamefully corrupt the words, and meaning of their Adversary in a matter of
such importance, as is their obedience due to God, and Caesar, I remit to the
consideration of any prudent man.

17 The soul is a spirit, says D. Schulckenius related here by my
Adversary, and has a spiritual power, yet it does also chastise the body
(but in that manner as I declared in the second part) with corporal
punishments, as watching, hairecloath, fasting, and whipping. And what then?
will they therefore infer, that because watching, wearing of hairecloath,
fasting, and whipping are commanded by the spiritual power of the foul,
therefore they are spiritual, and not corporal actions and punishments? No
man makes any doubt, but that the power, whereby God created the world, the
Angel moved the water, Joan. 5.
Ananias, and Saphira were stricken dead, Acts 5.
was a spiritual power, yet no man can deny, that the creation of the world,
and the moving of the water were corporal actions, and the sudden putting to
death of Ananias, and Saphira were also corporal actions, and punishments. So
likewise it cannot be denied, that the binding of men with fetters, be it done
by God, Angels, or men, that is, by a spiritual, or temporal power is a
corporal binding, and the depriving of any man of his temporal goods,
liberty, or life, let it be done by a spiritual, or temporal power, is still
a temporal, and not a spiritual punishment.

18 If therefore these men, as they make a show in words, will in very deed
and sincerely grant what I affirmed, and proved in that place, they must needs
confess, that the Pope, by virtue of that commission, which Christ gave to
Saint Peter, and the other Apostles to bind and loose, has no authority to
imprison men, to bind them with corporal chains, to absolve, or loose them
from their temporal bonds, debts, or allegiance, for that these are temporal,
and not spiritual bindings, and loosings, for what end, or by what power
soever they be done. Neither did I contend in that place, that the power and
authority of the Apostles to bind and loose was not temporal, but spiritual,
but only that the bindings, and loosings, which were the effects of that
power, were only spiritual, and not temporal bindings, and loosings. See
above Cap. 5 sec. 3. nu. 10. and sec.
more of these bonds, to which the Ecclesiastical power to bind, and loose,
is by the ancient Fathers limited and restrained. And hereby the Reader may
easily perceive, that I had no great reason to confute in that brief
Admonition D. Schulckenius his Reply, for as much as concerns this point, but
it was sufficient to remit the Reader to my aforesaid answer, seeing that D.
Schulckenius said nothing at all against it, but cunningly flyed from the
effects of the Apostles power to bind, and loose, which I there proved to be
only spiritual, and not temporal bonds, to the power it self to bind and
loose, whereof I did not intend to dispute in that place, knowing well, that
although the effects of that power had been, as they were not, temporal
bindings, and loosings, yet the power it self to bind, and loose might for
diverse reasons be called, as Divines do call it, a spiritual, and not
formally, a temporal, or civil power, although, as I said above, Cap. nu. 7^.
See also beneath cap. 12. nu. 61. and seq.
I think this question betwixt the Divines and Canonists, whether it be a
spiritual, or a temporal power, to be more verbal and of words, then real,
and of the thing it self. And this may suffice for this point.

19 Now before we come to examine Fa. Parsons reason, it will not be amiss to
set down the substance of that I answered to Cardinal Bellarmines second
argument, which is the same in effect with that of Fa. Parsons, and also to
examine what D. Schulckenius replieth to the same. To prove therefore, that
the Church has power to dispose of temporal things, and to inflict temporal
punishments, Cardinal Bellarmine brings this argument. Bell. l. 5. de Romans
Pont. c. 7.
The Ecclesiastical commonwealth ought to be perfect, and sufficient for it
self in order to her end, for such are all well established Commonwealths,
therefore she ought to have all power necessary to the attaining of her end,
but power to use, and to dispose of temporalls is necessary to the spiritual
end, because otherwise wicked Princes might without punishment favor
heretics, and overthrow religion, therefore she has also this power.

20 To this argument I answered in my Apology, Nu. 176. 177. and seq.
first by, distinguishing that equivocal proposition, The Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth ought to be perfect, and to have all power sufficient and
necessary to the attaining of her end, which is the eternal salvation of
souls. For first the sense of that proposition may be, that the Church has
such a sufficient power to obtain her end, which is the salvation of souls,
that she can actually bring all souls to Paradise, and can take away all the
obstacles, and lets, which can any wise hinder the salvation of souls, which
sense those words of Cardinal Bellarmine In Resp. ad Tract. Gersonii de
valid. Excom. in consid. 11.
may have, which affirm, that the Pope can effect all that, which is necessary
to bring souls to Paradise, and that he can remove all the impedements, which
the world, or the Devil withal their forces and sleights can oppose: And this
sense is plainly false, and very well impugned by Paulus Venetus in his Italian
Apology, Fol. 57. col^^n. 2.
both for that the Pope has no sufficient means to save an infant in the
mothers womb, whom she cannot bring forth alive (because it is not lawful to
cut the mothers womb, that the child may be baptized) or to save him, who
being in mortal sin, is fallen mad, until he return to his wits again,
which nevertheless is not in the Popes power: Also the Pope has no power over
the internal motions of the mind, which are very necessary to salvation: Also
for that there should neither be Turks, nor Infidels, nor Heretics, nor so
much as evil Christians without the Popes great fault, if he could effect all
that, which is necessary to bring souls to Paradise, and could remove all
those things, which do hinder the obtaining of eternal salvation.

21 Now concerning this first part of the distinction, D. Schulckenius does not
deny, that the aforesaid proposition, The Ecclesiastical commonwealth ought
to be perfect, etc. is in this sense false, but he denies, that Cardinal
Bellarmine understood it in this sense, and he only reprehendeth me for
omitting to set down what Cardinal Bellarmine answered to the objections of
Paulus Venetus. I answer, says he, Cap. 8. ad nu. 177. p. 350.
My Adversary Widdrington had done well, if when he related Paulus Venetus
his arguments and unnecessary subtilties, he had also adjoined Cardinal
Bellarmines answer: For so both he had done the Reader a pleasure, and also
had eased us of the pains to answer. But it is well, that Paulus Venetus his
arguments are not such, that we must labor much to answer them. For that
which Bellarmine said, that the Pope can effect all that, which is necessary
to bring souls to Paradise, and can remove all the impediments, etc. is to be
understood in this sense, that the Popes power is not limited, or restrained,
as it is in men of inferior Orders, but it is most ample, and most great, and
therefore the whole and full Ecclesiastical power to give Sacraments,
Indulgences, Benefices, to make laws, Decrees, Canons, to dispense in Oaths,
laws, vows, to examine, judge, punish, and that in every Diocese, Province,
Kingdom: It is to be added that these things are to be understood, for as much
as concerns the Popes part, and in a matter fit to receive his action. And
therefore no marvel if the Pope cannot bring to salvation souls obstinate in
heresy, or in sins especially internal. For it is their own fault, not the
Popes, seeing that he does apply remedies of themselves effectual, if they
themselves would admit them. So also it is no marvel if the Pope cannot apply
a remedy to an infant being in danger in the mothers womb, because such an
infant is not capable of the Popes help. And the same reason is of a man, who
when he has committed a mortal sin falls mad, etc.

22 But first, although when I published my Apology, I had seen Cardinal
Bellarmines Reply to Paulus Venetus, as I did not, and therefore could not set
down what the Cardinal answered to his objection, yet I must then also have
affirmed, as also I do now, that whatsoever Cardinal Bellarmines meaning was,
yet his words are so general and without any limitation, or declaration, that
they may very well be understood in the aforesaid sense. The Pope, says he,
can effect all that, which is necessary to bring souls to Paradise, and can
remove all the impediments, which the world, and the Devil with all their
forces and sleights can oppose. Seeing therefore that the Devil can by his
power cast a man being in mortal sin into phrencie, by which he is hindered
from attaining to eternal salvation, and can hinder an infant from being
baptized by causing the mother not to deliver it alive, and also can cause
sundry inward motions in the soul of man: and because Cardinal Bellarmines
words are so general, and without any limitation, or declaration, The Pope,
says he, can remove all the impediments to salvation which the Devil with
all his force and slight can oppose, it is plain, that they may very well be
so understood, that the Pope can also remove the aforesaid impediments, for
that those impediments are included in all impediments, as a particular in a
universal, and therefore to take away all occasion of error it was not
unnecessary to declare in what sense those words being so general might be
true, or false.

23 Besides, although the Popes power be not so limited and restrained, as it
is in men of inferior Orders, but it is most ample, most great, and full in a
certain measure and degree, yet this Doctor cannot be ignorant, that, there
is a great controversy among learned Catholics concerning the amplitude,
greatness, and fullness of the Popes power as well in spirituals, as in
temporals. For the Canonists do hold, that he has formally, properly and
directly both temporal and spiritual power, and that he is not only a
supreme spiritual Pastor, but also a temporal Monarch: but this Doctor with
some other Divines do maintain, that he has formally, properly, and directly
no temporal power, but only spiritual, yet by this spiritual power of his,
they say he can dispose of all things, and inflict all kind of punishments, as
well temporal as spiritual, as if he had formally, and directly temporal
power, and therefore they will not call this power of the Pope to dispose of
all temporalls formally and directly, but vertually and indirectly temporal
power, or a supreme power to dispose of all temporalls in order to spiritual
good. Other Divines, and Lawyers, whom I cited above in the first part, do
contend, that the Pope by the institution of Christ has neither formally, nor
virtually, neither directly, nor indirectly any temporal power, or authority to
dispose of temporal things, or to inflict temporal punishments, but only
spiritual power, by which he may dispose, or dispense in spiritual things,
and inflict spiritual punishments, and also command, enjoin, or impose
temporal things, as in them may be found virtue or vice, which are the object
of the spiritual directive power, but no way dispose of temporal things, or
inflict temporal or civil punishments, for that these are the acts and
objects only of civil power.

24 Neither also can this Doctor be ignorant, that there is a great
controversy betwixt the Divines of Rome, and of Paris, about the amplitude,
greatness, and fullness of the Popes spiritual power: insomuch that Iacobus
Almainus, a famous Doctor of Paris does affirm, Almain de author. Eccles.
cap. 3.
that there is so great a controversy among Doctors concerning the plenitude,
or fullness of Ecclesiastical power, and to what things it is extended, that
in this matter there are few things secure, or without doubt: so that, as,
William Occam says, it would be very necessary in these times, that wise men
being compelled by Oaths, and horrible threatenings to speak the truth should
declare, what things do belong to the plenitude of Ecclesiastical power, and
much more of Papal authority, which Almaine with the other Divines of Paris
do make inferior to the power of the Church, or of a General Council,
Gerson de potest Eccles. consid. 12.
which does represent the Church: for as John Gerson, and the said Almaine do
affirm, deceitful flattery has now overmuch extended and amplified the
greatness, and fullness of Papal authority.

25 Moreover, although I will not deny that the Pope has authority to make
laws and Canons, yet it is not certain that he has authority to make laws,
and Canons to bind a general Council, for that the Doctors of Paris do
affirm, that a general Council has authority to make laws and Canons to
bind the Pope according to the express definitions of the Councels of
Constance and Basil. Conc. Constable. sess. 5.
The Council does ordain, define, decree, and determine, says the Council
of Constance, as follows. And first it does declare that the said Council
being gathered in the holy Ghost, making a general Council, and representing
the Catholic Church, has immediately from Christ authority, which every man
of what state or dignity soever, although it be papal, is bound to obey in
those things which belong to faith, and to the rooting out of the said Schism,
and to the reforming of the said Church in the head and members. Also it does
declare that every man of whatsoever condition, state or dignity he be,
although it be Papal, that shall obstinately contemn to obey the commaundes,
statutes, decrees, or precepts of this sacred Synod, being lawfully gathered
concerning the aforesaid, or appertaining to any of them, made, or to be made,
unless he shall repent, let him be subject to condign penance, and be
deservedly punished, by having also recourse (if it shall be needful) to other
helps of law: Which decrees of the Council of Constance, the Council also of
Basil, which was lawfully called by Pope Eugenius the 4. and which at that
time when these decrees were made, Council. Basil. sess. 2.
was not accounted a Schismatic, but a lawful and Oecumenicall Council,
does in the same express words confirm.

26 Also, although I will not deny that the Pope has authority to dispense in
vows, and oaths, yet it is not certain that he has authority to dispense
in all vows, and in all oaths: for that many Divines do with S. Thomas
maintain that he has not power to dispense in the solemn vow of religious
chastity, or in those oaths which are made to confirm any thing, which we
are otherwise bound to perform by the law of God, or nature: because the
opinion of the Thomists is, that the Pope does dispense in oaths only by
declaring that the thing which is confirmed by oath, is not now a sufficient
matter of an oath, as I have declared more at large elsewhere. Disputat.
Theolog. c. 6. sec. 6. nu. 8. and in Resp Apol. nu. 148. 149.
Lastly, although I do willingly grant that the Pope has authority to
punish, yet it is not certain that he has authority to punish with all kind
of punishments, for that many learned Catholics do hold, as you may see more
at large above in the first part, that Ecclesiastical power is by the
institution of Christ restrained only to Ecclesiastical Censures, and cannot
inflict temporal or civil punishments, as death, banishment, imprisonment,
depriving of temporal goods, etc. And thus much concerning the first part of
the aforesaid distinction; now touching the second part.

27 Secondly therefore, the meaning of Cardinal Bellarmines aforesaid
proposition [The Ecclesiastical commonwealth ought to be perfect, and to
have all power sufficient and necessary, etc.] may be, that the Church has
all power sufficient, and necessary in order to her end, which is the
salvation of souls, in respect of the power it self and not in respect also
of all those things which are in any wise necessary, that the power may
actually work her effect. As the power, for example of the Sun to give
light, may be understood sufficient, either in respect of the power it self
to give light, or in respect also of those things, which do any way concur
to the actual giving of light and which things, if they be wanting, will
hinder the giving of light, of which sort are a proportionate distance, a
capable, and well disposed subject. And although the Sun has not sufficient,
power to remove all those impediments, which may hinder her actual giving of
light, for so it should draw the body that is to be enlightened within a
sufficient distance, and make it also diaphanum, clear, or perspicuous, which
to do is not is the power of the Sun nevertheless what man can therefore
deny, that the Sun has a perfect power, and of it self sufficient to
enlighten?

28 And in this sense the aforesaid antecedent proposition is true; For the
Christian commonwealth, or the Church of Christ has a perfect, and sufficient
power for it self to bring souls to the kingdom of heaven, for as much as
belongs to the power it self, which nevertheless does suppose the subject
to be otherwise apt, and well disposed. For she has power granted her by
Christ to give grace, whereby we may come to the kingdom of heaven, to Infants
by the Sacrament of Baptism, and to men of discretion also by other
Sacraments, but especially of Penance, by which the Priest, as a Minister of
Christ by virtue of the keys, which he has received from Christ absolueth
from sins, and gives grace, nevertheless this power to work actually her
effect, supposes certain necessary dispositions on the behalf of the
persons who are to receive the Sacraments, as well in Infants, as in men of
discretion, which dispositions the Church has not always power to procure.
Also, besides this power, which the Divines call of Order, the Church has also
power of Jurisdiction; for she has authority to preach the word of GOD, to
correct sinners, to make laws, and to punish the transgressors with
Ecclesiastical, or spiritual punishments: For as the Church, and the
Ecclesiastical power is spiritual, so also she ought to have means
proportionate to such an end. We grant therefore the antecedent proposition
in this sense, which we have now declared, but we deny, etc.

29 Now this Doctor although he grants all this, which I have said to be
true, yet he cannot forbear to take certain idle exceptions against the same.
I answer, says he, Page 353. ad nu. 179. and seq.
although all this do make little or nothing to the soluing of Cardinal
Bellarmines argument, but to the enlarging of the volume of his book they make
much, yet I would relate what he has said, for that I saw certain things to
be noted therein. But whether they make little or nothing to solue Cardinal
Bellarmines argument, you shall see anon; this is a usual trick of this
Doctor, especially when my answer, or argument is of greatest force, that he
knows not well what to reply thereunto, then with some idle, or despitefull
words to shift it of, as that it is spoken either to disgrace Cardinal
Bellarmine, or to make the Sea Apostolic odious, and dreadful to Christian
Princes, or that it is nothing to the purpose, but to enlarge my book, and to
make it seem to be of a competent volume, and such like trifling toies, which
do argue rather want of matter, and a spirit of contradiction, then a true
desire to examine sincerely this important, and difficult controversy; and
which with as great facility, and far greater reason may be retorted back
upon himself, for his often repeating of the same sentences, and which are
nothing to the purpose, as that of S. Leo, Ecclesiastica lenitas refugit
cruentas vltiones, Ecclesiastical lenity does shun cruel punishments,
which is nothing to the soluing of my argument, and spending many words to
prove that the Pope has power to command, and enjoin temporal penalties,
whereof I made no question, and consuming twenty eight whole pages to prove,
that S. Peter, and his Successors are the heads of the Church, which no
Catholic does deny, and which make little, or nothing to the impugning of my
doctrine, but to the enlarging the volume of his book they make much.

30 Now you shall see what goodly observations this Doctor has found out in
this part of my answer. First, says he, Page 353.
it is to be observed, that my Adversary Widdrington, I know not with what
cunning has transferred the question from the Ecclesiastical commonwealth,
as it is distinguished from the Commonwealth of Christian Laikes, to the
Christian Commonwealth, or the Church of Christ, as it is distinguished from
the company of Pagans, and infidels. For in Bellarmines argument the
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth is taken in the first, and not in the later
sense: But Widdrington answers of the Christian commonwealth, as it
comprehends Churchmen, and Laymen. Let he himself see with what
simplicity he did it, who otherwise does seem so scrupulously to shun
equivocations.

31 But first it is to be observed, with what cunning, or ignorance this
Doctor affirms, that I have transferred the question from the
Ecclesiastical commonwealth, as it is distinguished from the Commonwealth of
Christian Laikes, to the Christian commonwealth, or Church of Christ, as it is
distinguished from the company of Pagans, and infidels: See Apolog. nu. 176.
180. and seq.
seeing that I expressly spoke of the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, as it is a
spiritual commonwealth, and as it has spiritual power; Now with what color
of probability can this Doctor infer from any one word of mine, that I ever
said, that Ecclesiastical or spiritual power does reside in Laymen? or
that when I treat of the spiritual power of the Church, or of the
Ecclesiastical commonwealth, I take the Church, as it comprehends
Churchmen, and Laymen? True it is, that the Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
Commonwealth, kingdom, or Church of Christ, when we speak properly, and
generally, is taken both by Cardinal Bellarmine, and my self, as it
comprehends Cleargie-men, and Laymen, that is, as it contains both
spiritual power, and spiritual subjection, spiritual Pastors, and
spiritual subjects; and therefore Cardinal Bellarmine before in his first
reason affirmed, that Kings, and Bishops, Cleargie-men, and Laymen do not
make two commonwealths, but one only, that is, one Church. As likewise a
temporal commonwealth, or kingdom, when we speak properly, and generally,
is taken as it comprehends both temporal Kings, and temporal subjects, that
is, as it contains both civil power, and civil subjection; For what man of
judgment, speaking generally of a temporal kingdom, by the name of the
kingdom understands only the King himself, but when he speaks of the
temporal power of a kingdom, as I expressly spoke here of the spiritual
power of the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, no judicious man can understand,
that he speaks of subjects, wherein no temporal power does reside. Let this
Doctor therefore see himself with what simplicity he said, that I
comprehended here in this answer under the name of the Ecclesiastical
commonwealth Cleargie-men, and Laymen, when I treated of the Ecclesiastical,
or spiritual power of the Church.

32 Secondly, it is to be observed, says this Doctor, Page 354.
that which Widdrington here disputes of an apt, and well disposed subject,
that the Ecclesiastical power may therein work her effect, to be true, and
that Cardinal Bellarmine has the same in his answer to the objections of
Paulus Venetus: and yet that Widdrington after his accustomed uprightness
commended the argument of Paulus Venetus, and dissembled Card. Bellarmines
answer.

Here you see, that this Doctor grants the distinction which I made to be
true, and that Card. Bellarmine approoueth the same: but that which he adds,
that I dissembled Cardinal Bellarmines answer is very untrue; for I never saw
his answer; and although I had seen it, and so might have commended his
meaning, and his declaration, yet truly I should not have commended his words
being spoken so generally, and without any limitation, or declaration, seeing
that they may imply, that the Pope can remove all impediments whatsoever,
which either the world, or the Devil with all their forces, and sleights can
oppose, which proposition may at the first sight be taken, as I have known
diverse learned men understand it, in that first sense, which before I showed to
be false, and therefore what great fault, trow you, could it be for me to
declare the meaning of those words more plainly? seeing that a proposition may
without doubt sometimes be false, yea, and as learned Divines are of opinion,
may be also heretical, according to that vulgar maxim, S. Tho. secunda
secundae q. 11. ar. 2. Magister in 4. did. 13.
which Saint Thomas, and the Master of the sentences attribute to Saint
Hierome, ex verbis inordinate prolatis incurritur haeresis, haeresie is
incurred by words inordinately uttered, although he, by whom they were
spoken, had no badde meaning.

33 Thirdly, says this Doctor, Ibid.
it is to be observed, that Widdrington, whiles he declares what punishments
the Church can inflict upon her subjects that shall offend, makes mention
only of spiritual punishments, as though the Church cannot inflict also
temporal punishments, whereof see what we have said above cap. 4. upon the
40.41. and 42. numbers.

True it is, that the maine scope of my Apology was no other, then to prove
it to be probable, that the spiritual power of the Church, or Ecclesiastical
Commonwealth does not extend to the inflicting of temporal, or civil
punishments, but only of Ecclesiastical, or spiritual Censures. Neither has
this Doctor in those places, to which he remitteth his Reader, proved any
other thing, then that the Church by virtue of her spiritual power may
command, enjoin, and impose temporal punishments, and by the temporal
authority given her by the grant, and consent of temporal Princes may also
inflict them upon inferior persons, which I never denied. And so in this
kingdom we see by experience, that albeit Bishops have ever had authority to
excommunicate disobedient persons, and to enjoin temporal penalties, as a
thing proper to their spiritual power, yet to imprison them they procure a
Writ out of the temporal Court de excommunicato capiendo, for apprehending an
excommunicated person.

34 Lastly, says this Doctor, Ibid. page 354
it is to be observed, that whiles Widdrington declares the power of
Jurisdiction, not without mystery, he has said nothing of the power to
absolve from oaths, and vows, and other things of that kind.

True it is, that although I did not in that place expressly affirm, as also I
did not deny, that the Ecclesiastical power does not extend to the absoluing
from oaths, and vows, yet of set purpose, and for some mystery I did then
omit to make mention of them: and the mystery was this, for that there is a
great controversy among learned Divines, especially betwixt the Thomists, and
their opposites; (wherewith I thought it neither necessary, nor expedient at
that time to intermeddle) not only in what manner the spiritual power of the
Church may absolve from oaths, and vows, but also whether the Church has any
authority at all to absolve from all Oaths, and all vows, seeing that, as
afterward Praefat. ad Resp. Apolog. nu. 58. and in Resp. nu. 148.
I declared, S. Thomas, and his followers do contend, that the Pope has no
authority to absolve from the solemn vow of religious chastity, and also
that he cannot absolve from any vow, or oath by releasing the bond, and
obligation to perform that, which is once sworn or vowed, for this were to
absolve from the law of Nature, which commands us to perform that which we
have once lawfully sworn, or vowed, but only by declaring and interpreting,
that the matter, which was sworn or vowed, is not now in this particular case
a sufficient matter to be sworn, or vowed: From which doctrine it clearly
follows, that the Pope has no authority to absolve from the oath of true
temporal allegiance, unless he also have authority, as he has not, to
declare that true temporal allegiance is not in that particular case lawful,
or necessary, and consequently, not a sufficient matter to be sworn, whereas
true temporal allegiance is always not only lawful, but also necessary, and
commanded by the law of God and nature. And thus much concerning this Doctors
observations.

35 Now you shall see how well he confuteth the answer, which I gave to
Cardinal Bellarmines argument, supposing the aforesaid distinction. Thus
therefore I began to answer it: Wherefore we grant the antecedent proposition
in the sense, which we have now declared. But we deny that the power to use
and to dispose of the temporals of all Christians is necessary to the
spiritual end: for such a power is not proportionate to that end, and therefore
there is no likelihood, that for the spiritual end such a temporal power, or,
which is all one, such a power to dispose of temporals, was by Christ our
Savior given to his Church, which is a spiritual and not temporal
commonwealth.

I answer, says this Doctor Number. 355.
, whether the power to use and to dispose of the temporals of all Christians be
necessary to the Church for her end, is the principal question, which is in
controversy, Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, Widdrington denies. But whiles
he denies, he is so destitute of Patrons and Doctors, that also Ioannes
Parisiensis, whom in his book he more often cites for his opinion, then any
other, is flat against him, etc.

36 But first, it is not true, that the principal question which is in
controversy, is whether the power to dispose of the temporals of all
christians be necessary to the Church for her end, which is the salvation of
souls; but the principal question and controversy is whether Christ our
Savior gave authority to his Church, as it is a spiritual Kingdom, and
consists only of spiritual power to dispose of all temporals: And Cardinal
Bellarmine to prove that Christ gave unto his Church this power, brings this
for a reason, because this power to dispose of all temporals is necessary to
her spiritual end, to wit, the salvation of souls, which reason, I say, is
not true, and from thence it would clearly follow, that our Savior was of
necessity tied to give to spiritual Pastors authority to depose temporal
Princes, and to dispose of all temporals, which no man, I think that has his
wits about him, will affirm. And how did the Church of Christ, think you,
dispose of temporals by way of authority, when she was persecuted by the Pagan,
and Arrian Emperors? for then, if at any time, a power to dispose of
temporals, should have been necessary to the salvation of souls. Whereupon
Cardinal Bellarmine himself affirms, That it is not absolutely necessary to
resist the common enemy, Bell. l. 1. de Con^l. ca. 10.
as is the Turk. For if the Church could be conversant under the most cruel
persecutions of Nero, Domitian, Decius, Diocletian, why can she not also under
the persecution of the Turks?

37 Secondly, neither is it true, that I am destitute of Patrons and Doctors,
who maintain that the Pope by his spiritual power cannot dispose of
temporals, or inflict temporal punishments, as I have showed above in the
first part: where also I proved that Ioannes Parisiensis does no way favor,
but flatly contradict Card. Bellarmines doctrine: and also the very ashes of
this Doctors book, if they could speak, would give sufficient testimony
against him, that this my doctrine is not altogether destitute of Patrons and
Doctors. But whereas this Doctor should have proved that the power to
dispose of all temporals is necessary to the salvation of souls, which
Cardinal Bellarmine affirmed, and I denied, he flies from this reason to the
authority of Doctors, who affirm that the Pope has power to dispose of
temporals, which is to run up and down in a circle from intrinsecall grounds
to extrinsecall, from reason to authority, and contrariwise, and never to
persist in any one medium, or argument. Wherefore, whenever any Author, or my
self do seem to affirm, or suppose, that temporal things, and the disposing
of them, are in some cases necessary to the general good of the Church, and to
the salvation of souls; it is not to be understood of any absolute necessity,
but only of some great conuenience, or vtility, for which in common speech we
oftentimes take necessity, as it is well known to every Logician, who has but
read the beginning of Porphyries Introduction, Cum necessarium sit Chysaori,
etc. Whereas it is necessary o Chysaori, etc. In which case of necessity, or
great vtility, temporal things are by the institution of Christ, to be
disposed of to a spiritual end by the temporal and civil power of Christian
Princes, and not by the spiritual power, as he has distinguished the acts,
offices and functions thereof from civil authority.

38 But thou will say, says this Doctor, Page 355.
that this power to dispose of temporals, is not proportionate to the end of
the Ecclesisticall power, which is spiritual. I answer first, says he, that
this power to dispose of temporals in the Pope is not formally temporal, but
formally spiritual, and eminently temporal; and therefore it is very well
proportionate to a spiritual end.

But this is to declare the self same thing by it self; for to have vertually
or eminently a temporal power, is nothing else then to have a power to dispose
of temporal things, or to do all that which the temporal power can do, which
is the maine point which I utterly deny, and consequently affirm, that
(according to the institution of Christ, who has left distinguished, the acts,
functions, and properties of the temporal power or Common-weath, from them of
the spiritual power or Church of Christ) to dispose of temporal things, and
to inflict temporal punishments, which are temporal and civil acts and
punishments, are not by the institution of Christ proportionate to the
spiritual power, and to the end thereof, as it is by him distinguished from the
civil power, and the end, objects, and acts thereof. For, as Christ our Savior
has instituted his Church a spiritual Kingdom, or Commonwealth, and
distinguished her directive and coerciue power, and the acts, and objects
thereof, from the acts and objects of the civil power, or Commonwealth; so
also has he assigned spiritual punishments, as means proportionate to her
coerciue or punishing power, as temporal punishments are proportionate to the
temporal coerciue power.

39 Wherefore this Doctor, knowing right well, that I have always denied the
Church of Christ, to have either formally or eminently temporal power gives a
second answer. I answer secondly, says he, Page 356.
that temporal goods, and the power it self over temporal goods, have
indeed no natural proportion with spiritual, but they have a very great
moral proportion, which for the present is sufficient. For temporal goods are
spiritual instruments of good works, in which respect S. Peter calls Alms,
and other good works, 1 Pet. 2.
although corporal, spirituales hostias, spiritual sacrifices. Wherefore as
the spirit in man disposes of corporal actions, as Alms, fastings,
chastising of the flesh, and such like as they are necessary to the health of
the soul, (he might add also to the health of the body) so the Prince of the
Church may in order to a spiritual end (and if his similitude were good, may
likewise in order to a temporal end) dispose of temporal goods, which for the
same reason that they are necessary to the obtaining of that end, for the same
reason they are said to be proportionate to the same end.

40 But this answer I have confuted above partly in the second part, Par. 2.
cap. 8.
where I have showed that this similitude of the soul and body does manifestly
impugn their doctrine, and that the soul does not dispose of any temporal
action* as Alms, fasting, whipping, and such like, but only by way of
command, and also not without the active concurrance of some corporal organ,
and besides that if the similitude were good, the Pope should have power, not
only for spiritual good, but also for temporal, to depose temporal Princes,
to dispose of temporals, and to inflict temporal punishments; and partly above
in the former Chapter, Number. 108.
where Mr. Fitzherbert has taken this answer verbatim from this Doctor. For
temporal goods to have a moral proportion with spiritual, and to be
spiritual instruments of good or bad works, is nothing else then that they
may concur to virtuous or vicious actions, and be the object of virtue, or
vice, which therefore may be commanded or forbidden by the spiritual power as
it is directive, which has for her object virtue and vice: But no morrall
proportion, reference, or relation can alter the nature of temporal goods, or
puishments, or make temporal goods to become spiritual goods, and temporal
punishments to become spiritual punishments: and therefore no such moral
proportion is sufficient to cause temporal goods to be disposed, or temporal
punishments to be inflicted by the spiritual power as it is coerciue, whose
acts and objects are only the disposing of spiritual goods, and the
inflicting of spiritual punishments for a spiritual end.

41 Lastly, to the consequence of Cardinal Bellarmines argument, whereby he
labored to prove, that the power to use, and dispose of temporals is
necessary to the spiritual end, I answered thus Apolog. nu. 183.
by denying his consequence. Neither does it follow from thence, as Cardinal
Bellarmine does ill, and contrary to himself infer, that otherwise wicked
Princes may without punishment nourish heretics, and overthrow religion. For
the Church has, as we said, power to punish them not indeed with civil or
temporal, but with Ecclesiastical or spiritual punishments, unless perhaps
Ecclesiastical Censures are not worthy to be reckoned among punishments,
whereas they are accounted by all men to be most sharp and dreadful
punishments. Wherefore Cardinal Bellarmine himself does in express words
affirm, Lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 6.
that there is no greater punishment, which can be inflicted by the Church,
then is Excommunition: and again, Lib. 3. de Laic. c. 22. Aug. l. 1. contra
Aduersar. leg. and proph. c. 17.
that Excommunication is a greater punishment then corporal death: and to this
purpose he cites Saint Augustine, affirming, that it is more horrible to be
delivered over to Satan by Excommunication, then to be stricken with the
sword, to be consumed by fire, or to be devoured by wild beasts.

42 Now to this answer, D. Schulckenius replieth in this manner. Page 357.
I do not see, says he, in what thing Cardinal Bellarmine does according to
Widdringtons judgment contradict himself. That Excommunication is greater
then all temporal punishments Bellarmine did write, which is most true, and no
man unless he be impious, or mad can deny it: but not therefore did he ill,
or contrary to himself write, that it is necessary for the Church to have
power to dispose of temporals, least that the Prince may without punishment
nourish heretics, and overthrow religion. For many are more afraid of
temporal punishments, then of Excommunication, although this be without
comparison the greater; as boys are more afraid of the rod, then of loosing
their inheritance. And this is the cause why the Council of Lateran cap. 3.
did command, that Princes who nourish heretics should first be
excommunicated; and afterward, if this remedy does not avail, that the
subjects be absolved from their oath of allegiance, and their territories be
delivered over to others to be possessed by them. What will Widdrington say
here? that a Council of the whole world was ignorant of the greatness of
Excommunication, or that she did contradict her self, when she wrote those
things. Truly prudent men will condemn Widdrington of temerity, and
ignorance, and will not in any wise reprehend the Council. Besides, as the
Council of Lateran, against those who are ignorant of the greatness of
Excommunication does command, that the favorers of heretics be first
excommunicated, and afterward deprived of their temporal dominions: so
contrariwise the Council of Trent. sess. 25. cap. 3. against those, who do
know the greatness of Excommunication commands first, that malefactors be
punished with temporal punishments, with imprisonment, exile, pecuniary
mulcts, and at last, if these do not avail, to be stricken with the dart of
Excommunication. Neither does the Council of Trent contradict the Council of
Lateran, or contradicts her self, or knows not the force of
Excommunication; But my Adversary Widdrington, who contemns the decrees of so
great Councels, and yet professes himself to be a Catholic, is by his words
repugnant to his profession.

43 Observe now, good Reader, the fraud and falsehood of this man. And first he
does not see, forsooth, how Cardinal Bellarmine contradicts himself in
yielding the reason, why it is necessary, that the Church have power to dispose
of temporals, to wit, for that otherwise wicked Princes might without
punishment nourish heretics, and overthrow religion, as though he were so
blind, that he cannot see light at-noone days. For what a more manifest
contradiction can there be, then this: that Excommunication is the greatest
punishment that may be, and yet that a Prince, who is excommunicated for
favoring heretics, does favor heretics without being punished? But many
men, says this Doctor, are more afraid of lesser punishments then of
greater, as of corporal punishments more then of Excommunication, as children
are more afraid to be whipped, then to be disinherited. And what then? Can any
man of understanding infer from hence, that therefore a Prince, who is
excommunicated for favoring heretics, is not most grievously punished, or
that a boy, who is disinherited for his misdemeanor, is not more grievously
punished, then if he had been only whipped for the same?

44 And by this the Reader may easily perceive, how true that is, which this
Doctor said above, that the dictinction, which I made there (concerning the
sufficiency of Ecclesiastical power, and of Ecclesiastical Censures to bring
souls to eternal salvation, in regard of the power, and of the Censures
themselves, and in regard of all other things, which on the behalf of the
subject, or otherwise are required, that the Ecclesiastical power, and
Ecclesiastical Censures do actually work their effect, that is, actually
withdraw wicked Christians from sin, and so actually save their souls) does
little or nothing make to the saluing of Cardinal Bellarmines argument. Seeing
that you now thereby see most plainly, that the spiritual power is of it self
so great, and Ecclesiastical or spiritual punishments are of themselves so
dreadful, and terrible, that they are of themselves sufficient to withdraw any
man from his wicked life: And that therefore if this spiritual coerciue power,
and these spiritual Censures or punishments be of themselves sufficient for
the spiritual end, no other power of the Church to inflict temporal
punishments is necessary to obtain the same end; for if spiritual punishments
be sufficient, temporal punishments are not necessary, as any man of mean
understanding, who knows the difference betwixt sufficient, and necessary may
easily perceive. And if any man be so wilful, that he is not terrified with
Ecclesiastical Censures, it is not by reason of their insufficiency, but by
reason of the malice of the person, and the indisposition of the subject, for
to use this Doctors own words above, it is their fault, and not the Popes,
seeing that he applies remedies, and punishments, which are effectual of
themselves, if they themselves will admit them. And what if the Prince, whom
this Doctor says the Pope has power to depose, does not regard his sentence
of deposition, what other remedy, trow you, will this Doctor faigne, that the
Pope has authority afterward to apply? unless he will say, that he must
then have sufficient force, and might to thrust him by head and shoulders, as
the proverb says, out of his kingdom.

45 Secondly, neither did the Council of Lateran, nor of Trent inflict, or
impose temporal punishments, for that reason, which Cardinal Bellarmine here
gives, to wit, because they thought that Christians who were excommunicated
for favoring heretics, or other crimes, were not most grievously punished,
and consequently that they might therefore by their spiritual power dispose of
temporalls, and inflict temporal punishments, because otherwise they might
favor heretics, and commit other crimes without being punished, as Cardinal
Bellarmine did argue in his aforesaid reason, for then the said Counsels must
also have granted, that Excommunication is not a most grievous punishment, yea
and no punishment at all, and so they must have contradicted themselves, and
the received doctrine of the Church, for that no man, unless he be impious
or mad, as this Doctor here affirms, can deny, that Excommunication is more
grievous then any temporal punishment: but the reason is, because both the
Council of Trent, and also of Lateran, or at least wise Pope Innocent in the
Council of Lateran, perceiving, that many sensual men are more afraid of
sensible, and temporal punishments, then of spiritual, therefore to withdraw
them more easily from sin, they commanded, enjoined, and imposed by their
spiritual authority, as it is directive, corporal and temporal punishments,
which sensual men do most abhor, and also they inflicted the same
punishments, not by their spiritual authority, as it is coerciue, which is
extended only, as I have often said, to Ecclesiastical Censures, but by the
temporal authority, which they have received from the express, or tacit
consent, grant, and privileges of temporal Princes, seeing that it is well
known, as I have related elsewhere out of John Gerson, Gerson. de potest.
Eccles. considerat. 4.
that Princes out of their devotion have given to the Clergy great authority
of temporal Jurisdiction.

46 Thirdly, observe the goodly reason that this man brings, why the Council
of Lateran began first with spiritual punishments, and the Council of Trent
with temporal. For that, says he, the decree of the Council of Lateran was
made against those, who knew not the greatness of Excommunication, and the
decree of the Council of Trent was made against those that knew the greatness
thereof: as though either Christian Princes, or people knew not the greatness
of Excommunication at the time of the Council of Lateran, or that either in
very truth, or according to the Doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, Suarez, and
other vehement maintainers of the Popes power to depose Princes, or in the
judgment of this Doctor himself, it be commendable, or lawful first to
depose Princes, and to thrust them out of their kingdoms, and afterward to
excommunicate them, and to declare them to be accounted as Heathens, and
Publicanes. Be like this Doctor is persuaded, that all his idle conceits must
go for an undoubted oracle. But he is deceived: for howsoever his favorites
will applaude all his sayings, esteeming him as an other Pythagoras, yet other
men will require of him a more sufficient reason, then a bare ipse dixit.

47. Lastly, it is not true, that the Council of Lateran did first command,
that Princes, who favor heretics, should be excommunicated, and afterward,
if this remedy did not avail, their subjects should be absolved from their
allegiance: because in that decree there is no mention made of Princes, but
only of inferior Officers and Magistrates: But of this Decree we shall have
occasion to treat anon more at large: As also it is a slander usual in this
man's mouth, that I contemn the foresaid decrees of the Council of Lateran,
and of Trent, which I do reverence with as much respect, as he, or any other
Catholic ought to do, albeit I must needs confess, that although this
Doctors interpretation of those decrees I do not contemn, for this is a word
of arrogancy, yet truly I do not much regard, unless he shall bring better
reasons to confirm the same, then hitherto he has brought. And thus you see
part of the answer I made to Cardinal Bellarmines second reason, which
afterward I did prosecute more at large, and in the end I did briefly
insinuate, how insufficiently Father Parsons grounding himself chiefly upon
this second argument of Cardinal Bellarmine did satisfy the Earl of
Salisburies complaint.

48 For the Earl of Salisburie, says Father Parsons, In the Preface to the
Treatise tending to Mitigation nu. 19.
has bin a long time sorry, that some clear explication of the Papal
authority has not bin made by some public and definitive sentence
orthodoxall, etc. That not only those Princes, which acknowledge this
superiority might be secured from fears, and iealosies of continual
treasons, and bloody Assassinates against their persons, but those Kings also
which do not approve the same, and yet would feign reserve a charitable
opinion of their subjects, might know how far to repose themselves in their
fidelity in civil obedience, howsoever they see them divided from them in
point of conscience, etc. Now to this complaint, or desire of the Earl of
Salisbury to have the matter defined, and declared, Father Parsons answers,
that among Catholic people the matter is clear, and sufficiently defined, and
declared in all points, wherein there may be made any doubt concerning this
affair. And for the clearing of the whole matter, he divides it into three
questions.

49 The first is, whether any authority were left by Christ in his Church, and
Christian Commonwealth to restrain, or repress, censure or judge any
exorbitant, and pernicious excess of great men, States, or Princes, or that he
has left them remediless wholly by any ordinary authority? And to this
question the substance of his answer is this; that as in all other
commonwealths that are not Christian, all Philosophers, and other men of
soundest wisdom, prudence, and experience, either Jew, or Gentile have from
the beginning of the world concurred in this, that God and nature has left
some sufficient authority in every commonwealth for the lawful and orderly
repressing of those evils even in the highest persons. So when Christ our
Savior came to found his Commonwealth of Christians in far more perfection
then other states had been established before, subiecting temporal things to
spiritual, according to the degree of their natures ends, and eminencies, and
appointing a supreme universal Governor in the one, with a general charge to
look to all his sheep, without exception of great, or small, people or
potentates: upon these suppositions (I say) all Catholic learned men do
ground and have ever grounded, that in Christian Commonwealths, not only the
foresaid ordinary authority is left, which every other state, and kingdom had
by God, and nature to preserve, and protect themselves in the cases before laid
down; but further also for more sure, and orderly proceeding therein, that the
supreme care, judgment, direction, and censure of this matter was left
principally by Christ our Savior unto the said supreme Governor, and Pastor
of his Church and Commonwealth. And in this there is no difference in opinion,
or belief between any sort of Catholics whatsoever (so they be Catholics)
though in particular cases, diversity of persons, time, place, cause, and
other circumstances, may move some diversity of opinions. And thus much of
the first question.

50 The second question may be about the manner how this authority, or in
what sort it was given by Christ to his said supreme Pastor, whether directly
or indirectly, immediately, or by a certain consequence. And to this question
he answers: that albeit the Canonists do commonly defend the first part, and
Catholic Divines for the most part the second; yet both parts fully agree,
that there is such an authority left by Christ in his Church, for remedy of
urgent cases, for that otherwise he should not have sufficiently provided for
the necessity thereof. So as this difference in the manner makes no
difference at all in the thing it self.

51 The third question may be about the causes, for which this authority may
be used, as also the form of proceeding to be observed therein: whereunto he
answers, that herein there are so many particularities to be considered, as
are ouerlong for this place: only it is sufficient for Catholic men to know,
that this may not be done without just cause, grave and urgent motives, and due
form also of proceeding, by admonition, prevention, intercession, and other
like preambles, prescribed by Ecclesiastical Canons to be observed, whereby
my Lordships doubts of fears, and iealousies of continual treasons, and
bloody Assassinates may justly be removed. For that this authority does not
only not allow any such wicked or unlawful attempts, but does also expressly,
and publicly condemn the same, and the doctrine thereof, as may appear not
only by the condemnation of Wickliffes wicked article in the Council of
Constance, Sess. 15.
wherein he affirmed, That it was lawful for every private man to kill any
Prince, whom he held to be a Tyrant, but also by like condemnation of Calvin,
Beza, etc.

52 Thus you see that Father Parsons has not answered to the Earl of
Salisburies complaint in particular, to wit, that some clear explication of
the Papal authority (over the kingdoms, and lives of temporal Princes) has
not been made by some public, and definitive sentence orthodoxall, etc. But
he supposes it as certain, and granted by Catholics, and in stead of some
clear and public definition orthodoxall etc. Which the Earl of Salisburie
desired, he brings only certain reasons, which are in some sort grounded
upon the Law of Nature, and the light of natural reason, to wit, that Christ
has in his Church subjected temporal things to spiritual, which also is true
in the Law of Nature, and that otherwise he had not so sufficiently provided
for the necessity of his Church, as God, and Nature have provided for other
temporal commonwealths, which are not so perfect as is his Church: which
reasons how weak and insufficient they are, the Reader may presently perceive
by that which has been said before concerning the Law of Nature, and against
Cardinal Bellarmines second reason, and also if he will but apply them to the
Church and Synagogue in the old law, in which without doubt God Almighty did
both subject temporal things to spiritual, and for the necessity whereof he
did also sufficiently provide: and yet Cardinal Bellarmine himself affirms
it to probable, that in the old Law the Priesthood was subject to the kingdom,
and that Kings were not to be temporally by the High Priest, but contrariwise
the High Priest was subject in temporalls to the King, and to be punished by
him with temporal punishments. Wherefore after I had clearly overthrown
Cardinal Bellarmines reason, concluding thus: And so it is manifest, by that
which I have said, how weak this second reason of Cardinal Bellarmine is,
even according to his own principles, I forthwith answered Father Parsons in
this manner. Apolog. nu. 203.


53 By which it is also apparent, how weakly the Author of the English
Treatise tending to Mitigation, who groundeth his whole discourse for the Popes
power to depose Princes upon this second reason of Cardinal Bellarmine, does
satisfy the Earl of Salisburies desire, whereof we made mention above. For
although it be-true, that Christ our Savior left in his Church (which is a
spiritual commonwealth) as in all other well established commonwealths,
sufficient authority, and power, for as much as concerns the power it self,
to defend her self from the injuries of all men whatsoever, and to correct,
judge, and punish all wicked persons of what state, or condition soever they
be, that are subject to the supreme Prince of this spiritual commonwealth, as
members of the head, sheep to their Pastors, and children to their Father:
Nevertheless that Christ left in his Church sufficient power, might, or force
to repress at all times all excesses whatsoever of Christian Princes, or, that
the punishments, wherewith such Princes may be punished by the Church, are
temporal, which do pass the limits appointed by Christ to a spiritual
commonwealth, this, besides that it seems to be supposed by this Author as
certain without any reason at all, is also most clearly repugnant to the
common doctrine of the ancient Fathers, who do teach, as I related above, Nu.
5 and seq.
that the armor, or weapons of the Church are spiritual, not temporal, and
that Princes if they offend, are, for as much as concerns temporal
punishments, to be left to the examination, and judgment of God alone.

54 Wherefore there remains in the Church sufficient remedy, and spiritual
authority (for temporal authority, or which now I take for all one,
authority to dispose of temporalls, is not agreeable to the condition of a
spiritual commonwealth) to repress by spiritual punishments the exorbitant
excesses of all her subjects whatsoever, and of this there is no controversy
among Catholics, as also to every temporal commonwealth the law of God, and
nature has given full, and perfect temporal authority to punish all her
subjects that shall offend with temporal punishments, but not with spiritual,
which are not agreeable to a temporal commonwealth, and to defend her self
with corporal weapons from the wrongs, and violence of all men though of
foreign countries how strong, and potent soever they be, albeit she has not
always an effectual remedy, or sufficient force, might or power to free her
self from the unjust oppressions, not only of foreign countries, but also of
her own subjects by reason of their excessive power, and might.

55 And therefore it is not only a controversy among Catholics, about the
manner how the Pope has authority to dispose of temporals, and to depose
temporal Princes, to wit, whether directly or indirectly, immediately, or by a
certain consequence, as this Author without any proof at all does ill
suppose, as certain, and not doubted of by Catholics, but as I have often
said out of Trithemius, It is a controversy among the Schoolmen about the
thing it self, Trithem. in Chron. monast. Hirsang. ad ann. 1106.
whether the Pope has any such authority in any manner at all, and as yet it
is not determined by the Judge whether he has any power to depose the
Emperor, or no.

56 Lastly, if in every well established Common-weath there is left sufficient
remedy, and authority by God and nature to repress, and punish the more
heinous offenses of their Sovereign Prince, whereon the Discourse of this
Author in his first question, whereupon the other two questions do depend, is
chiefly grounded, I do not see in what manner, and with what reason he can rid
himself, but that consequently he must also grant, that the Pope himself may
for all enormous crimes be corrected, judged, and punished by the Church; Bell.
li. 2. de Council. cap. 19. ad 2. nu.
whereas Cardinal Bellarmine, as you have seen above Nu. 188. Apolog.
, does teach, that the Church has not any effectual remedy, or which in his
opinion is all one, any sufficient authority to punish a known and undoubted
Pope for any crime whatsoever, only heresy excepted. Therefore you see what a
foundation this Author has laid to subject Popes to the examination, censure,
and correction of a general Council, which represents the universal
Church, and to quite overthrow Cardinal Bellarmines doctrine, touching the
Popes authority over a general Council, which is also received by all the
writers of his Society. Thus I answered Father Parsons discourse in my Apology.

57 By which the Reader may easily perceive, what small satisfaction Fa.
Parsons gave to the Earl of Salisburies complaint, both for that he brought
no clear definition orthodoxall, which the Earl required, to prove that the
Pope has authority to depose wicked Princes, and to dispose of all their
temporals, but supposed it as granted by all Catholics for these silly
reasons, which I before rehearsed; and also, that from the doctrine of the
Popes power to depose Princes, and to dispose of all temporalls, it necessarily
follows, as I convinced in my Apology, Nu. 43. and Seg.
that he may also takeaway their lives, and give leave to others to kill them
by all those ways public or secret, by which temporal Princes may take away
the lives of their wicked subjects: and consequently his Lordships doubts of
fears and iealousies of continual treasons, and bloody Assassinates was not
removed by Father Parsons answer: for that they who would attempt to kill
such wicked and tyrannical Princes, and obstinate in their wickedness, might
easily answer the decree of the Council of Constance, and affirm, that what
they did was not done by private, but by public, and lawful authority, and
that they had sufficient warrant from the virtuall, at least wise, and
interpretatiue consent of the Pope, who was bound by the law of God to give his
consent thereunto, as in my Appendix against Suarez I did clearly deduce:
Part. 1. sec. 9. nu. 7. 8.
and so those wicked miscreants that murdered the last two Kings of France,
and attempted to have blown up with gunpowder our most noble King, and Queen
with their Royal issue, and all the nobility with the Knights, and Burgeses of
the Parliament, did easily shift off the Decree of the Council of Constance,
pretending that what they did, was done by lawful and public authority.

58 Now albeit Mr. Fitzherbert pretends to defend Fa. Parsons against that
which I did answer, for the respect and reverence, which he bears to the
memory of so worthy a man, and his old friend, whereof I will say nothing at
this time, because as he was respected and reverenced by many Catholics, so
also he was by many not reputed worthy of such respect and reverence, the
cause whereof I will omit now to relate, nevertheless he says little or
nothing, as you shall see, against that which I urged against him. For first
the greatest part of his defense he spends Page 120. nu. 16. and seq.
in excusing him from that, whereof I did not accuse him, to wit, that Fa.
Parsons did not say, that the Church has not only sufficient power to work
the effect, for which it was ordained, but also sufficientes vires, sufficient
forces always to execute and perform the same, but only that the power of
the Church being considered in it self is sufficient to work the effect, for
which it was ordained, if it meet with a capable subject, and have no
external impediment, which may be exemplified in the power to remit sins,
to give holy Orders, to excommunicate, and such like. For albeit the Church
have sufficient power to do all this, yet the same cannot be executed either
at all times, or in all places, or upon all persons, by reason as well of the in
capacity of subjects, as of other external impediments, which may hinder the
execution. So as it were extreme folly to say, that the Church has not only
sufficient power, but also sufficient forces always to execute and perform
the same. And the like we say concerning the power left by our Savior Christ
to punish absolute Princes in their temporal states, to wit, that the power
being considered in it self is sufficient, albeit the same cannot always be
executed, and Fa. Parsons never taught, or thought otherwise: And therefore I
must needs say, as I said before, that Widdrington has either most grossly
mistaken him (which truly I cannot see how he could do in this place) or
else most maliciously abused, and belyed him.

59 But truly I must needs say, that Mr. Fitzherbert, to return him back
his own words, has either most grossly mistaken me, or else most maliciously
abused, and belyed me. For I neither said, nor meant to say, that Fa. Parsons
supposed as certain, and confessed by all Catholics, that Christ has left to
his Church sufficient force, power, or might to repress at all times all
exorbitant excesses of Christian Princes, or people: but that he supposed as
certain, and confessed by all Catholics, that the penalties, wherewith the
Church may punish her spiritual Children, may be temporal punishments; which
supposition also of Fa. Parsons I declared afterward, as you have seen, in
these words. And therefore it is not only a controversy among Catholics
about the manner how the Pope has power in temporalls, to wit, directly, or
indirectiy, as this Au. hour without any proof at all does ill suppose, but
about the thing it self, whether he has in any manner at all such an
authority, whereof the Schoolmen are at variance, and as yet it is not
decided by the Judge whether the Pope has authority to depose the Emperor,
as we have often said out of Trithemius.

60 Nevertheless, this also I must needs say, that both D. Schulekenius, and
Mr. Fitzherbert, and also Fa. Parsons cannot make good Cardinal Bellarmines
second reason, and sufficiently confute the answer I made thereunto, but that
they will be driven to suppose, that the Church must have, not only
sufficient power, and authority, but also sufficient force, power, might, and
effectual means to bring souls to paradise; as any man of learning by that
which I have said before may easily perceive. For the substance of Cardinal
Bellarmines argument was this: The Church must have all necessary and
sufficient power, or authority to save souls, for which the Ecclesiastical
power is ordained, but the power to inflict Ecclesiastical Censures is not
sufficient for this end, therefore another power, to wit, to inflict also
temporal punishments is necessary.

61 To this argument I answered, that the power to inflict Ecclesiastical
Censures, being considered in it self, is sufficient to save souls, and that
Ecclesiastical Censures being so dreadful punishments, as I have showed, are
of themselves sufficient, if they meet with a capable subject, to withdraw men
from sin; neither is it necessary, that the Church must have, besides a
power sufficient of it self, sufficient force, might, and effectual means to
withdraw men actually from sin, for this were extreme folly to say as my
Adversary himself confesses; For the sufficiency, says he, of the power,
which Christ has left to his Church in this point, or any other consists in
this, that the power being considered in it self, is sufficient to work the
effect, for which it was ordained, if it meet with a capable subject, and have
no external impediment. Wherefore it is manifest, that he who will contend,
that the Church must have a more sufficient power to save souls, then which of
it self is sufficient if it meet with a capable subject, and have no
external impediment, must needs suppose that the Church must also have
sufficient force, might, and effectual means to save souls and a power to
make the subject capable, and to remove all external, impediments, or, which
is all one, must have such a sufficient power, which is not only sufficient in
regard of the power being considered in it self, but also in regard of all
other things, which are necessary that the power work the effect, for which
it was ordained: for that these two are opposite parts or members of the
distinction I made before, and no man that has any skill in Logike can be
ignorant, that in every division consisting only of two parts, or members, we
may rightly argue from the affirming of the one part to the denial of the
other, and from the denying of the one to the affirming of the other. If
therefore the power of the Church to inflict Ecclesiastical Censures be of it
self a sufficient coerciue power to withdraw men from sin, which is the end
of Ecclesiastical power, and if men be not thereby withdrawn from sin, it
is not by reason of the insufficiency of the power, but of the indisposition
of the subject, no other coerciue power to inflict temporal punishments can be
necessary: And therefore the aforesaid distinction of Ecclesiastical coerciue
power considered in it self; and in respect of the impediments, which may be
in regard of the subject, did quite overthrow Cardinal Bellarmines second
argument, and the whole discourse of Fa. Parsons, which was grounded thereon.
So that Mr. Fitzherbert might with more credit have left untouched the
satisfaction which Fa. Parsons pretended to give to the Earl of Salisburies
desire, or complaint, for ought he has been able to say in defense of the
same.

62 And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert quarelleth with me for teaching in this my
Discourse against Fa. Parsons, that the penalties, which the Church may, I do
not say, impose, as he untruly imposes upon me, for this power of the Church
to impose, command, or enjoin temporal penalties I never denied, but to
inflict, are not temporal punishments, and for remitting my Reader for this
point to diverse authorities even of the ancient Fathers related by me in my
Apology, he wishes me, Page 122. nu. 21.
and the Reader to see the answer to those authorities in D. Schulckenius, who
gives, as he says, sufficient satisfaction to every one of them, and shows
evidently, that diverse of those Authors do wholly impugn Widdringtons
opinion, and doctrine, and finally tells him of his bad fortune in alleging
such witnesses, as either make nothing for him, or quite overthrow him, and the
like may be seen, says he, in D. Westons Sanctuary, who also answers the
said places particularlay and fully: I also in like manner wish him, and the
Reader to see how their answers have been confuted, partly by Mr. John
Barclay, and partly by my self above in this Treatise, Part. 1. per totum.
where also I have showed the vanity of these men, that when they see their
arguments and answers most of all to be shaken, then they make the greatest
brags, to which silly shifts they have been driven by their bad fortune to
undertake the defense of so bad a cause, and through a vehement desire not to
seem to be vanquished, and to have any way erred in having coined a new
Catholic faith.

63 Furthermore, the Reader may see, Page 122. nu. 22. C. Bell. in Tract. de
potest. Sum. Pont. contra Barcl. cap. 8.
says Mr. Fitzherbert many of them answered by the Cardinal himself in his
book against Barclay, which Widdrington could not but have seen (no less
then the former) before he wrote against my Supplement, and therefore reason
would that he should have showed some insufficiency in those answers, before
he so confidently remitted me, and his Readers to those places, and such like,
which he knew were already answered: but perhaps he persuades himself, that
all his writings, and assertions, are, (as I have said in the Preface) like to
the laws of the Medes, See Preface nu. 15. and see also the answer thereunto.
Dan. 6.
and Persians, which are inviolable, and immutable. And this shall suffice
touching Father Parsons, whom you see he might with more credit have left
untouched for ought he has been able to prove against him.

64 But as the Reader may see many of them answered by the Cardinal himself
in his book against Barclay, so also he may see the Cardinals answers
confuted by Mr. John Barclay in his book against Cardinal Bellarmine, which
Mr. Fitzherbert could not but have seen, before he wrote now his Reply against
me, and therefore reason would, that he should have showed some
insufficiency in Mr. John Barclayes answers, before he so confidently
remitted me, and his Reader to Cardinal Bellarmines book against Barclay,
which he knew was already answered. And therefore that which he repeateth
here again concerning the laws of the Medes, and Persians, may more aptly be
applied to himself, and other such like vehement defenders of the Popes power
to depose Princes, who* for that they have unadvisedly begun to make their
doctrine to be an infallible point of faith, which they will never be able to
make good, will yet defend the same per fas, and ne fas, by right and wrong,
and perceiving that they cannot prevail with reason, and arguments, endeavor
to ouersway their cause by force, and authority, clamours, and threatenings: as
it is evident by the Breues, which his Holiness by their importunity, and
sinistrous Information has published to condemn the new Oath, wherein chiefly
that doctrine is denied, as containing in it many things flat contrary to
faith and salvation, which they will never be able to maintain, and by
condemning some of my books in such general words, and commanding me under
pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to purge my self forthwith in so strange a
manner not declaring of what crime either in particular or in general I should
purge my self, although I have often by diverse Supplications to his Holiness
most humbly, and earnestly requested, to be particularly informed, what one
thing is contained in the Oath, which is so clearly repugnant to faith* and
salvation, or what one thing I have written in those books, whereof I should
purge my self, as being contrary to faith, or good manners. For what man can
be so simple, as to imagine, that if those most Illustrious Cardinals of the
Inquisition could plainly have showed any one thing, which either in the Oath,
or in any of my books is repugnant to says, or good manners, we should not
have heard it proclaimed by my Adversaries with open mouth? And what else is
this, I pray you, but to contend, that their assertions are like to the laws
of the Medes, and Persians which are inviolable, and immutable?

65 And this may suffice touching Fa. Parsons discourse, which Mr. Fitzherbert
might with more credit to himself, and with more respect, and reverence to
his old friend, have left untouched, seeing that he has brought nothing
against that, which I objected against Fa. Parsons discourse to satisfy the
Earl of Salisburies desire, but cauelleth only about trifles, which make
nothing to the defense of Fa. Parsons, as that I did not in that brief
Admonition to the Reader confute D. Schulckenius book written against me, and
Cardinal Bellarmines book written against D. Barclay, and also the whole
particular discourse, which he himself made in his Supplement to prove the
Oath unlawful, and repugnant to all laws humane and divine: but remitted the
Reader to some things, which more at large I declared in my Apology, to the
end that he duly considering my answers, and their Replies, and also what Mr.
John Barclay had written in defense of his Father against Cardinal Bellarmine,
might give his judgment accordingly, until I had time to make a more full
answer to them all. And therefore seeing that now I have in this Treatise more
fully confuted both Cardinal Bellarmine, and D. Schulckenius (if he be
another man) and also Mr. Fitzherberts whole Reply, which he has patched
together by the helps of Cardinal Bellarmine, or D. Schulckenius, Fa. Suarez,
and Lessius, we shall see what a learned Reply he will make to this my
Treatise being destitute now of those helps, which he had before of those
men's writings, and being left only to his own wit, and learning, and to the
aid which he can get from others of his Society, who are more expert in
School points then is himself, whom all men know to have little skill either
in Philosophy, or Schoole-Diuinitie. And for a conclusion I wish the Reader to
call to mind, how he imposes upon me here two manifest falsehoods, the one,
that I affirm Fa. Parsons to suppose that Christ has left to his Church not
only sufficient power, and authority, but also sufficient force, might, or
effectual means to repress at all times all excesses whatsoever of Christian
Princes, and the other, that I quarrel with Father Parsons for teaching, that
the Church may impose temporal penalties, which, as you have seen is very
untrue.

66 Now let us proceed to the examining of the rest of his Discourse. After
this, says he, Page 123. nu. 23.24.25. Acts 5. 1 Cor. 5. Widdring. in admoni.
nu. 19.
Widdrington takes hold of two examples in my Supplement, to wit, the
punishment of Ananias and Saphira, and of the incestuous Corinthian, which I
alleged to prove the power of the Church to inflict temporal penalties.
Whereof he says thus: Illa corporalis Ananiae and Saphirae interfectio, etc.
That corporal killing of Ananias and Saphira, and the visible delivery of the
fornicatour to Satan, are to be referred to the grace of miracles: neither
will this Author say, as I think, that the Pope has power to kill wicked
men, and malefactors with the word of his mouth. So he. Whereto I answer,
that he trifleth no less in this, then in his former answers: for, albeit I
will not say that the Pope has power to kill with the word of his mouth, that
is to say, to do miracles; yet I say he has power to do and ordain those
things in the Church, which at their first institution were testified, and
confirmed by miracles.

67 As for example, I will not say that the Pope can give the holy Ghost in
some visible form in the Sacrament of Baptism, and Confirmation, as the holy
Ghost was given in the Apostles time, Acts 8. and 10.
yet I make no doubt but that the Pope may minister those Sacraments with the
iuisible effect and fruit thereof, which was visibly showed and testified in
the Apostles time by that miracle; neither will I say that the Pope can deliver
a man to the visible possession of the Devil to be bodily tormented, as S.
Paul did, when he excommunicated the Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.
and others; nevertheless, I say, that if Widdrington do not reform and
retract his pernicious doctrine, the Pope both can, See cap. 17. nu. 23. and
seq. Item Decretum Sacrae Cong. and see them also there answered.

Chrysostom. hom. 15 in cap. 5. epist. 1. ad Corinth. Acts 5. Acts 12. 1 Cor. 5.
Greg. hom. 10. in Euang.


and will, ere it be long, excommunicate him, and deliver him over to the
invisible power of the Devil; which effect was at the first ordinarily
testified by the visible torments of the bodies of excommunicated persons, vt
castigaretur caro says S. Chrysostom, that their flesh might be chastised: So
as Widdrington may if it please him, distinguish betwixt the miracles, and that
which was in the primative Church signified, expressed, and testified thereby.

68 And therefore I say, that for as much as it pleased God to testify by the
miraculous punishment of Ananias, and Saphira, and of Elymas the Magycian,
(whom S. Paul stroke blind) and of the excommunicated Corinthian, and others,
that the Church has power as well over the body, as over the soul, it cannot
with reason be denied, but that the power remains, although the miraculous
manner in the execution of it ceased, when the Christian faith was once
propagated, and generally received, because, as S. Gregory says, Signa data
sunt fidelibus, etc. Signs, or miracles are given (or ordained) for infidels,
and not for the faithful.

69 But it is Mr. Fitzherbert himself that trifleth no less in this then in
his former answers. For the question here betwixt us is not now, whether the
Pope has an ordinary power granted him by Christ to inflict corporal and
temporal punishments, and to deprive the faithful of their lives and
dominions, but whether from this miraculous fact of killing of Ananias and
S^phira at the word of S. Peter, or from the miraculous delivering of the
incestuous Corinthian to Satan, to be coporally tormented by him, that his
soul might be saved* or from any other miraculous and extraordinary power,
which the Apostles had to inflict coporall punishments, it can be rightly
concluded that the Pope has an ordinary power to inflict also corporal
punishments. And whatsoever Mr. Fitzherbert says, I do confidently auerro,
that it is a most vicious kind of arguing from miraculous facts, and from an
extraordinary power, which was granted to the Apostles as they were Apostles
at the first instituting of the new law, and abrogating of the old, to inflict
corporal punishments, to infer that the Pope and other inferior Bishops,
who succeeded the Apostles not as they were Apostles, but as they were Bishops,
had an ordinary power to do the like facts, and to inflict the like corporal
punishments: But other arguments must be brought to prove that the Prelates of
the Church may now by their ordinary power do those things, which the Apostles
at the first institution of the Church did by a miraculous and extraordinary
power.

70 For two powers were granted to the Apostles, the one ordinary; which should
also descend to all their Successors* who in that power are equal to the
Apostles; the other extraordinary, wherein they did excel all the Prophets of
the old Testament. For the Apostles were also Prophets, as S. Peter proves
by the authority of the Prophet Joel; against the Jews, who said, that the
Apostles were drunk, Acts 2. And as well observes Abulensis, they did excel
the Prophets in many things; Abulens. q. 6. in Praefat. Mat.
first, in the manner of their Prophecy; because God was ready to speak by
the Apostles whenever they would, insomuch that they ought not to think what
they should speak, but the holy Ghost did immediately speak by them, Math.
10. Luke 21. But it was not so in any Prophet of the Old Testament. Secondly,
they did excel the Prophets in regard of the things which were revealed,
because more high things were revealed to the Apostles, then were revealed to
the Prophets. Thirdly, they did also excel in regard of the miracles: for they
did wonderful miracles, not only as great as Christ himself did, but also
greater, as he said to Philip, John 14. Et maiora horum faciet, The works that
I do, he also shall do, and greater then these shall he do. For it is read
of S. Peter, Acts 5. that when he passed through the streets in Jerusalem,
they broughtforth the sick into the streets, and laid them in beds, and
couches that when Peter came his shadow at the least might ouershadow any of
them, and they all might be delivered from their infirmities, which
nevertheless we do not read was ever done by Christ, etc. Fourthly, the
Apostles also did excel the Prophets, for that they spoke with all languages,
Acts 2. And this extraordinary power of the Apostles did not descend to all
their Successors; And therefore it is no good argument from an extraordinary
and miraculous power, which was granted to the Apostles to inflict corporal
punishments, to infer an ordinary power in their Successors to inflict the
same.

71 Neither do those examples which Mr. Fitzherbert brings of the miraculous
manner of giving the holy Ghost, as it was given in the Apostles time in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and Confirmation, make any thing at all for his purpose:
for that these Sacraments had in the Apostles time commonly two effects annexed
to them, the one was ordinary, to wit, the giving of invisible grace, which
proceeded from their ordinary power, and which therefore was to descend to
their Successors, the other Miraculous and extraordinary, to wit, the visible
appearing of the holy Ghost in the persons baptized, or confirmed, and this
proceeded from a miraculous and extraordinary power, and which therefore was
not to descend to all their Successors: neither is it lawful to conclude that
the Pope can work that visible effect by his ordinary power, which the
Apostles did by their miraculous and extraordinary power. So likewise
Excommunication had in the Apostles time commonly two effects; the one
ordinary, which was, that the person excommunicated was deprived of spiritual
graces and benefits, and of Ecclesiastical communion, and reputed as a
Heathen, and a Publican, and this effect proceeded from ordinary power, and
which therefore was to be derived to all their Successors; the other
extraordinary and miraculous, which was to be corporally afflicted by Satan,
and this proceeded from the extordinary and miraculous power granted to the
Apostles over all Devils, Luc. 9. which therefore was not to descend to all
their Successors. Wherefore we cannot well conclude that because the Apostles
did inflict corporal punishments by their miraculous power, therefore their
Successors may inflict corporal punishments, by an ordinary power, but other
reasons must be brought to prove the same; for it is apparent to every
Schoole-boy that the former consequence is stark naught.

72 But these visible torments, says Mr. Fitzherbert, did testify, that the
excommunicated person was delivered over to the invisible power of the Devil,
as Widdrington, if he do not reform his pernicious doctrine, both can, and
will, ere it be long be excommunicated by the Pope, and delivered over to the
invisible power of the Devil, which effect was at the first ordinarily
testified by the visible torments of the bodies of excommunicated persons, so
as Widdrington may, if it please him distinguish betwixt the miracles, and that
which was in the primitive Church signified, expressed, and testified thereby.
And Mr. Fitzherbert may, if it please him, clearly see, that I have
distinguished betwixt these two, and have granted, that the invisible effect,
which was signified, expressed and testified, because it proceeded from the
ordinary power, which the Apostles had, might be done also by the ordinary
power, which was granted to the Apostles Successors, but not the visible
apparitions, torments, or punishments, which did testify the invisible effect,
for that they proceeded not from the ordinary, but from the extraordinary power
of the Apostles. And if his Holiness shall excommunicate me, as this man
threatens, without giving me any notice what pernicious doctrine I have
taught, that I may reform and retract it, the excommunication will be more
hurtful to their souls, that shall be cause thereof, then to mine, according
to that saying which Gratian 11 q. 3. Illud plane.
does attribute to Saint Augustine, Illud plane non temere dixerim, etc. This
plainly will I speak without rashness, that if any of the faithful shall be
excommunicated unjustly, it will rather hurt him that does, then who suffers
this wrong: and I shall comfort my self with those words of our Savior, Beati
qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iustitiam. But truly I am fully persuaded,
that his Holiness has had now so sufficient experience, to what exorbitant
proceedings these bad informers have drawn him, that he will hereafter be
more wary to proceed against me, in that strange manner, as the most
Illustrious Cardinals of the Inquisition have proceeded against me, and my
books, at which all the world does wonder.

73 Wherefore, when Mr. Fitzherbert says, that by the miraculous punishment of
Ananias and Saphira, and of Elymas, etc. it pleased God te testify; that the
Church has power as well over the body, as over the soul, and therefore it
cannot with reason be denied, but that the power remains, although the
miraculous manner in the execution of it ceased, when the Christian faith was
generally received; if he mean, that those miraculous punishments did testify
an ordinary power to be in the Church; that is in spiritual Pastors, to
inflict punishments, as well upon the body, as upon the soul, this he must
prove by some other reason, then by his bare I say, to which in very truth
knowing his insufficiency in Theological learning I give but little, credit,
and therefore with the same facility I deny it, as he says it; for it is the
maine question betwixt us, whether the Church has any such ordinary power, or
no: But if he mean, that those miraculous punishments did signify, and
testify a miraculous and extraordinary power to be in the spiritual
Pastors of the Church in the Apostles time, to inflict in some sort temporal
punishments, as well upon the body, as upon the soul, then I willingly grant
his, I say, but withal dcny, that either the power it self, it being
extraordinary and miraculous, or the effects and execution thereof, which also
were miraculous should afterward remain in the Church, when the faith was
once propagated, and generally received, according to that saying of Saint
Gregory, Signs or miracles were given for Infidels, not for the faithful. I
said, to inflict in some sort temporal punishments, for, as well observes
Abulensis, Abul. q. 96. in c. 20. Matthew.
the punishment which Saint Peter inflicted upon Ananias, and Saphira, was
only by the way of prediction; whereupon he was not as a Judge, or
executioner of Christ, but as a Prophet, and the punishment inflicted by Saint
Paul was by way of prayer and intercession; whereupon it was not any use of
Jurisdiction, but of a miracle, because the Devils are not subject to the
command of men, and so neither of them did exercise the use of coerciue
(temporal) power.

74 And by this also that which Mr. Fitzherbert immediately adds, is easily
answered. Besides that, says he, it is to be considered for the further
explication of this point, that although the punishments were miraculous and
extraordinary for the manner of them, yet if we consider the punishments
themselves, the Apostles exercised therein their ordinary and Apostolical
Jurisdiction, as being the ordinary Judges, to whom the chastisement of
spiritual offenses appertained, which is evident in the punishment of the
incestuous Corinthian by the formal, and judicial sentence pronounced by the
Apostle saying; 1. Cor. 5.
Ego quidem absens, etc. I indeed absent in body, but present in spirit, have
already judged, as present, him that has so done, in the name of our Lord
Jesus, you being gathered together, and my spirit, with the virtue of our Lord
Jesus, to deliver such a one to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus did the
Apostle fulminate his terrible sentence of Excommunication, showing, and
exercising his Apostolical authority. And the same is also to be understood
concerning the corporal punishment of Ananias and Saphara, S. Chrysostom. in
hunc locum.
in which respect Saint Chrysostom says; That Petrus faciebat terribile
iudicium, Peter executed a terrible judgment upon them; and Saint Hierome
says, that meruere sententiam Apostoli, S. Hieron. epist. 150. ad Hedibiani q.
2. in fine. Apud August. l. 3. c. 16.
They deserved the sentence of the Apostle; and the Author of the book, De
mirabilibus Scripturae, amonst Saint Augustines works, says, that Petrus
ligauit, etc. Peter did bind Ananias, and his wife with the bond of death, vt
authoritas Apostolica quanta esset ostenderetur, that it might appear how
great was the Apostolical authority. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

75 But I never denied, that the Apostles were ordinary Judges to whom the
chastisement of spiritual offenses appertained, but that which I deny is, that
by these miraculous punishments of Ananias and Saphira, and the incestuous
Corinthian, or such like it can be proved, that the Apostles were ordinary
Judges to inflict temporal punishments for spiritual offenses, or that they
exercised therein, I do not say their Apostolical, Bell. l. 1. de. Romans Pont.
c. 9.
but their ordinary power and Jurisdiction (for the Apostles had two powers,
one ordinary, and which should descend to their Successors, the other
extrordinary, or delegate, which therefore should not descend, neither is it
lawful from the punishments, which they inflicted by their extraordinary
power, to infer that they did, or might inflict the like punishments by their
ordinary power) this I say cannot be proved by any miraculous fact or
punishment, which the Apostles inflicted by their extraordinary and delegate
power. And therefore, although the Apostle in pronouncing his terrible sentence
of Excommunication against the incestuous Corinthian showed, and exercised his
ordinary Apostolical power, forasmuch as concerned the delivering him over to
the invisible power of Satan, yet forasmuch as concerned the delivering him
over to the visible power of Satan, that is, to be visibly tormented by him,
the Apostle did not use his ordinary Apostolical, but his extraordinary
Apostolical power. And the same is also to be understood touching the
corporal punishment of Ananias and Saphira, to wit, that Saint Peter used
therein his extraordinary Apostolical power, as I observed above out of
Abulensis.

76 Neither do S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, or S. Augustine say any thing
contrary to this. For all that can be gathered from their words is only this,
that the judgment of S. Peter was terrible, and that they deserved the
sentence of the Apostle, and that the binding of Ananias and Saphira with the
bond of death, did proceed from Apostolical authority: but that this their
sentence and judgment, and the binding of them with the bond of death, did
proceed from ordinary Apostolical authority, this cannot any way be gathered
from the words of those holy Fathers, but rather the flat contrary. Chrysostom. hom.
12 in Act.
For S. Chrysostom does attribute their punishment to a great miracle, both in
regard Saint Peter knew their thoughts, and what they had done privily, and
also for that he killed them by the commandment of his word. And Saint
Hierome, Hieron. epist. 8 ad Demetriad.
although he deny, that Saint Peter commanded or desired their death, yet he
attributes that sentence of the Apostle to a miracle, and to the spirit of
Prophecy. The Apostle Saint Peter, says he, does not wish their death, as
foolish Porphyrie does calumniate, but with a prophetical spirit he foretold
the judgment of God, that the punishment of two might be a doctrine to many.
So likewise the Author de mirabilibus S. Scripturae, does attribute their
punishment to a miracle, and to the Apostolical virtue of Christ, and to the
same power whereby he raised Tabitha from death, which words Mr. Fitzherbert
was willing to conceal. August. sermon. 204. de tempore, qu^est sermo 3. in Dom.
4. post. Trinit. 4. Reg. 2.
And Saint Augustine himself compares this fact of Saint Peter, to that of
Helizaeus, at whose prayer or curse two bears came forth of the forest, and
tore forty two boys that mocked him, saying, Come up balde head, come up
balde head. Wherefore Mr. Fitzherbert may distinguish, if it please him,
betwixt the ordinary, and extraordinary power of the Apostles, and clearly
see, that from the facts and punishments, which the Apostles exercised by their
extraordinary, delegate, and miraculous power, which therefore does not descend
to their Successors, it is not lawful to argue, that the Apostles by their
ordinary power might do the same, or that their successors have therefore power
to inflict the like punishments.

77 But here, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 125. nu. 28.
perhaps Widdrinton will say, that if Saint Peter exercied his Apostolical
power, and jurisdiction therein it follows that the Pope, or other
Ecclesiastical Judges, may also give sentence of death, yea execute upon such
as deserve it, which is contrary to the custom, and Canons of the Church.
Whereto I answer, that for as much as that time there were no Christian
Princes, or Magistrates to do justice in that kind, and that it was necessary
in the beginning to inflict such an exemplar punishment upon those two
hypocrites for the terror of other, Saint Peter thought good to perform it
himself, although afterward when Christian Religion was further propagated,
and Christian Princes held it for an honor to them to serve God, and his
Church with their temporal laws and power, the Church thought it needless to
inflict bloody penalties, not because it might not do it, if it would, but
because it seemed more decent, and convenient for lenity of a pious Mother to
abstain from the same, and to use more mild, and less rigorous punishments;
in which respect the Church has always retained the use of some temporal,
and corporal chastisements, although she have restrained her Ministers by
Canons, and constitutions from the effusion of blood, remitting the judgment,
and execution thereof, wholly to the secular Magistrates, who have by their
laws sufficiently provided for the execution of justice in that kind.

78 But first, without perhaps I do say, and have evidently convinced, not
from those miraculous facts of the Apostles, but from the doctrine, and grounds
of Cardinal Bellarmine, and others, who mainetaine the Popes power to depose
Princes, and to dispose of all their temporalls, that the Pope by the
institution of Christ, has authority also to kill wicked Princes by all those
ways public, or private, by which temporal Princes have authority to
deprive their subjects of their lives, as I have insinuated above in this
Treatise, Cha. 3: nu. 15 and 16. and chap. 5. sec. 2 nu. 9 and seq.
and proved at large in my Apology, Apolog nu. ^3. and seq.
to which D. Schulkenius answers only with a transcat, let it pass as not
belonging to the matter: and Mr. Fitzherbert both in other places of this his
Reply, and also here by these words, [not because it might not do it, if it
would] does expressly acknowledge as much, although forsooth he will not
meddle with the lives of Princes to avoid envy, and yet he fears not to say,
Chap 2. nu. 15.16.
That the Pope can take away my life, and the lives of all Christians: Now what
a scandalous doctrine this is, and what fears, and iealousies of continual
treasons, inhumaine gunpowder plots, and bloody Assassinates against their
Royal persons, those Christian Princes especially, who dissent from the
Catholic Roman Religion, may justly conceive thereby, I have sufficiently
proved in my Appendix against Fa. Suarez, Part. 1. sec. 9 nu. 5. and seq.
where also I have clearly convinced, that this pretense of Ecclesiastical
lenity, and the clemency of a Pious mother, which only for mildness sake,
as they pretend, and not by any obligation does not use such rigorous
punishments, is a mere shift, and cloak to dazell the eyes of the simple, and
unlearned Catholics. For as it is no clemency, but a plain cruelty for a
mother not to cut off one member of her beloved child, when it is in danger to
infect, and kill the whole body, so also the Pope should be cruel to the
Church of God, not to cut off an heretical Prince that is in danger to infect
the other members of the Church, if we once suppose this scandalous, and
damnable doctrine, that the Pope has power in order to spiritual good to
dispose of all the temporals, both of Christian Princes, and subjects, as
temporal Princes have in order to temporal good, authority to dispose of all the temporal, and corporal goods of their subjects.

79 Secondly, it is not true, that the Church has always retained the use of
some temporal and corporal chastisements, except only by way of command,
whereof I never made doubt: As also that reason, which my Adversary here
brings, why the Church now, since Christian Religion has been further
propagated, and Christian Princes have held it for an honor to them to serve
God, and his Church with their temporal laws, thought it needless to inflict
bloody punishments, especially upon wicked, and disobedient Princes for that by
their laws they have sufficiently provided for the execution of justice in
that kind, is very weak, and insufficient, because although Christian Princes
have sufficiently prouiued for the execution of justice with bloody
punishments against their subjects, yet they have no way provided for the
execution of justice in this kind against themselves; and therefore if
Christian Princes themselves become heretics, and seek to draw their subjects
to their heresy, neither Ecclesiastical lenity, nor the reason that my
Adversary here has brought, why the Church now thought it needless to
inflict bloody penalties, can be any hinderance, why the Pope may not proceed
against them with bloody punishments, if we once suppose, that he has power
and authority so to do. But the true, and ancient doctrine is, that a Priest,
as he is a Priest, is forbidden by the law of Christ to use, See above part 2.
cap. 9.
and not only is counseled for decency sake not to use, the material, or
temporal sword.

80 But now Mr. Fitzherbert, for the vpshot and conclusion of this Chapter,
will clearly prove by an argument, which no man forsooth of judgment can
deny, that the supreme spiritual Pastor has power to punish his sheep, or
subjects, not only in their souls, but also in their bodies, and goods. And
truly I cannot but wonder, says he, Page 126. nu. 29.30.
that any man of judgment can think it unlawful for the supreme spiritual
Pastor, to punish his sheep, or subjects in their bodies, or goods, seeing
that it cannot be denied, but that he is their Pastor, and superior in regard
not only of their souls, but also of their bodies, that is to say, of their
whole persons wherein their body is necessarily included; and therefore for as
much as every man is bound to serve God no less with his body, then with his
soul, and that the body concurreth with the soul to the execution of all
external works, good and bad, and shall be either glorified, or tormented
eternally together with it, no man can with reason deny, but that he who has
the direction, and government of the whole person for the eternal good
thereof, may punish the same as well in the one part, as in the other (as also
in what else soever is accessorie to the said person) when the same shall be
requisite for the eternal good, and salvation thereof. So as reason it self
may teach us, that the Apostolical power and authority extended it self to
the punishment, not only of the soul, but also of the body, and goods, when
occasion required. And this I hope, may suffice for the confutation of
Widdringtons answers concerning the law of God, and Nature; and therefore I
will now briefly examine, what he says concerning the law of Nations, and the
Civil, or Imperial law, which shall be the subject of the next Chapter.

81 But truly I cannot but wonder, that Mr. Fitzherbert, who is taken, and
commended by many for a man, although not of any great Schoole-learning* yet of
a deep, and rare natural judgment, should so palpably bewray both his want
of learning, and also his weakness of judgment. For by his own argument any
man of judgment may conclude, that a temporal Prince may punish his subjects
not only in their bodies and goods, but also in their souls: seeing that it
cannot be denied, but that he is their Superior in regard not only of their
bodies, but also of their souls, that is to say, of their whole persons,
wherein their soul is necessarily included; and therefore for as much as every
Christian man is bound to serve his temporal Prince, and obey his just laws,
no less with his soul and for conscience sake, then with his body, and that
the soul concurreth with the body to the execution of all external works,
good and bad* and shall be either glorified, or tormented eternally together
with it, no man can with reason deny; but that he who has the direction and
government of the whole person for the temporal good thereof, and the public
good of the whole commonwealth, may punish the same as well in the one part,
as the other (as also in what else soever is accessorie to the said person)
when the same shall be requisite for the temporal good of the said person* and
the public good of the whole common-weath. So as reason it self may teach us,
that temporal authority extends it self to the punishment not only of the
body, but also of the soul, when occasion requires.

82 Now what will Mr. Fitzherbert in his judgment say to this argument? Can he
deny, that a temporal Prince is not Superior to every person, that is
subject to the laws of his kingdom? Or can he deny, that when a temporal
Prince commands his subjects to do any thing, that part which is
principally commanded, is the soul, which is capable of reason, and therefore
chiefly subject to command, and not the body, which is not endued with reason?
for which cause neither the soul, if it want the use of reason, is subject to
command, as it appears in infants, and mad men, who although they should kill
a man, do no more transgress the law made against murder, then if a wild
beast should do the same: And therefore it cannot be denied, but that as well
a temporal Prince in order to temporal good, as a spiritual Pastor in order
to spiritual good is superior to the whole person of man, although the soul,
which is capable of reason, and understanding, and not the body, is chiefly
subject to the commandment as well of temporal Princes in order to temporal
good, as of spiritual Pastors in order to the spiritual, and eternal good
of their souls. Moreover a Christian Prince is to direct, and govern by
temporal laws the persons committed to his charge, not only for their
temporal good, but also for their spiritual, and eternal: for that the end
of a Christian Prince is, also according to Card, Bellarmines doctrine, In
Schulkenio page 334.
not only temporal good, and external peace in the commonwealth, but also
everlasting happiness, for which man was principally created, and to which
every Christian Prince ought, as much as lies in him, to bring the souls of
his subjects; and therefore he may according to my Adversaries argument punish
them as well in their souls as in their bodies, when it shall be requsite to
the eternal good, and salvation of the whole person. Whereby you may see, what
little reason any man of judgment can have to repose his soul, and conscience
upon the learning and judgment of this man, who here in a matter of such
importance, has so grossly discovered his great want of learning and judgment.

83 Secondly therefore^, the weakness of this argument will clearly appear,
and the confused, and cloudie mist of the Popes Superiority over the whole
person of every Christian man, which Mr. Fitzherbert for want either of
learning, and judgment, or of sincerity has cast before the eyes of the
unlearned Readers, will be easily dispersed, and their understandings cleared,
if they distinguish betwixt the directive, or commanding, and the coerciue, or
punishing power both of temporal Princes, and also of spiritual Pastors. For
to omit now Metaphisicall questions (as in what consists essentially the
person of man, and how the person of man is distinguished from his humanity,
or which is all one, from the body and soul of man being united in one
essential compound, and whether the subsistence, or personalitie of man be a
simple, or compound entitie, a spiritual, or corporal, or mixed of both, for
if it be a simple entitie, we cannot properly say the whole person of man, as
though the personality of man were compounded of parts, which difficulties the
vulgar sort cannot well comprehend) and to take the whole person of man in the
common vulgar sense, as it is a particular, or individual substance, including
both body and soul, it is evident, that the soul of man is, if not only, yet
principally subject to the directive or commanding power, not only of
spiritual Pastors, but also of temporal Princes, for that laws are not made
but for reasonable creatures, and who have free will to observe or transgress
the law. And therefore although a temporal Prince has power to force or
punish the bodies of his subjects, yet he cannot command their bodies, because
they are not capable of reason or understanding.

84 But we must not argue in the like manner concerning the coerciue, or
punishing power. For, considering that not only the soul, but also the body
are subject to punishments, according to their nature, to wit, the soul to
spiritual, and the body to temporal punishments, therefore as well the body
as the soul are subject to the coerciue, or punishing power in general,
according as it may inflict corporal or spiritual punishments. Wherefore,
neither from the superiority, or authority, which spiritual Pastors have to
direct or command the persons of their spiritual subjects, nor from the
authority which temporal Princes have to direct or command the persons of
their temporal subjects, can we rightly conclude, what authority either
spiritual Pastors, or temporal Princes have to punish the soul, or the
body, or, which is all one, to inflict spiritual or temporal punishments: for
that the soul, and not the body is principally subject to the directive or
commanding power. So that by this manner of arguing from the directive power to
the coerciue, it may rather be concluded, that temporal Princes may punish the
soul, for that they have power to command the soul, rather then that
spiritual Pastors may punish the body, for that they have not power to
command the body, which being an unreasonable creature, is not subject to any
external commandment. But what coerciue authority either spiritual
Pastors, or temporal Princes have to punish the body or soul, we must
gather from the institution of Christ, to wit, whether Christ our Savior has
given authority to spiritual Pastors to inflict only spiritual punishments,
and consequently to punish only the soul, and to temporal Princes to inflict
only corporal and temporal punishments, and consequently to punish only the
body, and not the soul, but only by consequence as being grieved when the
body either in it self, or in some temporal things annexed thereunto, is
punished. So that the maine question, notwithstanding Mr. Fitzherberts
argument, still remains a foot to wit, whether Christ our Savior has given
to spiritual Pastors authority to inflict only spiritual, or also temporal
punishments; neither can this question be decided by any argument grounded
upon natural reason, but only upon the holy Scriptures, wherein the
institution and law of Christ is contained.

85 And although the holy Scriptures do expressly testify, that the Apostles
did in some sort punish, to wit, as Abulensis before Nu. 73.
declared, by way of prediction, or deprecation not only Christians, but also
infidels in their bodies, as S. Paul foretold the blindness of Elymas the
Magician, and S. Peter the death of Ananias and Saphira; yet because this was
done by them miraculously, and by that extraordinary power which they had given
them by Christ, which therefore was not of necessity to descend to their
Successors, we cannot deduce a good argument from thence, that therefore
spiritual Pastors have now an ordinary power to inflict the same punishments,
but only that they may inflict them in that manner, and by that power
wherewith the Apostles did, to wit, by miracle, in which case I will not deny,
but that if perhaps any holy Pope or Bishop have the grace of miracles, he may
by prophecy foretell, or by prayer obtain that such a wicked Prince, whether
he be Christian or Heathen, shall by God, the Angels, or the Devil be
deprived of his life and kingdom. Neither does reason teach us, that because
Saint Peter and the Apostles, had so ample and extraordinary Apostolical power
to inflict corporal punishments, therefore the Pope and the Apostles
Successors should have an ordinary power to inflict the same. For as Christ
gave to the Apostles such an extraordinary, and transcendent power, so he gave
them an extraordinary grace and understanding, that they should not either be
puffed up with pride by reason of so great a power, or at any time abuse the same
in prejudice of themselves or others: which extraordinary grace and
understanding Christ gave not to all future Popes and Bishops: Wherefore seeing
that this plenitude of Ecclesiastical power to depose Kings, and to dispose of
all temporalls, supposing the humane fragilitie of Popes, who therein are like
to other men, might be occasion, to use Almaines words, Almain de potest.
^cces. and L^^ca q. 1. c. 9.
for the Popes to be puffed up with exceeding great pride, and might also be
very hurtful to subjects, there is no likelihood that Christ gave him such a
power.

86 Neither do I make any doubt, that either Christian Princes or people would
be any way grieved, but rather very glad, that the Pope should have so ample a
power and authority over their bodies and goods, if they were assured that he
were so confirmed in grace, and enlightened with supernatural knowledge as the
Apostles were, that he should always in very deed use it to the good of their
souls, and never abuse it to the great prejudice of them and their subjects.
But seeing that Popes are, as other men, subject to all humane infirmities, and
may not only be tempted, but also overcome with ire, envy, hatred, flattery,
and a vehement desire to increase their temporal States and Dominions, no
marvel that Sovereign Princes, who ever have been accounted supreme in
temporals, and therein inferior only to God, cannot take it well, to be made
now subject to the Pope in temporals, unless sufficient reason be brought to
prove the same.

And this I hope may suffice for the confutation of all that Mr. Fitzherbert
has replied concerning the law of GOD, and Nature; and therefore I will now
briefly examine, what he says concerning the law of Nations, and the Civil,
or Imperial law, which shall be the subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein M. Fitzherberts arguments taken from the Law of Nations and the
Civil Law are answered: and first the difference betwixt the Priests of the
old and New Testament, and the Priests of other Nations, and also betwixt the
Law of Nations, and of Nature is declared, and from thence proved that among
all Nations the Civil Commonwealth was supreme, and disposed of all things
both spiritual, and temporal, and punished all persons both Priests and
others with temporal punishments: and consequently that the new Oath cannot
be impugned by the Law of Nations: and lastly what Master Fitzherbert
obiecteth from the Civil Law is confuted.

1. IT is a usual trick of Mr. Fitzherbert, as you have seen in the former
Chapters, and also shall see in this, and the rest, then most of all to brag,
when he has least cause, and when any answer of mine is most sound, and
sufficient, then to cry out that it is improbable, impertinent absurd,
frivolous, foolish, idle, or ridiculous. He pretended to prove in his
Supplement by the law of Nations, that the new Oath is unlawful in regard it
denies the Popes power to excommunicate, and depose temporal Princes, not for
that he thought it otherwise needful, having, as he says, proved already
(but how insufficiently you have seen) that the Oath is contrary to the law
of God, and Nature, but to satisfy the importunity of his Adversary, and to
give his Reader an abundant satisfaction, because as the Lawyers say, abundans
cautela non nocet, a prouiso too much never hurts. And to all the arguments
he brought from the law of Nations, and the Civil law, I gave this brief
answer as here he sets it down.

2 Septimo, ex iure Gentium nihil aliud probat hic Author, etc. Seventhly, this
Author proves nothing else by the law of Nations, but that all people ever
held Religion in the highest price, or esteem, and preferred it before
policy; but that the Priests of the Gentiles had power, as they were Priests,
to punish any man with death, or the deprivation of all his goods, it did not
proceed from the law of Nature, granting them such an authority but from the
municipall laws of the Gentiles, Pro domo sua.
the which Cicero (whom this Author cites) does most manifestly confirm,
saying, that it was divinely invented, and ordained by the ancient Romans, that
their Bishops should have the chief command both in matters belonging to the
Commonwealth, and to the religion of the immortal Gods. And as for the Civil
law, this Author only confirms by it that the Bishop of Rome is the
supreme Governor of the Church in spiritual things. Thus I answered in that
brief Admonition.

3 Now Mr. Fitzherbert to this my Answer makes as you shall see, no other
Reply, then that, which I did fully satisfy above in the sixth Chapter, when I
treated of the law of Nature: and therefore it were needelesse to set down
here his words verbatim, but that otherwise he would take occasion to brag
after his accustomed manner, that I have concealed, and dissembled his
strongest arguments. Observe therefore well what he says. But if thou have,
says he, ip. 129. nu. 2.3
well noted, good Reader, what was the effect, and substance of my discourse
concerning the law of Nature thou will easily discover the weakness of this
answer. For whereas he would prove by Cicero his words alleged by me,
that the authority of the Pagan Priests to punish the supreme Secular
Magistrates with death, or deprivation of goods, proceeded not from the law of
Nature, but from the municipall laws of the Gentiles, I must desire him to
call to mind what was my inference upon the words of Cicero, and the examples
by me alleged; to wit, that this law, and custom amongst the Romans had no
other ground in their opinion, but the Law of Nature, because they having no
other light to guide them, but the light of reason, held it to be most
conform to Nature, that religion should be preferred before policy, and
temporal things subordinate to spiritual, by the same reason that things
less perfect are inferior to the more perfect, the body to the soul, earthly
things to heavenly, men to Angels, and the like.

4 So albeit I do not deny but that their custom proceeded from their
municipall law, yet it does not follow thereon, that it did not also proceed
from the Law of Nature, but rather the contrary, because their municipall law
in that point had no other ground, but the Law of Nature, which moved them to
make that Law. For although the Law of Nature could not teach them the
mysteries of Christian Religion. nor in what manner GOD was to be worshipped,
and served, in which respect they both might, and did err in those things,
which pertained to particular points of religion, (as also other Nations did
which had not the light of grace) yet not only they, but also all other
Nations, being enlightened by nature, agreed in certain general principles
touching religion, as concerning the necessity, and dignity thereof, and that
all humane actions ought to be leuelled, and referred thereto, as to their
end; whereupon necessarily followed the subordination, and subjection of
temporal things to spiritual, and of the Civil, or political Society to
the Religious in matters that touch religion: and all this I explicated further
in my Supplement, when I treated of the law of Nations in particular, in these
words. Thus Mr. Fitzherbert.

5 Whereby first of all you may easily see, that all the proofs he brings
from the law of Nations, he reduces to the law of nature, and that therefore
what I said in the sixth Chapter concerning the law of nature does fully
satisfy all that he says here concerning the law of nations. And secondly
you may see, what a pretty circle he makes, and how cunningly he would
prove the same by the same. For in his sixth Chapter he pretended to prove,
that the authority of Pagan Priests to punish temporally the supreme Civil
Magistrate did proceed from the law of nature, for that it proceeded from the
custom and law of all Nations; and now here he proves, that this their
authority did proceed from the custom, and law of all Nations, for that it
proceeded from the law of nature, by which kind of arguing he proves in
very deed idem per seipsum, the same thing by the very same.

6 Seeing therefore that all he says here is a mere repetition of that he
said in his sixth Chapter, I will also reduce into a brief compendium what I
answered there, that the Reader may thereby clearly see, that he has no way
satisfied, albeit he pretend to have given an abundant satisfaction to that
which I answered in my brief Admonition, as well concerning the law of
Nations, as Nature. And to take away all equivocation and ambiguitie of words,
although the law of nature does properly signify the light of natural reason
teaching or prescribing some thing of necessity to be done, or omitted, or,
which is all one, commanding some thing to be done, or not to be done, for
that every law being taken properly does intrinsecally include some precept, or
commandment, nevertheless we do not now take the law of nature in this
proper, and strict sense, but more generally, for the light of natural reason,
not only as it commands, or forbids, but also as it gives, grants,
teaches or prescribes any thing, abstracting from all positive laws, grants,
and ordinances of God, or man. So that every right, power, or authority, which
the light of natural reason, abstracting from the positive ordinances of God,
or man, teaches to be due, or belong to any man, is said to belong to him by
the law of Nature, as the right which every man has to defend himself and his
goods, although it be with the death of the inuader, is given him by the law
of nature; Likewise the power, and authority, which the Civil commonwealth
has over every member thereof, supposing the union of men in one Civil
Society, is granted by the law of nature, for that the light of natural
reason, abstracting from all positive laws, or graunts of GOD, or man, does
teach, and ordain the same.

7 Now to the point, and to the inference, which Mr. Fitzherbert made upon the
words of Cicero, and the examples by him alleged; first, I did willingly
grant, that the light of natural reason does teach us, that Religion is to
be preferred before policy, and temporal things are in perfection
subordinate to spiritual, by the same reason that things less perfect are
inferior to the more perfect, the body to the soul, earthly things to
heavenly, men to Angels and the like; and that therefore when there are two
things concurring, and commanded to be done, whereof the one concerns
religion, the oath policy, the one spiritual things, the other temporal,
the one concerns the soul, the other the body, we must prefer, caeteris
paribus, that which concerns religion before that which concerns policy,
and that which concerns spiritual things before that which concerns
temporal, and that which concerns the soul before that, which concerns
the body: and this the light of true natural reason does teach us.

8 But what of all this? will he conclude from hence, that because Religious
Priests are in perfection, and nobility superior to temporal Princes by the
same reason that policy is in perfection inferior to Religion, therefore the
light of natural reason does teach us, that Religious Priests may punish
temporally temporal Princes, and are superior to them in temporal
authority? This is a very vicious consequence, and by the like argument we
may conclude, that because Angels are superior to men in perfection, and
excellency of substance, knowledge, and natural strength, therefore they are
also superior to men in authority, and command, and that men are bound by
force of obedience to do what the Angels shall prescribe, which no Divine
will grant, unless they be sent by GOD as his messengers, and ministers. And
likewise we may conclude, that he who has one of the liberal sciences, is
by the law of nature superior in authority to every trades man, by the same
reason that things less perfect are inferior to the more perfect, and every
servile trade is subject, and inferior in perfection to every one of the
liberal arts: and yet whosoever should argue from the law of nature in this
manner, would be esteemed to be in this point no less then a very natural:
for that from the law of nature, and the light of natural reason we can only
conclude, that in what degree of superiority one thing is superior to another,
in the like degree of subjection this is subject, and subordinate to that, and
that therefore temporal things are subject to spiritual in dignity and
perfection, because these are superior to them herein; but to transcend from
one kind of superiority to another, and from superiority in perfection and
dignity, to argue a superiority in command, and authority, or from a
superiority in spirituals, to argue a superiority in mere temporal things, is
contrary to the light and prescript of true natural reason.

9 Secondly, I did also grant that all Nations being enlightened by Nature,
did agree in certain general principles touching Religion, as concerning the
necessity and dignity thereof, and that all humane actions ought to be leuelled
and directed by the square, and rule of Religion, and referred thereto, as to
the end of man, although not to the intrinsecall end of the actions themselves,
as I declared above in the second part; whereupon does necessarily follow a
subordination and subjection of temporal things, to spiritual, and also of
the civil Society to the religious in dignity and perfection: But it does not
follow from the law of nature, or the light of natural reason, that the
religious Society, as it is distinguished from the civil, should have power
and authority to command and much less to punish, especially with temporal
punishments, the civil Society. And the reason hereof I alleged in that
place out of the doctrine of Abulensis. Cap. 6. nu. 35.


10 Because every man living according to the law of nature; and the light of
natural reason may be considered, either as living by himself alone, or else
as living with other men in civil Society. If he be considered as living by
himself alone, what power soever he has either concerning temporals or
spirituals, concerning his body or soul, is in himself alone, so that he has
neither power to command or punish but himself alone; and in this manner every
man is a Priest, and by the law of nature has authority to worship God, and to
sacrifice to him in all places, and at all times, and with all kind of
Sacrifices, which the prescript of true reason does not teach to be unlawful,
for that the law of nature, or the light of natural reason does not limit, or
determine to a man as living by himself alone any certain time, place, or
manner of worshipping God, and doing sacrifice to him. But if a man be
considered, as he is a part and member of some civil Society, or
Commonwealth, then no private man, but the Commonwealth it self, or the
supreme Governor thereof, has by the law of nature, and prescript of
natural reason all authority to command, dispose, ordain, and punish as well
concerning religious as civil affairs: So that in this manner the
Commonwealth it self, or the supreme Governor thereof is the public
Priest, and none has authority to offer Sacrifice to God, or to worship him in
any public manner, and as a public person, but the Commonwealth it self, or
those, whom in her place she shall appoint; neither can any private or
particular man have any public authority to command, ordain, or punish, for
matters belonging to the worshipping of God, but that which the civil
Commonwealth is pleased to grant him.

11 Wherefore there is a great difference, as I noted in that place, betwixt
the Priests and the Religious Society in the law of nature, before any positive
law of God was published, and the Priests and religious Society in the old and
new Testament. For in the law of nature there were not two distinct and
independent Societies, the one Religious, the other Civil, but the civil
Society had all power and authority to command and dispose, as well concerning
the public service of God, as concerning civil government; neither did the
law of nature determine, or appoint any certain men who should be Priests, and
should have full authority to command and dispose of those things which
belonged to the public service of God, but this authority was in the
Commonwealth it self, which appointed certain men to be the public
ministers, as well concerning the public worshipping of God, with religious
rites and ceremonies, as concerning the civil government of the Commonwealth;
neither had these public ministers any more authority or command, then the
Commonwealth did give them; so that it was in the power of the Commonwealth
to extend, diminish, or quite take away the power, authority, command and
privileges, which by her authority were granted unto them. But since the
positive law of God was written, the religious and civil Society are two
total and independent Commonwealths, neither has the civil Commonwealth,
or the supreme Governors thereof any authority to determine matters
concerning religion, and the public service of Almighty God, for that he
himself has appointed those that shall be public Ministers in matters
belonging to Religion, to wit, in the old Testament the sons of Aaron, and
who by natural propagation should descend from him, and in the new Testament
his Apostles, and who by lawful ordination shall descend from them, and what
spiritual authority these Ministers have they do not receive from the civil
Commonwealth, but from God himself.

12 Whereupon it is evident, that we cannot gather what authority and
privileges the Priests either of the old Testament had, or of the new
Testament have, from the law of nature, for that all the authority and
privileges which the Priests in the law of nature had, did wholly depend upon
the civil Commonwealth, by whose authority those Priests and Ministers of
religious rites and ceremonies were made, but what authority either to command
or to punish either Laymen, or Clergymen the Priests of the old Testament
had, and of the new Testament have, we can only gather from the positive
institution, and grant of God, who has given and determined their authority,
and not from the law of nature, wherein the Priests were subject to the civil
Commonwealth, and had all their authority from the Commonwealth it self. And
by this which I have now said here, and more at large declared in the sixth
Chapter, is fully satisfied all that Mr. Fitzherbert has said above, and
repeateth here out of his Supplement concerning the law of nature, in these
words:

13 First then, says he; Page 130. nu. 5.
it is to be considered, that humane law is commonly divided into Ius Gentium,
Ius Civil, and Ius Ecclesiasticum vel Canonicum, the law of Nations, the
Civil law, and the Canon or Ecclesiastical law. And as for the law of Nations
(which is a humane law, so easily and directly deduced from the very principles
of Nature, that all Nations do receive and admit it) it is manifest; etc. But
before we go any farther, it will not be amiss to observe the difference,
which the learned Divines of this age do make betwixt the law of Nations and
Nature, for unless we know and agree what the law of Nations is, we shall
dispute thereof to little purpose. First therefore Mr. Fitzherbert by those
words [ which is a humane law so easily and directly deduced from the very
principles of Nature, that all Nations do receive and admit it] does seem to
signify, that only the known moral principles or general maxims of
Nature, or natural reason do belong to the law of Nature, and the
conclusions, which are easily and directly deduced from them, do belong to the
law of Nations: which doctrine nevertheless all the Divines of this age, even
of his own Society do commonly reject; Vasq. 1 a. 2 ae. disp. 154. cap. 3
Salas Disp. 5. de Leg. sec. 5. Suarez l. 2. de Leg. c. 7.
as you may see in Vasquez, Salas, and Suarez, who do therefore affirm, that
the law of Nature does comprehend not only all moral principles but also all
conclusions, which are easily and directly, or by an evident and necessary
consequence deduced from those principles of Nature.

14 For all moral things, which are known by natural reason, are either the
first general principles of manners, as virtue is to be embraced, vice to be
shunned, Do not that to another, which thou will not have done to thy self;
and these without all doubt do belong to the law of Nature; or else they are
principles not so general, but yet evidently known of themselves, as Justice
is to be kept, God is to be worshipped; Parents are to be honored, and such
like, and these also without all question do appertain to the law of Nature:
or thirdly they are conclusions, which are evidently deduced from the moral
principles of nature, and cannot be known but by discourse, among which some
are known more easily, as adultery, murder, perjury, and such like to be
evil, some are not so easily known, but to know them there is required a
greater discourse, as simple fornication to be of it own nature evil, usury
to be unjust, an officious lie not to be lawful for any cause whatsoever, and
such like. And all these, and other moral conclusions of what degree soever,
so that they be deduced as conclusions from the moral principles of nature by
a certain and evident consequence, do also according to the common doctrine
of Divines, belong to the law of Nature. I said by a certain and evident
consequence, for, as well observes Salas, Salas tract. 14. disp. 5. sec. 5.
as conclusions, which are evidently deduced from moral principles, and do
bind without any positive law, do evidently contain the law of nature, so
those conclusions which are probably deduced, do contain it porbably, and are
laws of nature not certain, but probable, in which if in very deed falsehood
be affirmed, they are not the laws of nature truly, and in very deed, but
apparently, for that an erroneous conscience is not truly a law.

15 The reason, why not only moral principles, but also the conclusions,
which are deduced from them, do belong to the law of nature, and not of
nations, as the law of nations is a positive, and humane law, is both for that
all actions, which by the light of natural reason, abstracting from all
positive precepts of God or man, are known to be evil, and for that cause are
forbidden by the law of God, or man, because they are evil of themselves,
although they had never been forbidden by any such positive law, do belong to
the law of nature; and also for that otherwise the moral precepts of the
Decalogue, and others contained in them, as the precept forbidding simple
fornication, usury and to be revenged of ones enemy by his own private
authority, and such like, should not belong to the law of nature, because none
of those precepts are general principles, but conclusions deduced by discourse
from them, nay nor to honor, and woorship God should belong to the law of
nature, for that it is not known but by discourse that there is a God.

16 And by this the Reader may easily perceive, that Mr. Fitzherbert in
defining the law of nations to be a humane law, which is so easily and directly
deduced from the very principles of Nature, that all Natitions do receive and
admit it, does not only dissent from all the learned Divines, even of his own
Society, but he must also, unless he will maintain strange paradoxes,
plainly contradict himself. For first, if the law of nations be so easily and
directly deduced from the very principles of nature, that all nations do
receive and admit it, it cannot be a humane law, which has it force and
obligation to bind only from the constitution of men, but it must have it
force and obligation to bind from the very principles of nature, and
consequently it must be reduced to the law of nature, and not of nations.
Besides, every humane law is therefore a positive and humane law, not only for
that it is received and admitted by men, but also for that it is made by men,
and has it force to bind only by the positive constitution of men; neither
are those laws, which are only declared by all nations to be easily and
directly deduced from the known principles of nature, to be numbered among
humane laws, but among the laws of nature. And if the law of nations is to be
accounted a humane law, for that it is so easily and directly deduced from the
principles of nature, that all nations do receive and admit it, why may not
many laws of nature be accounted humane laws, seeing that they are so easily
and directly deduced from the very principles of nature, that all nations do
receive and admit them? Moreover, Mr. Fitzherbert will not, as I think, deny
but that many things are forbidden by the law of nature, which nevertheless
are not so easily and directly deduced from the very principles of nature, that
all nations do receive and admit them, as simple fornication, usury,
drunkenness, perpetuity of marriage, and plurality of wives, which according
to the doctrine of all Divines are repugnant to the law of nature, and yet some
nations have not thought these to be unlawful. Whereupon Vasquez boldly
affirms, Vasq. 1 a. 2 ae. disp. 122. c. 2. tom. 1.
that one may have invincible ignorance for his whole life time, of those
conclusions of the law of Nature, which are more obscure, and more remote from
the general principles of Nature, then are the moral precepts of the
Decalogue. Wherefore, although Mr. Fitzherbert does make here a long discourse
about the law of nations, and nature, yet it seems, that he does not hitherto
understand, what is the law of nations, and how it is distinguished from the
law of nature.

17 Wherefore to omit now the diverse opinions of Doctors concerning the
difference of the law of nature, and nations, it will be sufficient for this
present to declare, how Vasquez differs from the other Iesui^es and Divines
in this point. Vasq. 1 a. 2 ae. disp. 157. c. 3. tom. 2.
For Vasquez is of opinion, that the law of nations is comprehended under the
law of nature, as a part and member thereof, and that it differs from the law
of nature only in this, that the law of nature is that, which is deduced by a
very good discourse from the principles of nature, not only as permitting, but
also as commanding some thing to be done, or not to be done, insomuch that it
is a rule of virtue and vice, and this, whether we consider nature by it
self, or, which is all one, as men live alone by themselves, or else as living
in common and civil Society. But the law of nations is only a law of
permission, utility, or conueniencie. For some things are in this manner
convenient and profitable to men, as living in Civil Society, which are not
convenient for a man living by himself alone: therefore this permission of a
thing convenient to the whole nature of man, as living in Civil Society, is
called by Vasquez the law of nations that is, a license or power of nations. Of
this sort is the division of lands, for without it, Cities could very hardly be
well governed; and also a right, or power to make war, and by the right of
war to revenge injuries, for without this, Cities would be exposed to a
thousand injuries: but a power to marry is not to be called the law of
nations, but of nature; for that it was not introduced by natural reason, for
this consideration, that men began to live in Cities, whereupon they were
called Nations, but because it is convenient by permission to the nature of
man, being absolutely considered by it self. So that according to Vasquez no
law of nations is a rule of virtue, and vice, to wit, commanding something as
necessary, or forbidding some thing as evil, but only granting, or
permitting some thing as convenient and profitable, and also as honest, but not
necessary: but the law of nature both commands, forbids, and permits.
Wherefore the law of nature as it does permit only, and not command, or forbid
is by Vasquez called the law of nations. For all moral precepts do, according
to him, belong either to the law of nature, or to the Civil law: for if any
thing be commanded, or forbidden by force of natural reason, it belongs to
the law of nature; but if it be commanded, or forbidden by the will of man
having authority thereunto, it belongs to the Civil law. And of this
opinion he thinks Aristotle, and all the ancient Philosophers to have been,
for that all Philosophers before the Civil lawyers, did divide every law in
general into the law of nature, and the Civil law.

18 But this opinion of Vasquez does not please Suarez, Salas, Suarez lib. 2.
cap. 18. 19. Salas disp. 2. sec. 2. 3. and seq. D. sec. 3.
and many other Divines, albeit Salas thinks this question concerning the
difference of the law of nature, and nations, is for the greatest part rather a
verbal question, and of words, then real and of any great moment. For if it
be once known, that any thing belongs to the law of nature; it little
imports to say, that it belongs also to the law of nations, for that all
nations do commonly keep, or use that law. But it greatly imports to know,
whether any thing be commanded by the law of nature, or only by the positive
law of man, and if it be commanded by positive law, whether that law be common
to all nations, or no, and whether it be common to all nations, as it were per
se, by it self, for that all nations, as being one total community of
mankind have decreed it, or, as it were per accidens, by accident, for that
every Nation decreeing it by it self, we may gather by Induction that all
nations have decreed it, and so that it is a decree common to all nations.

19. For the better understanding whereof Suarez, Suarez lib. 2. de Leg. pap.
19. Salas Tract. 14. q. 91. disp. 2. sec. 3.
and Salas do observe, that a law may be said to be common to all, or many
nations, either for that all, or many nations being taken severally by
themselves, do agree in that law, or else for that it is observed by the use
and custom of all, or many nations, as they have among themselves a certain
society, and civil communication. For although every City, commonwealth, or
Kingdom be in it self a perfect community, and composed of her parts, and
members, yet every one of them is in some sort a member of this universal
world, as it appertains to mankind; neither are those communities so
sufficient severally for themselves, but that they want some help, society,
and communication of others, sometime for greater utility, or conueniencie,
and sometime for moral necessity, and want, and in regard of this they want
some law, whereby to be directed in this kind of communication, and society.
And although for the most part this be done by natural reason, yet it cannot
be done sufficiently, and immediately for all things, and therefore some
special laws might be introduced by the custom of the said nations. For as
in one City, or province a custom does bring in a law, so also in the
university of mankind the law of nations might by custom be introduced; and
especially for that those things, which belong to this law, are both few, and
also very near to the law of nature, and have from it a very easy inference,
and are so profitable, and convenient to nature it self, that although it be
not an evident inference, as of a thing altogether necessary to moral honesty,
or virtue, yet it is very convenient to nature, and of it self acceptable to
all men.

20 Wherefore the opinion of these Authors does consist in these points. The
first is, that the law of nations does not only permit, or grant somethings,
but also command, and forbid by binding under sin: for that otherwise the law
of nations would not properly be a law, neither should a law in general, being
taken properly, and as it is a rule of reason, or of virtue, and vice, which
intrinsecally includes some precept, be well divided into the law of nature,
of nations, Vasque disp. 157. cap. 4. in fine Thom. prim. secun. q. 95. ar. 4.
and the Civil Law: and yet Vasquez himself does affirm, that the law of
nations was by S. Thomas rightly numbered among humane laws. Besides, the law
of naure, and the Civil law, do permit and grant many things, and so the law
of nature does grant or permit, but not command a man to marry a wife, and to
keep, and conserve his proper liberty, and therefore it is not proper to the
law of nations to permit, or grant, neither ought it by this to be
distinguished from other laws. Moreover, if a permissiue or concessiue law in
respect of all mankind, as living in civil society, is called the law of
nations, why may not also a preceptiue or commanding law although it suppose
civil society, in the same respect be called a law of nations? Neither can
there be made any doubt, but that from civil society, and from the positive
law of nations, yea and from the civil law, may arise a natural obligation;
as for subjects to obey the positive laws of their princes, for children to
honor their parents, for married persons to observe conjugal duty, for
servants in general to serve their masters, But see above cha. 6. nu. 23. and
nu. 93. and seq.
not to take away by private authority the goods of another man, which has
been given him by the positive laws, or grants of temporal Princes, and many
such like, all which do suppose some civil society.

21 The second is, that the Civil Laws, and the Divines do not speak
commonly of the law of nations after the same manner. For the Divines do
commonly call the law of nations that law; which is, ordained, and made by
nations, and the law of nature they call that which nature it self, or the
prescript of natural reason without the will, and decree of man does make, and
ordained. But the Civil Lawyers do oftentimes call the law of nature, that
law or right which is common also to brute beasts: and the law of nation, that
law, which all men, and only men do use, although-otherwise it be grounded
upon natural reason: as you may see in ff. de just. and iure, where the law of
nature is described to be that, which Nature has taught all sensible
creatures, and is not only proper to men, but common also to beasts; fishes
and birds, as carnal copulation, getting of children, and bringing of them up:
and the law of nations is described to be that, which all Nations do use, and
which is common only to men among themselves, as Religion toward God, to obey
our Parents, and Country, to defend our selves from wrong, and injury. And
therefore as very well observes Paradulphus. Prateius cited by Salas, Salas
Disp. 2. seq. 4.
unless one diligently observe (which has given occasion to many men of
error) that the law of nations is by the Lawyers sometimes taken for the true
law of nature, and sometime it is taken for that law, which is made, and
received by the greatest part of mankind, and do very well distinguish these
two, he will never come to the true knowledge of the law. And therefore
Bartholus; to avoid this confusion does distinguish two laws of nations, the
one he calls Ius primarium; the first, or principal law, and this is the
very law of nature, which he defines to be that law, which from the very
beginning of Nations was introduced by natural reason, without any decree, or
constitution of Nations: and the other he calls Ius secundarium, the less
principal law of nations, which all Nations do use by their own decree, or
constitution.

22 The third is, that the law of nations, being taken most properly, and
rigorously is both a positive law, as many Doctors cited by Salas do hold,
that is, it is a law made, and enacted by the positive constitution of men, and
not by the prescript of natural reason, Salas disp. 2. sec. 3.
and also that the law of nature which does contain in it both the known
principles of nature, or natural reason, and also the conclusions, which are
clearly, easily, and directly deduced from those principles, is not properly
the law of nations. And this also the Emperor Justinian does sufficiently
confirm, Institut. de Iure not. Gent. and civil.
who makes this distinction betwixt the civil law, and the law of nations;
that whatsoever every particular people, or nation, does enact, or ordain,
that is called the civil law, as being a law proper to that city: But the law
of nations is common to all mankind, for that custom, and humane necessities
so requiring, the nations of men have made to themselves certain laws: and
truly if those laws were natural, they could not be well said to be made by
men, but by nature it self, or by God the Author of nature; Seeing therefore
that the law of nature is not made by men, it cannot properly be called the law
of nations. Whereupon it follows, that it is not for this cause only called
the law of nations, for that all nations do use it, observe it, receive, or
admit it, as being easily and directly deduced from the very principles of
nature, but for that they do use, observe, receive, and admit it, as being the
Authors, and enacters thereof.

23 So that, as the civil law, and the law of nature do take their name or
denomination from the Authors, or makers thereof, so also the law of nations.
Wherefore the law of nations is that, which nations made for themselves, and
therefore it is a positive law. For all nations, as they make one Community of
mankind, have power to bind every particular man to those things, which are
convenient to all mankind, as every city has power to bind every member
thereof to those things, which are convenient for that City, and every
kingdom to those things which are convenient for the whole kingdom. And that
all nations had intention to bind men to some things, it is manifest by
tradition, and they might sufficiently declare their intention by words,
customs, or other signs, especially in the beginning of the world, when in
regard of the few number of men, and of their mutual love, and concord it was
an easy matter, for all, or the greater part of men to agree in the same will,
or intention, and in some manner to publish, and declare the same: And this law
is not the law of nature, for that it is grounded in humane will, and not in
any necessary prescript of natural reason; neither is it the Civil law, for
that it is not proper, and peculiar to one City, or Kingdom, therefore it is
to be called the law of nations, not only for that nations do use, receive,
and admit it, and are bound to observe it, as Mr. Fitzherbert does here
insinuate, for that they are bound also to receive, admit, and observe the law
of nature, but because it has it force and obligation to bind themselves, as
from the Authors, makers, and enacters thereof.

24 And by this the Reader may easily perceive, that the law of nations
properly so called, is not, according to these Divines comprehended in the law
of nature, as a part in the whole, but is distinct from it essentially, albeit
they do agree in many things, Suarez lib. 2. cap. 19. 20.
as Suarez does declare at large. For first they agree, that both of them are
in some sort common to all men, in which respect both of them may be called the
law of nations, or of men, if we only regard the word or name. Secondly, they
agree, that as the matter of the law of nations has regularly place only
among men, so also the matter of the law of nature is proper to men, either
altogether, or for the most part, for sometimes also the law of nations may
dispose in a matter common to brute beasts, as in permitting fornication, or
the carnal company with sundry persons, which is common also to beasts. And
therefore many examples, which by the Civil Lawyers are contained under the
law of nations only in regard of this condition, as Religion toward God,
honor to Parents, piety toward our Country, and such like, do only in name
belong to the law of nations properly so called, for in very truth they
appertain to the law of nature. Thirdly, they agree, that in both of them are
contained precepts and prohibitions, and also graunts, concessions, and
permissions.

25 But they differ first and principally; for the affirmative precepts of the
law of nations do not infer any necessity of the thing commanded only of
it own nature by some evident deduction from the principles of nature, for
whatsoever is of this kind is natural; and therefore this necessity must
only proceed from the consent, and positive constitution of men. And in like
manner the negative precepts of the law of nations do not forbid any thing
because it is evil of it self, for this also is merely natural. Wherefore
in regard of humane reason the law of nations does not only declare the act to
be evil, but does also make it evil, neither does it forbid evil, for that
it is evil, as the law of nature does, but by forbidding the act it makes it
evil. Secondly, they differ in universality, and community to all Nations:
for the law of nature is common to all, and only through error and ignorance it
is not kept by some, but the law of nations is not always, but regularly
common to all, or almost all nations, as S. Isidore writes; Isidor. lib. 5.
Etymolog. ca. 5.
whereupon without any error that law may in some places not be observed,
which by others is thought to belong to the law of nations.

26 Thirdly, they differ in mutability. For the law of nations cannot be so
immutable as the law of Nature, because immutability does proceed from
necessity, and therefore where there is not the like necessity, there cannot
be the like immutability. Whereupon we may easily gather, that the precepts
of the law of Nations are mutable, for as much as they depend upon the consent
of men. And the reason is^, for that those things which are forbidden by the
law of Nations, are not simply, absolutely, and intrinsecally evil of
themselves, because these precepts are not deduced from the principles of
nature, by any necessary or evident deduction, but do only bind by virtue of
humane consent, which has been introduced at leastwise by a general custom,
and therefore in regard of the matter there is no repugnance, that in the law
of Nations there may be made some alteration, so that it be done by sufficient
authority.

27 Wherein it is to be observed, that this mutation does happen otherwise in
the law of Nations, which is only common, for that all, or many Nations do
agree in such, or such a law, and otherwise in that law, which is common by the
use and custom of Nations, as among themselves they have a certain Society,
and communication. For the first law may be changed by a particular Kingdom,
or Commonwealth, for as much as concerns that kingdom, or Commonwealth,
because that law as it is in that Kingdom, or Commonwealth, is intrinsecally
a Civil law, to speak so, and it is only called the law of Nations, either
for that other Nations have the same law, or else for that it is so near to
the law of Nature that from thence the universality of such a law does arise:
But this law, as it is per se, and of it own nature in every Commonwealth,
does depend upon their peculiar determination and authority, or custom of that
Commonwealth in it self, and without respect to other Commonwealths,
therefore it may be changed by that Commonwealth, for as much as concerns
that Commonwealth, although others do not consent thereunto, because every
Commonwealth is not bound to conform her self to others. As for example, any
Commonwealth may ordain, that within her self common harlots shall not be
permitted, or that all unjust buyings and sellings in every excess whatsoever
shall be repealed, and made void, or that they shall not use money, but other
kinds of exchangings; for although these things be not done de facto, because
there is no cause or profit to do the same, yet in respect of moral honesty,
and sufficient authority they do not repugne to be done.

28 But in the other law of Nations it is far more hard to make any
alteration because it does respect the common good of all nations, and it
seems to be made by the authority of all, and therefore without the consent
of all it cannot be abolished. Nevertheless in regard of the matter there is
no repugnance, but that it may be altered, if all Nations should consent, or if
the contrary custom should by little and little be brought in. But although
this may be conceived as not repugnant, yet morally it is not possible, for
that this law being so near to the law of nature, and so convenient according
to natural reason, it is scarce possible that all Nations, or the greatest
part should agree to the abrogation thereof. Nevertheless in another manner
any one Community may command, that among themselves only such, or such a law
of nations be not kept, and this manner is possible and moral. And so the law
of nations concerning the bondage of captives taken in a just war, is changed
among Christians by an ancient custom of Chrstians, which is as it were a
special law of Christian nations, and also by an express Imperial law of
Justinian the Emperor, Cod. de Episcopis and Clericis, leg. Deo auxilium.

29 Lastly, Suarez distinguishes the law of nations from the Civil law, first
in this, that the law of nations is not written, but is introduced by use and
custom, wherein it differs from the law of nature, which although it be not
written, yet it is grounded in nature, and not only in custom; but the Civil
law is both written, and not written. Secondly, that the law of nations is
introduced by the use and custom of all nations or almost all; for it is
sufficient to the law of nations, according to Saint Isidore, cited before, Nu.
25.
that all nations, or almost all nations well governed do use the same: but
the Civil law, although it may also be introduced by custom, yet it is
introduced by the custom of one, or few nations, and binds only them.
Thirdly, that the Civil law may be altered wholly, but the law of nations,
cannot, speaking morally be altered wholly, but only in part; which is not to
be understood of the whole collection of all the precepts of both laws, for so
neither of them can morally be wholly changed, because it is morally impossible
to alter all the civil precepts in any one kingdom, but it is to be
understood of every singular precept, which may easily be changed and abrogated
throughout the whole kingdom, but no one precept of the law of nations can
throughout all nations be abrogated, although some nation do not observe it.
This is the opinion of Suarez concerning the difference betwixt the law of
nature, of nations, and the Civil law.

30 But although as well observes Salas, this question is for the greatest
part rather verbal and of words then real, and of the thing it self, for
that all do agree in this, that whatsoever is forbidden by the law of nature,
is of it self evil, and what is forbidden by the positive law of men, whether
it be of one nation, of many, or of all, is not evil of it self, but made
evil by that positive law, and prohibition, Nevertheless concerning that
distinction, which Suarez, and Salas do make of all nations, or the greatest
part, as they are taken jointly, and make one Society, or Commonwealth of
mankind, and of all nations, as they are taken severally each one by
themselves, I have one chief difficulty: for in my opinion this distinction
of theirs is merely imagined, and invented without any good, and sufficient
ground: because although all Nations do make one Society, or commonwealth of
mankind, as they are referred to GOD the invisible King, and Governor of all
mankind, yet as they are referred to their visible Governors on earth, they
do not make one, but diverse total Civil Societies, Kingdoms, or
Commonwealths; and consequently the laws made by them are really diverse, and
not one law; and so the law of nations is not truly, and formally one law, but
diverse laws observed, or by express, or vertuall covenant agreed upon by all,
or the greatest part of nations, and it cannot be called one law, except by
aggregation, as all, or the greatest part of nations, as they are referred to
their visible Governors on earth, cannot be properly, and formally, but only
by aggregation, be called one Civil Society, kingdom, or Commonwealth, (as
many stones laid together are by aggregation called one heap of stones,) no
more then England, France, and Spain, be called one kingdom, or parts of one
total kingdom compounded of them three, or the laws commanding, or
forbidding the same thing, made, or by covenant agreed upon by these three
kingdoms, be called one singular law.

31 From whence it follows first, that the law of nations, as it is a
positive humane law, is not formally one singular law, but many Civil laws of
diverse nations together, although it may be called one law of nations, for
that it commands, and forbids one and the self same thing. Secondly, that
the Christian nation, as it is referred to the visible Governors thereof is
not properly, and formally, one Civil Society, Nation, Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, but many temporal Kingdoms professing the same Christian
Religion, although as it is referred to the supreme spiritual Pastor
thereof, it be truly, properly, and formally one spiritual Society,
Kingdom. Church, and mystical body of Christ. Thirdly, that the law of
nations, as it is a positive law, may be changed, and wholly abrogated by any
particular Kingdom or Commonwealth for as much as it concerns only that
kingdom, or Commonwealth because that law, as it is in that kingdom, or
Commonwealth, is intrinsecally, to speak so, a Civil law, and has not force
by virtue of the law to bind the subjects of that kingdom, or Commonwealth,
but as it was enacted, and received by the Governors, and subjects of that
kingdom, or commonwealth. Nevertheless by virtue of some express, or tacit
pact, covenant, or agreement (which properly is no law, for that a law
requires a superiority in the maker thereof over the persons who are bound to
observe that law, which superiority a covenant does not require) made betwixt
diverse kingdoms it may bind also the subjects of other kingdoms: in which
respect the law of nations, for as much as it concerns diverse kingdoms,
cannot be repealed and abrogated without the consent of both kingdoms, because
pacts and covenants may not be broken without the consent of all parties; but
if both parties do agree, it is lawful not to observe that covenant, for as
much, as it concerns only themselves. And so the custom of receiving
Ambassadors in time of hostility, under the law or rather covenant of
immunitie, which is said to be brought in by the law of nations, may be
abrogated by the mutual consent of two kingdoms, for as much as concerns
themselves, although other kingdoms will not for their parts agree thereunto.
And for the same reason any other law of nations, as it is a pure positive
law, may be repealed by the consent, and agreement of those kingdoms whom it
does concern, although other nations will still observe the same. And this
may suffice concerning the difference betwixt the law of nature, of nations,
and the Civil law. Now to Mr. Fitzherberts discourse.

32 And as for the law of Nations, says he, pa. 130. nu. 5.
(which is a humane law so easily, and directly deduced from the very
principles of nature, that all nations do receive, and admit it) it is
manifest, that it cannot dissent from those infallible grounds, which I have
laid already, as well out of the law of Nature, as out of the law of GOD,
especially seeing that there is nothing, wherein all Nations do more
uniformly agree, by the very instinct of Nature, then that all temporal
things are inferior to spiritual things, and subordinate thereto, whereupon
it necessarily follows, etc. But what grounds either infallible, or fallible
Mr. Fitzherbert has already laid as well out of the law of nature, as out of
the law of GOD, you have already seen. Neither does any man make any doubt,
but that this is an infallible ground, wherein all nations by the very instinct
of nature do uniformly agree, that as all spiritual things are superior to
all temporal things in dignity, worth, and excellency in general, so all
temporal things are inferior, and subordinate to spiritual things in the
same degree of subjection, and subordination, wherein spiritual things are
superior to them; for no man can be so foolish as to imagine, that temporal
things must be subject to spiritual things in any other degree, or kind of
subjection, or subordination, then wherein spiritual things are superior to
them.

33 Mark now what Mr. Fitzherbert would conclude from this infallible ground:
Whereupon it necessarily follows, says he, that all the temporal states of
temporal Princes, are subordinate to the Church, and to the head thereof, and
to be disposed by him, when the good of the Church shall so require, as I have
amply declared. But fie for shame, that Mr. Fitzherbert, who is accounted a man
of great judgment, though of small learning, should make so childish, and
improbable a consequence, and withal to esteem it a necessary inference? For
what man of judgment would argue thus: All temporal things are inferior,
subject, and subordinate to spiritual things, to wit, in worth, dignity, and
excellency, therefore the Pope has power to dispose of all temporal things,
when the good of the Church shall so require? But my Adversaries usual custom
is to darken, and confound the Readers understanding with a mist of cloudie,
and ambiguous words, which being once dissolved, and taken away, the plain,
and perspicuous truth will presently appear. For as concerning his antecedent
proposition, which is, that all temporal things are inferior to spiritual
things, and subordinate thereto, first, if his meaning be, that all temporal
things are inferior and subordinate to all spiritual things in every kind of
subjection, this is apparently false, for that all spiritual things are not
capeable of all kind of superiority, seeing that only spiritual persons, or
substances, and not spiritual accidents are capable of spiritual authority,
or jurisdiction, which consists in a power to command, to punish, or to
dispose of something.

34 Secondly, if his meaning be, that all temporal things are inferior, and
subordinate to all spiritual things in some kind of subjection, this is very
true; for as all spiritual things, in that they are spiritual, are more
excellent, and of a more noble, more perfect, and of a superior, and higher
degree or order, then is any temporal thing, so all temporal things, as they
are temporal, are inferior, and subordinate in nobility, perfection and
excellency to all spiritual things: But from a superiority in perfection,
worth, and nobility to conclude a superiority of another kind, to wit, in
authority, jurisdiction, or power to dispose thereon, is transcendere de
genere ad genus, to transcend from one kind to another, which manner of arguing
every Schoole-boy knows to be vicious: as thus, Angels both good, and bad
are superior to men in substance, knowledge, might, and other natural
perfections, but to conclude from hence, that therefore Angels are superior to
men in authority, or Jurisdiction, and that therefore men are inferior and
subject therein to Angels, and are bound to obey them as their lawful
Superiors, unless they be sent as messengers from God, which the Greek word
(...) does import, and which, as Saint Gregory says, S. Greg. hom. 34. in
Euanga.
is a word of office, not of nature, were a very fallacious kind of arguing.
Also all servile trades are inferior, subject, and subordinate to all liberal
arts and sciences, to wit in worth, perfection, and nobility, and this all
tradesmen will acknowledge, but they would smile at him that should conclude
from thence, that therefore all they that are endued with any liberal art or
science may command and punish all tradesmen, and dispose of what they have,
when the good of the liberal arts or sciences shall so require.

35 But thirdly, if Mr. Fitzherbert in his antecedent proposition by spiritual
things does not understand all spiritual things, but only spiritual persons,
who by their office have charge of Religion, and of all spiritual things
appertaining to Religion, and that all temporal things are by the instinct of
nature, and the light of natural reason subject, and subordinate to spiritual
persons in such sort, that they may be disposed of by them, when the good of
Religion shall so require, then indeed supposing this antecedant proposition
to be true, it does necessarily follow, that the Pope has power to dispose
of all temporal things in order to spiritual good; But then he supposes
that which he should prove, and which I ever denied: for, as I have amply
showed before, by the law of nature the civil Commonwealth it self, and the
supreme Governors thereof had supreme authority to dispose of all things,
as well concerning Religion, as State, and policy. Neither did the Religious
Society, and the civil Commonwealth in the law of nature make two total,
and independent bodies, Societies, or Commonwealths, as they do now in the
new Law, wherein the temporal Prince, or the Civil Commonwealth have not to
dispose of spiritual, and religious affairs, as they did in the law of
nature, and according to the custom of all nations: and therefore it cannot
be proved either by the law of nature, or of nations, that the Pope has
power to dispose of the bodies, States, or temporal goods of temporal
Princes, but contrariwise standing in the law of nature, the Civil
Commonwealth had supreme power, and authority to dispose of the bodies, and
goods of Religious Priests, and of all things belonging to Religion, and the
public service of God.

36 Wherefore to little purpose are those words, which Mr. Fitzherbert next
adioyneth. And therefore Vlpian the Lawyer, says he, affirming that Ius
Gentium, the Law of Nations, is that, which is common only to men, puts for
example, Religio erga Deum, Religion toward God, giving to understand, that
all Nations, and people do agree in nothing more, then that due honor is to
be given to Almighty GOD, which is not done, when any thing is preferred
before his service, or when temporal things are not subordinate to spiritual,
and due reverence, respect, and obedience given to his immediate Ministers.

37 But what is all this to the purpose? what will he conclude from hence? who
makes any doubt, but that all Nations and people do uniformly agree in this,
that due honor is to be given to almighty God, and that nothing is to be
preferred before his service, and that temporal things are subordinate to
spiritual, to wit, in perfection, worth, and excellency, and that due
reverence, respect, and obedience is to be given to his immediate Ministers?
But from hence it only follows according to the law of nature, and Nations,
that because in the law of nature the chief Ministers of God in all things as
well concerning his public service, as the civil government, was the civil
Commonwealth it self, which because she could not by her self immediately
exercise the said functions, she appointed certain Ministers to execute the
same, therefore we must give due reverence, respect and obedience, first, to
the Commonwealth it self, or the supreme Governors thereof, and secondly,
to those immediate Ministers, whom the Commonwealth it self, or the supreme
Governors thereof, have appointed, according to the honor, dignity, and
authority, which is granted them. And therefore he that should make this
argument, Due honor is to be given to almighty God, and nothing is to be
preferred before his service, and due reverence, respect, and obedience, is to
be given to his immediate Ministers, therefore the Pope has authority by the
law of Nature, and Nations, to depose temporal Princes, and to dispose of all
their temporals, it is evident, that he shoots far wide of the mark, and
makes a very vain and frivolous consequence, seeing that according to the law
of nature, and Nations, the civil Common-weath has full authority to dispose
of all things both concerning state and Religion.

38 Wherefore with these general propositions, which all men understand and
approve, he still joins that ambiguous and equivocal proposition, that
temporal things are inferior and subordinate to spiritual things, to make
the unlearned Reader believe that some great mystery lies hidden therein,
whereas the plain meaning of it is, that spiritual things are superior to
temporal things in worth, excellency, and dignity, and therefore caeteris
paribus, to be preferred before them, so that in very deed the meaning thereof
is nothing else, but that the service of God is to be preferred before all
temporal things, which in the law of nature all civil Commonwealths which
had supreme authority to dispose of all things both concerning State and
Religion, did ever acknowledge. And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert laboring in his
next Paragraph to prove this, spends his time and labor in vain, for that
no man makes doubt, but that all Nations ever preferred Religion, and the
service of their Gods before all other things.

39 But before I come to set down his words, I think it not amiss to declare
briefly in what sense Religion toward God, which Vlpian the Lawyer mentioned
here by my Adversary reduces to the law of Nations, may appertain both to the
law of Nations and Nature. And that he may the more easily perceive his own
error and ignorance in contending to prove by the law of Nature and Nations,
the Popes authority to depose temporal Princes, I will relate verbatim Suarez
doctrine, against which he neither can, nor will, as I suppose, in this point
take any exception.

40 Religion, or the worshipping of God, says Suarez, Suarez. lib. 2. Leg.
cap. 19. number. 10.
which example the Lawyer used, does absolutely belong to the law of nature,
but the special and particular determination thereof does belong to the
positive law of God, and in the order of nature, (mark these words) it would
belong to the civil or private Law: But the mean betwixt both seems in some
sort to belong to the law of Nations, as the right to worship God by Sacrifices
is not simply, or absolutely commanded by the law of nature, and yet all
Nations d^ seem to have agreed therein. as we have said, treating of this
matter, and therefore it may worthily be said to belong to the law of Nations.
Likewise, that there should be in the Commonwealth a State of man appointed,
specially to the service of God, does not seem to belong to the absolute law
of nature, yet it is so convenient and agreeable thereunto, that almost all
Nations and Commonwealths have agreed in this institution, at least wise in
the general, although in the particular manner there has been great variety,
and therefore concerning this institution in general, Religion may also be
said to belong to the law of Nations. Thus Suarez.

41 Whereby Mr. Fitzherbert may clearly see, that although to worship God in
general is commanded by the law of nature, yet both to worship him in this, or
that particular manner is not ordained by the law of nature, but left to the
determination of every private man, as he is considered to live by himself
alone, or of the civil Commonwealth, as he lives in civil Society; and also
that there should be in the Commonwealth a State of men appointed, specially
for the public service and worshipping of God, is not ordained by the law of
nature, but only by the law of nations, and this also only in general, for
as concerning the particular manner, to wit, what honor, dignity, authority,
and prerogatives this State of men should have, it is not determined by the law
of nations, because in this there has always among nations been great
variety, for that some nations gave to their religious Priests greater honor,
authority, and prerogatives, and some gave less, as partly you have seen in
the sixth Chapter, and partly you shall see anon by examining the rest of my
Adversaries discourse. So that you may manifestly perceive, that no good
argument can be brought from the law of nature or nations to prove, that the
Pope has authority to punish temporally the supreme civil Magistrate, seeing
that all the authority which the religious Priests had in the law of nature,
either in temporals or spirituals, did only proceed from the grant of the
civil Commonwealth it self, and not from the law of nature.

24 Now let us go on with Mr. Fitzherberts discourse; This, says he, Page 131.
nu. 6
is manifest by the general consent and practice of all Nations, who have
always preferred divine things before humane, and spiritual things before
temporal as in Aethiopia, etc. But this is only a continual repeating of
that which he has so often affirmed, and which no man calls in question; for
no man makes doubt, but by the law of nature we are bound to prefer the
service of God before any other thing, and to give due reverence, respect, and
obedience to his immediate Ministers, but to honor or serve God in this, or
that particular manner, and what particular honor, respect, or obedience is
due to religious Priests, this does not proceed from the law of nature or
nations, but in the order of nature from the civil or private laws of every
nation, as Suarez before affirmed, for that, as all histories acknowledge, in
this there was a great variety among all nations, Baptist. Fulg. lib. 1.
as in Aethiopia says Mr. Fitzherbert, where the Priests determined of the
life and death of Kings in such sort, that when the Priests signified to them
that it was Gods will they should die, they presently killed themselves.

43 But he might have added, if it had pleased him, the next words following in
Fulgosus, whom he cites in the margent, that this custom of theirs did not
always continue, Diod. Sicul. lib. 3. cap. 1.
for it was abolished by King Erganes, who lived about the time of Ptolomey
King of Egypt, who to the end his death should not be foretold him by the
Priests, he slew them all, and was the first that took away that custom.
Besides, neither was this custom observed among other nations, as among the
Romans, the chief Priest or Bishop ought to keep his hands not only pure
from all blood, but also he ought not to be partaker or privy to the death of
any man, insomuch that if any condemned man did fly to him he was freed from
death for that day Alex. lib. 2. geralium dierum cap. 8.
. Neither did those Priests of Aethiopia properly put their Kings to death by
authority, but as interpreters of the will of GOD they did declare, that it was
GODS pleasure they should kill themselves; and so this example is little to the
purpose.

44 Also in Egypt, says Mr. Fitzherbert, none could be a King except he were
a Priest. True it is, that the custom of the Egyptians was, Stobaeus se. 42.
as Stobaeus also affirms, to create either Priests, or warlike men their
Kings, for honor and nobility was given to warlike men for their fortitude,
and to Priests for their wisdom: But he that was chosen out of warlike men
to be their King was forthwith made a Priest, and partaker of philosophy, or
the study of wisdom. And no doubt, but that this was a laudable custom, and
so much the more, for that the King of Egypt could not judge, Diodor. Sicul.
l. 1. c. 6.
but according to the laws, and the Kings themselves were subject to the laws
of their kingdom; yet this custom of the Egyptians was not general among
other nations. For although in times past, Plutarch. in quaest. Romans
as Plutarch writes, Kings did the greatest and chiefest part of Sacrifices,
and they with the other Priests did concur in sacred rites, yet after they
became to wax insolent, arrogant, and cruel, the Graecians for the most part
taking away from them their Empire, left them only authority to sacrifice to
their Gods.

45 And the like custom, says my Adversary, was also observed among the
Goths, whiles they were Paynimes. That the Goths had this for a continual
custom, that none should be their Kings, unless they were Priests, I have not
read, and that it was among them a continual practice I can hardly believe,
both for that their custom was, that their Kings should not be learned, but
among al nations, Caelius l. 8. c. 6.
the Priests were usually the most learned of all the people, and also for that
the contrary is signified by Ioannes Magnus in his history of the Goths, who
writes, that their Priests were of diverse degrees, to wit, Pontifices,
Archiflamines, Flamines, Salij, Augures, and that to their chief Priests, See
Procopius and Joan. Magnus, in their history of the Goths. Olaus l. 3 c. 8. and
l. 8. c. 15.
who were called Pontifices, was granted by them equal power with their Kings,
whose authority was so great, that whatsoever they should either counsel or
command, both the King himself, and the people, did forthwith wllingly
execute, as an oracle from heaven. And no marvel if it were so, seeing that
the reverence which the Goths did bear to Priests, although they were of a
contrary Religion to them, was exceeding great and to be admired; insomuch that
when they conquered any City, they did neither violate Temple, nor Priests;
and in the judgment of all men they were accounted so pious and religious that
they would not hurt any one, that should fly to the Temples dedicated to God
for succor or Sanctuary. And when Alaricus King of the Goths, otherwise a
barbarous and cruel man, invaded Italy in the time of Honorius the Emperor,
and had subdued Rome, before he would give leave to his soldiers to spoil
the City, he proclaimed by sound of trumpet, that the bodies and goods of those
persons, Fulgos. l. 1. c. 1.
who flyed for refuge to the Apostles Church should not be touched, and which
is more to be admired, the soldiers themselves in the very midst of the
sack and spoil, meeting certain sacred Virgins carrying upon their heads
plate of gold, after they were informed, that they were consecrated to the
Apostles, did not extend their hands so much as to touch them. Fulosus in the
same place.

46 And amongst the Gauls, says Mr. Fitzherbert, the Druides, who were
their Priests, had in their hands the chief manage of public affairs,
deciding all controversies, and judging all civil, and criminal causes,
Caesar l. 6. de Bello Gallico.
excommunicating such as would not obey them, and those that were so
excommunicated were abhorred and detested of all men. But this custom of the
Gauls proceeded from the private and civil law of that nation, and was not
common to all nations, as you may see above in the Graecians, who from their
Priests took away the temporal government, and left them only authority to
sacrifice to their Gods, and the great variety, which was among nations
concerning the authority of their Priests, does evidently convince the same.

47 I have also signified before Cap. 6. nu. 10
says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 132. nu. 6.
what authority and command the chief Bishops, and Augures had in the Roman
Commonwealth above the Consulls, and temporal Magistrates, when
consideration of Religion occurred in matters of State: Whereupon Valerius
Maximus says, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
that the Roman Commonwealth always preferred Religion before all things,
even in men of the highest degree, dignity, and Majesty, and that their Empire
did willingly submit it self, and obey in matters of Religion, esteeming that
it should in time arrive to the sovereignty of humane government, if it did
well and duly observe the divine power. Thus says Valerius of the
pre-eminence, and sovereignty of Religion in the Roman Commonwealth. And for
the time of the Roman Emperors, most of them were extreme Tyrants, and did
condemn as well all divine, as humane laws, yet all of them seemed to
acknowledge the Sovereignty of Religion, in that they took upon them the title
and dignity of chief Bishops, because no man should have any authority over
them, as the Bishops had over the Consulls in the Roman Commonwealth; Bapt.
Fulgos. l. 1. c. 1.
and yet nevertheless we read of Alexander Seuerus, that he suffered an
appellation from himself to the Bishops, and that they reuersed his sentence,
when it seemed to them, that equity and justice required it. And heereto may
be added; what great respect the Emperors of the Turks, and Persians bear
at this day to the chief Bishop, who has power to abrogate any law made by
them, if it seem to him to be repugnant to the Alcoron.

48 But from these examples, or any other such like, this only can be
gathered, that all nations have ever preferred Religion, and the worship of
their Gods, before any other temporal thing, and that in respect chiefly of
Religion, they gave to their Religious Priests, (whom they appointed to be
their immediate Ministers to offer Sacrifice to their Gods, or as certain
messengers, or prophets to declare their wills, as in Rome were the Augures,
and Soothsayers) certain temporal honor, authority, and pre-eminence
greater, or lesser according to the custom of every Nation; but it cannot be
gathered from hence, that this temporal authority, which these Religious
Priests had to punish any man temporally, did proceed from the law of nature,
or nations, as the law of nations is accounted one law, but from the municipall
laws of every nation, kingdom, or commonwealth, as the diverse custom of
every nation touching the temporal authority of their Religious Priests does
clearly convince.

49 But mark, what Mr. Fitzherbert would gather from these examples; So that,
says he, Page 133. nu. 7.
by all this it appears, that howsoever all Nations have differed amongst
themselves in particular rites and ceremonies of Religion, yet they have all
agreed in this general principle of nature, that there ought to be in all
Commonwealths a due subordination and subjection of humane things to divine,
of Policy to Religion, and of the temporal Magistrate to the spiritual, in
matters that appertain any way to Religion: Whereupon it follows, that Ius
Gentium, the law of Nations being grounded upon the principles of nature,
cannot patronize, or admit an Oath, whereby a temporal, and Secular Prince
shall be exempted (in matters that concern Religion) from subjection to his
spiritual Pastors, and special to the supreme Pastor of Christ's Church.
Thus said I in my Supplement concerning the law of Nations, whereby it
appears, etc.

50 No man makes any doubt, but that all Nations have agreed in this, as a
principle of nature, that there ought to be a due subordination, and subjection
of humane things to divine, of Policy to Religion, and of the temporal
Magistrate to the spiritual, in matters that appertain to Religion: but in
what this due subordination and subjection, according to the principles of
nature consists, this is the whole difficulty. For if Mr. Fitzherberts
meaning be, that spiritual things and Religion, are more excellent, then
temporal things and policy, and therefore Religion, and things belonging
thereunto, are caeteris paribus to be preferred before things appertaining to
civil government, and that, according to the principles of nature, it is fit
and convenient, that the civil commonwealth should for reverence to Religion,
give to Religious Priests some temporal honor, authority, and prerogatives;
and also, that Religious Priests should be honored and obeyed by all men in
those things, whereunto the authority, which is given them either by God
himself, or by the positive grant of the civil commonwealth does extend;
this I willingly grant to be a principle grounded in nature, and natural
reason: But if his meaning be that the civil commonwealth is according to
the principles of nature, and natural reason subject and subordinate, not
only in dignity and perfection, but also in coerciue authority, and that the
Religious Priests might in the law of nature, and according to the known
principles of natural reason punish temporally either the supreme temporal
Prince, or any one of the inferior people, this is very untrue, as I have
convinced before Cap. 6. nu. 35 and seq. and. c. 8. nu. 40.
out of the doctrine of Abulensis, and Suarez.

51 Wherefore, as all the particular power, and authority, which was granted
to Religious Priests in the order of nature before the law of God was written,
as well in matters concerning Religion, as policy, did not proceed from the
law of nature, or of nations, among whom there was so great variety in this
point, but from the private, or Civil law of every particular commonwealth,
to whom the chief manage and disposition of all things, as well concerning
Religion, as Civil government did belong, so all the particular
subordination, and subjection especially in coerciue authority either of the
people, or of the Civil Magistrate to the Religious Priests, as well in
matters of Religion, as State, did wholly proceed from the free grant of the
Civil commonwealth, or the supreme Prince, and governor thereof. Whereupon
it evidently follows, that both the law of nature, and nations would have
patronized, and admitted an Oath, which had been made before the law of God
was written, whereby the Civil commonwealth, or the supreme temporal Prince
should have been exempted from the temporal punishment of any religious
Priest, who in all matters as well concerning Religion, as policy, was
subordinate and subject both to the coerciue, and directive power of the Civil
Society, or commonwealth; and that therefore this Oath now in question
concerning the Popes authority to depose temporal Princes, and to dispose of
temporal kingdoms, cannot any way be impugned, but altogether patronized by
the law of nature and nations. And by this all that Mr. Fitzherbert has said
in his Supplement concerning the law of nature, and nations, and that also,
which here* he adds for a conclusion, is most clearly satisfied.

52 Thus said I in my Supplement, says he, Pap. 133. nu. 8.
concerning the law of nations, whereby it appears, that the said law (
which is deduced directly from the law of nature) teaches, and confirms not
only the supreme dignity of Religion in the Commonwealth but also the
subordination, and subjection of the temporal state to the Religious, even in
temporal matters that touch Religion; and that the custom, and municipall law
of the Romans ordaining the same in their Commonwealth, was most conform to
the law of nature, being deduced directly from the known principles thereof,
which by the light of natural reaso^n were manifest to the Philosophers, and
wise lawmakers amongst the Paynims; and therefore whereas Widdrington
ascribes the pre-eminence of Religion in the Common wealth of the Romans to a
municipall law, denying it vvithall to proceed from the law of nature, which
was the ground of that law, he speaks as problably, as if he should ascribe
an effect wholy to the second cause, and deny it to proceed from the first.
So as it is evident, that he has answered as improbably and imperfectly to my
arguments drawn from the law of nations, as to the former grounded upon the
law of nature.

Nu. 13.
53 But first, I have clearly showed, as you have seen, from the doctrine of
Suarez, and the common opinion of Divines, that the law of nations, as it is
distinguished from the law of nature, is not directly deduced from the
principles of the law of nature, but it is a humane law, having force to bind
only by the positive constitution and decree of man. Secondly, that, although
according to the principles of natural reason Religion is in dignity,
perfection, and nobility superior to policy, and policy is therein
subordinate, and subject to it, yet according to the law of nature, and
nations, all the particular authority, which the Religious Society, as it was
distinguished from the Civil, had to command, or punish any man, depends
wholly upon the Civil commonwealth, not only in temporal, but also in
religious affairs; and the particular customs, and municipall laws not only
of the Romans, but also of all other nations, granting some temporal honor,
authority, and prerogatives to Religious Priests did not proceed from the law
of nature, nor was directly, or indirectly deduced from the principles thereof,
but was derived merely from the positive constitutions, and graunts of every
particular Civil commonwealth, in whose power it was to create, depose, and
punish their Religious Priests, and to extend, diminish change, and quite take
away from them all their directive and coerciue authority: and Mr. Fitzherbert
affirming the contrary, speaks not only improbably, and disagreeably to the
doctrine of Suarez and all other learned Divines, but also discovers herein
his great want of judgment, learning, and reading. Nevertheless I will not
deny, but that in this sense the particular customs, and municipall laws of
nations granting to their Religious Priests, who were their immediate
ministers for things belonging to the public service and worship of their
Gods, some temporal honor, and authority, were most conform to the law of
nature, and principles of natural reason, for that the law of nature, and
light of natural reason does approve and allow such laws and customs as
fit, and convenient, but not command, and ordain them as necessary: in which
sense also the exemption of Clergy men now in the new law from the coerciue
authority of Secular Magistrates ordained by humane law, may be said to be
conform to the law of nature, for that it does approve such exemption as
convenient, but not command it as necessary. And thus much concerning the law
of nations, and nature.

54 Now touching the Civil law, Page 134. nu. 9. 10.
Mr. Fitzherb. makes a quick dispatch thereof in these words. And as for the
Civil law, says he, whereas Widdrington says only, that I have proved
nothing else thereby, but that the Pope is the supreme superior of the Church
in spiritual matters, he is to understand, that albeit I have not directly
proved any thing else by the Civil law, yet I have also thereupon inferred
the extention of his power to temporal things by a necessary consequent. For
having concluded, that the Imperial, or Civil law does not only establish
the Popes Supremacy, but also acknowledge the subjection of temporal Princes
to him in matters belonging to their souls, and the good of the Church I added
this inference.

55 Whereupon it follows directly, that it acknowledges also, See Supplement
cap. 1. nu. 118. page 67.
by a necessary consequent, that he may punish them temporally in their
persons, and states, when the good of souls, and the service and glory of
God, does require it, according to the rule of the said law, which I have
touched before to wit, that the accessorie follows the principal, and that
he which has the greater power, has also the less. And therefore I conclude,
that the Civil law does no way favor, support, or justify the Oath, and much
less inioyne it, Ibid. nu. 64, 65.
but flatly impugn, and overthrow it. Thus said I in my Supplement, remitting
my Reader for the more ample proof of this inference, to that which I had
before handled concerning the same, when I treated of the law of God, See cap.
nu. 3. and seq.
which I have also repeated in the first Chapter; as also I have examined his
answers thereto, and showed them to be very idle and frivolous, and therefore
I may well conclude, that the arguments in my Supplement, grounded as well
upon the laws of God, Nature, and Nations, as upon the Cuiill, or Imperial
law, do stand sound, and good against the Oath, notwithstanding any thing,
that my Adversary Widdrington has been hitherto able to bring to the contrary.

56 But fie, Mr. Fitzherbert, that you in whose mouth are so frequent absurd,
ridiculous, impertinent, frivolous, foolish, idle, fradulent, impious,
malicious, (as though all your writings were so grave, wise, substantial, and
sincere) should thus in every Chapter delude your Reader, and (not to use your
own foul words) show so great want of learning, judgment, and sincerity. For
what man of learning, or judgment can sincerely think, that the Civil law
may be said sufficiently to patronize the Popes power to depose Princes, and to
impugn the new Oath, for that it acknowledges the Pope to be the supreme
spiritual Pastor; or with what sincerity can you make your Reader believe,
that you had no other meaning in spending fourteen whole Pages of your
Supplement, to prove by the Civil law, that the Pope is the supreme
spiritual Pastor, and has authority to Excommunicate wicked Princes, then
only to infer thereupon by your necessary, or rather improbable consequent,
that he may therefore punish them temporally in their persons, and states? For
first, who would not imagine, that when you boasted to prove the Oath, to be
repugnant to the Civil law, because it denies the Popes power to depose
Princes, you would have brought some text out of the Civil law, where it is
written, that the Pope has such a power to depose, and not to have made so
much ado to prove by the Civil law, the Pope to be head of the Church, and to
have authority to inflict spiritual Censures, which no Catholic denies, and
then forsooth in a word, or two to deduce from thence by a far fetched
consequence of your own, and not of the Civil law, that therefore the Pope
may also punish them temporally in their persons, and States?

57 And truly, if it be sufficient to condemn in this manner the Oath by the
Civil law, you might in the like manner for a greater flourish have brought the
authority of all the ancient Fathers, yea and of all Catholics, even of my
self, and of all those, who mainetaine the Oath to be lawful, for a clear
testimony to condemn the same; for that all the ancient Fathers, and all
Catholics, even my self, and those who maintain the Oath to be lawful, and
deny the Popes power to depose Princes, do acknowledge the Pope to be the
supreme spiritual Pastor, and to have authority to inflict spiritual
Censures. And without doubt you would condemn me for a vainglorious Thraso,
if I should take upon me to prove by the testimony, and grant of Cardinal
Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, Suarez, and of your self, who are so
vehement for the Popes power to depose Princes, that the Pope has no such
power; for that you and all the rest do grant the Pope to be the supreme
spiritual Pastor; and then by a necessary consequence in my judgment,
though not in yours, I should infer from thence, that because the Pope is by
the institution of Christ according to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers a
spiritual Pastor, and not a temporal Prince, he has only authority to
give, or take away heavenly, not earthly kingdoms, to absolve from the bond of
sins, not of debts, to use spiritual, not temporal weapons, or, which is
all one, to inflict Ecclesiastical, not Civil punishments: This consequence
the ancient Fathers made. See above cha. 5^ sec. 3. nu. 11. and seq.
But besides that it is not sufficient to prove any conclusion by the
authority of the Civil law, unless the Civil law grants both the premises, or
propositions from whence that conclusion is deduced, the insufficiency of this
consequence grounded upon those rules, The accessorie follows the principal,
and he that can do the greater, can do the less, See chap. 2. and 3. per
totum.
I have made manifest in the former Chapters.

58 Secondly, do not dissemble, Mr. Fitzherb. nor seek to delude your Reader,
but deal sincerely, and be not ashamed to acknowledge your error, seeing that
not only your self, but also Card. B^ll. Gretzer, Lessius, Becanus, and also
Suarez have herein grosely erred. For your meaning was not by making that long
discourse out of the Civil law, to prove the Pope to be the supreme spiritual
Pastor, and to have authority to Excommunicate wicked Princes, only to
infer by a necessary consequent in your own understanding, that he may also
punish them temporally in their persons, and states, but your meaning was to
prove directly by the Civil law the Oath to be unlawful, for that in your
opinion it denies the Popes power to Excommunicate Princes, which the Civil
law does expressly acknowledge: For in the beginning of your Supplement, you
took upon you to prove the Oath to be repugnant to all laws humane and
divine, namely in respect of those clauses, which do exempt temporal Princes
from excommunication, and deposition by the Pope: and then after you had made
an end of your long discourse concerning the Popes spiritual power
acknowledged by the Civil law, you made this inference, that the Civil law
cannot justify the Oath, but does flatly impugn it, for that the Oath
supposes and implies the Kings Majesty to be supreme head of the English
Church, and not the Pope, and thereupon denies the Popes authority to
excommunicate, and depose a temporal Prince. So that the Oath in your opinion
contained two clauses, the one a denial of the Popes power to excommunicate
Princes, and this was that which you intended to prove to be directly
repugnant to the Civil law; the other was a denial of the Popes power to
depose Princes, and this in a word or two related before, you affirmed to be
also repugnant to the civil law, for that in your judgment it follows
necessarily from the fromer, which how vain an assertion this is, you may see
by that I have said before, for so you may make one to affirm any thing, if to
make him to grant an argument or consequent, it be sufficient that he grant
the antecedent, although he deny the consequence. But now it seems by your
silence, as I signified before in the first Chapter, that you are ashamed to
insist upon the former clause concerning the Popes power to excommunicate
Princes, for which you made that long discourse to prove by the Civil law the
Popes supremacy in spirituals, and yet rather then you will confess your
error, you care not to delude your Reader, in dissembling the chief and
principal cause, for which you affirmed the Oath to be repugnant to the
Civil law, to wit, because it denied the Popes power to excommunicate Princes,
wherein with many others of your Society, you have most fowlely and shamefully
erred.

59 Wherefore I may now very well conclude, that the arguments which Mr.
Fitzherbert has brought in his Supplement grounded as well upon the law of
God, of nature, and nations, as upon the civil or imperial law, are very
insufficient, and that the answers which in my Admonition. I did briefly make
to them, do stand sound and good, notwithstanding any thing that Mr.
Fitzherbert has been hitherto able to bring to the contrary. Now you shall
see what arguments he brings from the Canon law, and especially from that so
often named decree of the famous Council of Lateran.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the difficulties which some make concerning the authority of the
Lateran Council are propounded, the decree of the Council, which is commonly
urged to prove the Popes power to depose Princes is related, and Widdringtons
first answer to the said Decree is proved to be sound and sufficient, and Mr.
Fitzherberts replies against the same are confuted.

1 WE are come now at last, courteous Reader, to examine what conuincing
arguments can be brought for proof of this new pretended Catholic faith,
touching the Popes power to depose Princes out of the Canon law, and especially
from the decree of the great and famous Council of Lateran, whereon my
principal Adversaries, seeing belike all their other arguments and authorities
to be clean shaken and battered, do now chiefly rely. Wherefore, albeit
neither the more ancient of our modern Divines, who are vehement maintainers
of the Popes power to depose Princes, as Victoria, Corduba, D. Sanders, and
others, nor Cardinal Bellarmine himself, who has taken from these men all
his chief arguments and authorities to confirm his new Catholic faith in
this point, did in his Controversies make any great reckoning of the decree of
this great Council, for otherwise without doubt, he being not ignorant of this
decree, and also desirous to make his doctrine unquestionable, and therefore
fears not to brand the contrary opinion with the note of heresy, would not
have been contented only with the fact of Pope Innocent the third in deposing
Otho the Emperor, and have neglected to urge this decree of the Council of
Lateran, which was called by the said Pope Innocent, yet now he flies to the
decree of the great Council of Lateran, as the chief pillar to support his
new Catholic faith: and therefore in regard principally of this decree he
doubts not to affirm (but how rashly, and without sufficient ground you
shall see beneath) that whosoever denies the Popes power to depose Princes,
contemns the voice of the Church in this so great and famous a Council, and
is to be accounted a Heathen and Publican, and in no wise a Christian.

2 And Mr. Fitzherbert also makes so great account of this decree, that
whereas he spends only three Chapters concerning the law of God in the old
and new Testament, the law of Nature, of Nations, and the Civil law, yet in
examining this decree of the Council of Lateran, he consumes seven whole
Chapters, wherein he has borrowed of Fa. Lessius masked under D. Singletons
name the greatest part of a whole Treatise, which he made in the defense of
this Decree, and in the end he boldly affirms, P. 204. 205.
that I am fallen into flat heresy, yea, which is more, by my own grant, and
confession, and why forsooth? for not understanding the Decree in that sense,
wherein Cardinal Bellarmine, and some later Divines, specially Jesuits do
understand it, as though the authority of these men is so great, that we are
bound to accept their private expositions concerning any text of holy
Scriptures, or sacred Canons, for the voice of the Catholic Church. But how
vain are the bragges of this boasting man, and how palpable are his slanders,
taxing me of ridiculous absurdity, folly, temeritie, malice, impiety,
impudency, and heresy, and then especially, when my answers are most strong,
and his Replies most childish, and impertinent, you have partly seen in the
former Chapters, and in the rest also you shall more clearly perceive.

3 But before I come to show what is the true sense, and meaning of this
decree, it will not be amiss first to see, of what authority and credit
among all Catholics this great and famous Council of Lateran is, and ought to
be, for this is very material to know, whether any decree therein contained
be of it self sufficient to make any matter of faith, which all Catholics
are bound to believe to be of faith: as also, because some make doubt, Bell.
lib. 2. de Council. cap. 13.
says Cardinal Bellarmine, whether the last Council of Lateran under Pope
Leo the tenth, which most expressly defined, that the Pope is above a General
Council, was truly a General Council, therefore even to this day it
remains a question also among Catholics, whether a General Council be
above the Pope, or no. And although I do not intend to deny, or call in
question the authority of this Council, but for my own part do willingly
admit, and approve the same, yet for satisfaction of the Reader, and that the
truth may the more easily be found out, and followed, I think it necessary
to set down the doubts, and difficulties, which some have made against the
authority of this so great, and famous a Council.

4 First therefore, it is certain, and out of controversy, that the aforesaid
Council of Lateran was called by Pope Innocent the third, to which came all
those Ambassadors, Bishops, and other inferior Prelates, mentioned here
beneath by my Adversary, and in this all Histories do agree, in which respect
it may truly be called the greatest, and most famous Council, that ever was
assembled in the Church of God, albeit, if we respect only the number of the
Bishops who were present thereat, and who only according to Card. Bellarmines
doctrine have authority to decide, determine, and define, as Judges, matters
belonging to Christian faith, and Religion, the Council, of Chalcedon was
far greater, whereat were present 630. Bishops; and the Council of Lions
under Pope Gregory the tenth was also far greater, whereat were present
according to Genebrard, 500. Bishops, and according to Binnius more then 700.
whereas at this Council of Lateran were only 412. Bishops according to
Matthew Paris, and Abbas Vspergensis, whom Binnius follows, who comprehend
the two Patriarchs, and 70. Archbishops in the number of the 412. Bishops. But
all the difficulty consists in this, whether this decree, which is now in
question, and all the other Canons, which now are published, as decrees of the
Council of Lateran, were confirmed by the general consent of all or the
greatest part of all the Fathers, or were only propounded and rehearsed in the
Council, but not approved by common consent. And one chief ground of this
difficulty is taken from the testomonie of our countryman Matthew Paris, a
Benedictiue Monk of the Monastery of S. Alban, who both lived near the time
of this Council, See his History of Henry the 3. in the year. 1248.
and was also reputed a man probatae vitae and religionis expertae, of an
approved life, and tried religion, as Pope Innocent the 4. does testify, in
regard whereof he was by the same Pope Innocent sent into the kingdom of
Norway to reform the Monastery of Holme; although in regard of his freedom
of speech, and upright dealing he is undeservedly taxed by the most
Illustrious, and renowned Cardinal de Peron, as a great enemy to Popes, in
which respect he might also tax him, as a great enemy to all, both Popes, and
Kings, Clerks, and Laikes, yea and to those of his own Order, for that he
freely, and without partiality rehearses, and taxes the vices of all: But
the ancient proverb is by daily experience found true, Ohsequium amicos,
veritas odium parit. Flattery causes friends, truth enmity.

5 Thus therefore he writes of that Council, Mat. Paris upon the year 1215.
in the life of King John.
after he has set down the time, and place where it was held, and the number
of persons who were present thereat: All these being gathered together in the
place aforesaid, and according to the manner of General Counsels every man
being placed in his order, the Pope having made first an exhortation, 60.
Chapters were rehearsed in the full Council, which to some did seem pleasing,
or easy, to others burdensome. At length he beginning his speech concerning
the business of the Crucifix, subioyned saying, etc. And the same Matthew
Paris in his lesser Chronicle writes thus: But that General Council, which
after the Papal manner did pretend great things at the beginning, ended in
scorn and mockery, whereby the Pope cunningly deluded the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Deanes, Archdeacons, and all that came to the Council. For
when they now perceived nothing to be done in so great a business, they being
desirous to return home, desired leave one after another: which the Pope did
not grant them, before they had promised him a great sum of money, which they
were constrained first to borrow of Roman merchants, and pay it to the Pope
before they were permitted to depart from Rome. The Pope now having received
the money did freely dissolve this gainefull Council, and all the Clergy
departed sorrowful.

6 From which word of Matthew Paris it seems to follow, that neither all
these 60. Chapters mentioned by him were made by the order of the whole
Council, but rather by Pope Innocent himself, or by his direction before the
Council began, both for that at the very beginning of the Council, after the
Pope had made his sermon, it seems that they were rehearsed in the full
Council, and also because they seemed to some pleasing, and to others
burdensome, nor that they were approved by the common consent of the Fathers,
because there is no likelihood that they would give their free consent to the
publishing of such decrees, which seemed to them heavy, and burdensome. And
therefore the most Illustrious Cardinal of Peron was greatly mistaken, when
he affirmed Matthew Paris to say, that the Council of Lateran made 60.
Chapters, for that Matthew Paris, as you have seen, only says, that 60.
Chapters, which seemed pleasing to some, and burdensome to others, were
rehearsed, he does not say, made, in the full Council.

Platina in vita Innocentij 3^ and Nauclerus generat. 41. ad annum. 1215.
7 Another ground, why the authority of this Council is by some called in
question, is taken from the testimonies of Platina, and Nauclerus, and some
other circumstances annexed thereunto. For both these Authors do expressly
affirm, that nothing at all could be plainly decreed by the Council, by
reason of the sudden departure of Pope Innocent from Rome, giving to
understand thereby, that something was by the common consent of the Fathers
decreed, but nothing plainly. The words of Nauclerus are these: In the year of
our Lord 1215. Pope Innocent did celebrate at Rome in the Lateran Church a
Council, or Synod, at which were present the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and
Constantinople, etc. Many things were then consulted of, but nothing could be
plainly decreed, for that that those of Pisa, and Genoa made war one against
the other by Sea, and those on this side the Alps by land (therefore the Pope
going thither, says Platina, to take away this discord, dies at Perugia)
Nevertheless some Constitutions, says Nauclerus, are reported to be
published, among which one is, that whensoever the Princes of the world shall
offend one the other, it belongs to the Pope to correct them. Many things in
conclusion were treated of for the recovering of the holy Land.

8 Neither are those words, say they, of Nauclerus, [that nothing was plainly
decreed in the Councell] to be understood only concerning the recovering of
the holy Land, both for that his words are general, and without limitation,
and to be referred to those many things that were consulted of, which did not
only concern the recovering of the holy Land, but also the reformation of the
universal Church in faith, and manners, for both which causes the Council was
called, as Pope Innocent himself, in his speech, which he made to the
Council at the beginning thereof, and in his Bull of calling the Council
related by Abbas Vspergensis, does expressly affirm; Abbas Vesper. ad annu.
1212.
and also those words of Nauclerus immediately following, yet some
Constitutions are reported to be published, among which, etc. and his putting
in the last place, that many things were treated of for the recovering of the
holy land, do sufficiently show, that those first words of his [Many things
were consulted of, yet nothing at all could be plainly decreed] he did not
understand touching only the holy Land.

9 And although those very same words, that Platina has, to wit, that many
things were then consulted of, but nothing could be plainly decreed, may be
wrested to the recovering only of the holy Land, if we only regard his words
immediately going before, to wit, that the Pope seeing the power of the
Sarracens to increase in Asia does celebrate a very great Council at Lateran
at which were present, etc. Many things were consulted of, etc. yet if we
consider, say they, many other circumstances together also with that, which
Matthew Paris said before, it is probable, that Platina his meaning was, that
many things were consulted of, not only concerning the increase of the
Sarracens power in Asia, but also touching the reformation of the Church in
faith and manners contained in those 60. Chapters rehearsed in the full
Council, and that nothing at all, especially concerning those Chapters, which
seemed to some easy, to others burdensome, could be plainly, and manifestly
decreed, for that the Pope did so suddenly depart from Rome to appease the
discord betwixt the people of Pisa, and Genoa, that there was not time
sufficient, duly and maturely to debate the same.

10 The first circumstance is, that although the increase of the Sarracens
power in Asia was an occasion to hasten the calling of this Council, yet it
was not called only for the recovering of the holy Land, but also for the
reforming of the universal Church in faith, and manners, See Abbas Vsperg. ad
annu. 1212.
to wit, as Pope Innocent himself confesses, to root out vices, and plant
virtues, to correct excesses, and reform manners, to expel heresies, and
strengthen faith, to appease discords, and establish peace, to suppress
oppressions, and nourish liberty, to induce Christian Princes, and people to
give aid, and succor to the holy Land, etc. whereof Platina could not be
ignorant; and that therefore, according to Platina his meaning, many things
were consulted of, concerning the things, for which the Council was called,
but nothing was plainly, and manifestly decreed by any authentical and public
approbation of the whole Council. And in this sense that, which writes
Godefridus, who lived at the same time, may be well understood; Godefridus
monarchus ad annum. 1215.
The same year 1215. says he, the Pope held a Council at Rome, where
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Prelates of Churches, as well from
the parts beyond the Sea, as from all the coasts of Christendom, were
gathered together in the Church of Saint John Baptist, which began at the feast
of S. Martin, and was prorogued until the feast of Saint Andrew, wherein
nothing was there done worthy to be remembered, but that (which before was
unheard of) the East Church did submit her self to the West.

11 The second circumstance is, that there was as much decreed in the Council
concerning the recovery of the holy Land, and as plainly, as touching any
other thing, as it is manifest by the last Chapter; Being moved, says the
Pope, with a vehement desire to deliver the Holy land from the hands of the
wicked, by the advice of prudent men, who fully know the circumstances of
times, Sabel. ennead. 9. lib. 6.
and places, the sacred Council approouing, we define, etc. Whereupon, as
writes Sabellicus, it was sufficiently agreed upon to make war against the
wicked in Asia, but the discord betwixt those of Genoa, and Pisa hindered the
preparation thereof.

12 The third circumstance is, that this so great and famous Council, which
was celebrated in the year 1215. was not published to the view of the world,
and placed among the other Councels, but 300. years after it was celebrated,
to wit, in the year 1538. and that by a German, who affirms, that he had
these decrees out of an ancient Book, but from whence, or from whom he had
this Book, or of what credit it was, he makes no mention: and Iacobus Merlin,
who printed the Councels but three years before; did clean omit this Council
of Lateran. Now what prudent man, say they, can imagine, that if this Council,
and all the decrees, which are now therein contained, had been approved by
the general consent of the Fathers, who were present thereat, either Pope
Innoncent himself, who would have caused the said decrees forthwith to be
published, as other approved Councels have ever been published, or that his
Nephew, and next Successor but one, Pope Gregory the ninth, as he was careful
to publish all his Uncles decretall Epistles, and these decrees also, which
were propounded by him in this Council of Lateran, whereof the greatest part
of the Canon law, called the decretals of the Pope Gregory the ninth, is
compounded, so also he would not have neglected to publish this so great and
famous Council of Lateran, and the Canons therein decreed, if it had been
certain, that they were approved and confirmed by the consent of the whole
Council: or if there had been any authentical copy of this Council
preserved in the Vatican, as by all likelihood there would have been, if the
Council had been complete, and Oecumenicall, and the decrees therein
propounded, had been approved by the general consent of the Fathers) some
one or other Roman Antiquary would in 300. years space have caused it to be
published, and that we should not have needed a Germans help to seek out in
Germany after 300. years a copy of this Council to publish as authentical.

13 But it seems, say they, that this ancient Book which this first
publisher of the Council mentions, was by some one or other collected out of
the Book of the Canon law, called the decretals of Pope Gregory the ninth, for
that it contains just as many Chapters, and no fewer then are in the
Decretals, to wit, 72. Chapters: and they have the very same beginning, and
ending, and also the very same notes and observations even in the middle of the
Chapters, which is not so in other Councels, as may be seen in the Council of
Lateran held under Pope Alexander the third, whereas the Chapters propounded
and rehearsed in this great Council os Lateran, were according to Matthew Paris
only 60. And this will appear more clear, if we consider that the 40. and
41. Chapter, and the 60. 63. and 64. in the Edition of this Council set out by
this German make 4. chapters, as they do in the Decretals, and not two only,
as in the Councels now published they are divided, that thereby they may make
just 70. Chapt. and not 72. and so it might more credibly be answered (as the
most illustrious Cardinal of Peron does answer) that it was an error in
Matthew Paris of the Writer, or Printer, to put 60. for 70. whereas to put 60.
for 72. and so to change both the letters, had been an error too egregious,
and hardly to be believed.

14 To these circumstances may be added, that there is no mention made of the
approbation of the Council, but only of some few decrees, as of the 2. 4. 5.
18. 42. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 51. 66. 69. and the 72. or last decree concerning
the holy land, whereof the third decree, which is now in controversy betwixt
my Adversaries and me, is none: As also neither Pope Gregory the ninth does in
the Decretalls entitle any one of those Chapters, or decrees, as made by the
Council of Lateran (howsoever the most Illustrious Cardinal of Peron does
untruly affirm the same) but only by Pope Innocent in the Council, which
words do not properly, and in rigor of speech signify, that they were made
or approved by the Council, but only by Pope Innocent in the Council, or,
as Mat. Paris says, rehearsed in the full Council by the commandment of Pope
Innocent to be approved, and confirmed by the common suffrage and consent of
the Fathers, which nevertheless seemed to be easy and pleasing to some, but
burdensome to others: And therefore the Fathers did not agree about them;
neither was there time sufficient to examine them more thoroughly, by reason of
the great have which Pope Innocent made to depart from Rome, to appease the
stirs in Italy. For the Council began at S. Andrews tide, and the Pope dyed
at Perugia the next July following; neither do any Histories that I have read
make mention, when the Pope dissolved this great and famous Council; Only
Blondus affirms that he departed from Rome primo vere, at the first beginning
of the spring. Blond dec. 2. lib 6. in fine.
So that the Council might continue only for a month or two, for ought by
any History we can know to the contrary. Whereupon Platina, after he had said,
that many things were consulted of, and nothing could be plainly decreed, for
the reason before mentioned of the Popes sudden departure from Rome,
ascribes the condemnation of Almaricus his errors, and of Abbot Ioachim his
Book against the Master of the sentences, not to the Council, but only to
Pope Innocent: Pope Innocent, says he, did disprooue a certain Book of Abbot
Ioachim, and he condemned the errors of Almaricus.

15 All these things being considered, it is very probable, say they, that
albeit many things were consulted of in the Council, yet nothing at all,
especially concerning those decrees, which to some seemed easy, and to others
burdensome, could be plainly decreed, that is, concluded and agreed upon by
any public, and known authentical decree of the whole Council, or greatest
part thereof, hitherto published to the view of the world: yet it may very well
be, that most of those Fathers gave at least wise their private or tacit
consent to the publishing of many of those 60. Chapters or decrees, although
also all those 13. decrees, wherein mention is made of the approbation, and
consent of the Council might by the appointment of Pope Innocent be written in
that form of words before the Council began, and also rehearsed in that
manner in the very beginning thereof. Wherefore we have not, say they, any true
authentical Copy of the Council of Lateran yet published, taking the
Council, as it contains only those decrees, which were made by the common
consent and approbation of the whole Council but the Council of Lateran,
which is now extant, is only a collection of those decrees registered in the
Book of Decretals, which Pope Innocent propounded to the Council, and were
rehearsed, as Matthew Paris says, in the full Council at the very beginning
thereof: Paul. Emilius lib. 6. in Philip. po 2. Seuebr. lib 4. ad annum 1215.
Vignerius eod^m anno.
especially seeing that the Earldom of Tholosa was by a peculiar decree of
the Council of Lateran, with the consent no doubt of the King of France,
given to Simon Earl of Montfort, which decree is not to be found in the
Council of Lateran now extant, for that it was not by Pope Gregory the ninth,
put among the Decretals. These be reasons, for which the authority of this
great Council is by some called in question.

16 But on the contrary side the most Illustrious Cardinal of Peron, does bring
two principal arguments, which may seem to confirm the authority of this
Council, and that the decrees now extant were made by the general consent and
approbation of the whole Council. The first is, for that otherwise we may
impugn the article of Transubstantiation, the article of the holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father, and the Son, the precept of annual confession,
the condemnation of the errors of Abbot Ioachim, etc. But to this argument
they answer, that it does not therefore follow, that we may impugn the
aforesaid Decrees, because they are now received by the general consent of all
Catholics, either by virtue of the Canon law, contained in the book of
Decretals, which Pope Gregory the ninth commanded to be observed, and practiced
by all men, or because they are approved by common consent, but not by virtue
of the authority of the Council, wherein nothing was decreed, and agreed upon
by any known, and authentical approbation of the Fathers, although doubtless
they did by their private, or tacit consent approve many of those 60. or 70.
Decrees.

17 The second argument is, for that both Counsels, Popes, and Sholasticall
Doctors, do cite some of the aforesaid 60. or 70. Decrees, as of the Council
of Lateran. But to this also they answer, that these Decrees are called Canons
of the Council Lateran, for that they were propounded and rehearsed in the
Council, but not confirmed or approved by the general acceptance, and
consent of the Fathers, because they seemed to some to be easy and pleasing,
but to others heavy and burdensome. To these may be added a third argument,
that the Council of Constance in the 39. Session ordaining what profession the
future Pope was to make, decrees, that every future Pope hereafter to be
chosen, must make this confession, and profession, before his election be
published, that he does firmly believe the holy Catholic faith, according to
the traditions of the Apostles, of general Counsels, and of other holy
Fathers, but especially of the eight Sacred general Counsels, to wit, of the
first Nicene, of the second Constantinopolitan, of the third Ephesine, of the
fourth Chalcedon, of the fifth and sixth Constantinopolitan, of the seventh
Nicene, and the eight Constantinopolitan, and also of Lateran, Lions, and
Vienna also general Counsels. But to this they also answer, that by the
Council of Lateran is not understood this under Pope Innocent the third, but
the former celebrated under Pope Alexander the third, in the year 1180. and if
it be understood of this Council of Lateran, it is only, say they, forasmuch
as concerns those decrees wherein mention is made of the approbation of the
Council, as is that 46. decree which the Council of Constance mentions in
the Bull of the confirmation of the Emperor Frederikes constitution. As also
by the Council of Lions it does not understand that under Pope Innocent the
4th. who in the presence thereof excommunicated the Emperor Fredricke, and
whereat only 140. Bishops were present, but that under Pope Gregory the tenth,
in the year 1274. whereat S. Bonauentura, and S. Thomas of Aquina, and more
then 700. Bishops were present according to Binnius, and Ebarhardus, whom
Binnius cites.

18 These be the principal difficulties both against, and for the authority
of this Council of Lateran, which, before I came to examine the sense and
meaning of the decree which is now in question, I thought needful to set
down, that the Reeder may thereby judge, whether if one for the reasons
aforesaid should deny the authority of this Council, and affirm, that nothing
was therein plainly concluded by any public and authentical decree, approved
by the common consent of the greatest part of the Fathers there present, may be
excused from all note of heresy, error, and temerity, in that manner as the
Doctors of Paris may be excused from those aspersions, for still defending the
authority of a General Council, above a true and undoubted Pope, and denying
the authority of the Council of Lateran under Pope Leo the tenth, wherein the
contrary doctrine, as Cardinal Bellarmine says, is expressly defined; yet for
my own part, as I said before, I do willingly embrace, and admit the
authority of this great Council of Lateran, and of every Canon and Decree
therein contained, and namely of this which is now in question, and do only
contend about the true sense and meaning thereof, as is usual in the holy
Scriptures themselves, which some expound one way, some another, not intending
thereby to call in question the authority of Gods word but only to examine and
declare what is the true sense and meaning thereof.

19 Now let us see, what Mr. Fitzherbert says in this Chapter against my
answer, wherein I briefly declared the true sense and meaning of this Decree.
Thus therefore he begins: It rests now, says he, that I examine the
probability of Widdringtons answers to my arguments grounded upon the Canon
law, and specially upon a constitution and Canon of the great and famous
Council of Lateran. And first of all he sets down the answer I gave in my
Admonition, which before I relate, it will not be amiss to put down the
decree it self of the Council of Lateran, for thereby the sense and true
meaning thereof will more easily appear. First* therefore the Council in the
third Chapter does excommunicate, and anathematize all heresy, and condemn
all heretics, by what name soever they be called, and does ordain, that they
being condemned shall be left to secular potestaes, Magistrates, or their
Bayliffes to be punished according to their deserts, but so that Clergy, men
shall be first degraded from their Orders or Clergy, and if they be Laymen,
that there goods shall be confiscated, but if they be Clergy men, that their
goods shall be applied to the Churches, from whence they received stipends: And
then it decrees thus:

20 But let Secular Potestaes, what offices soever they bear, be admonished
and induced, and if it shall be needful, be compelled by Ecclesiastical
Censure, that as they desire to be reputed and accounted faithful, so for the
defending of the faith, they do take publicly an Oath, that they will
sincerely endeavor to their power to cast out of the territories subject to
their Jurisdiction all heretics declared by the Church: So that from hence
forth when any man shall be chosen to a perpetual or temporal potesta, or
office, he be bound to confirm this Chapter by Oath. Si vero Dominus
temporalis, etc. But if the temporal Lord, Officer, or Landlord, For Dominus
temporalis, signifies also every Officer, Magistrate or Landlord.
being required and admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his
territory from heretical filth, let him be excommunicated by the Metropolitan,
and other Bishops of the same Province. And if he shall contemn to give
satisfaction within a year, let it be signified to the chief Bishop or Pope,
that from thenceforth he may denounce his vassals absolved from his fealty, and
expose his Land or territory to be taken by Catholics, who, when the
heritickes be rooted out, may possess the same without contradiction, and
conserve it in the purity of faith, the right of the principal Landlord, or
Lord being reserved, so that he give no obstacle to this, nor put any
impediment thereto: The same nevertheless to be observed concerning those, who
have no principal Landlords. This is the decree of the Council.

21 Now all the difficulty consists chiefly in this, what is to be understood
by those words, dominus te^poralis, and dominus principalis, a temporal, and
principal Landlord, Officer, or, if we will needs translate it so, Lord: Mr.
Fitzherbert in his Supplement pretended to prove, that those words did
comprehend Kings, and absolute Princes, and that therefore the Pope has
authority to depose temporal Princes, and to absolve their subjects from their
temporal allegiance. To which his argument I answered briefly in my aforesaid
Admonition Nu. 21.
in this manner.

22 Lastly, to that decree of the Council of La^eran so often inculcated and
urged, I gave elsewhere Widdr. in Praefat. ad Resp. Apol. nu. 43.
diverse answers, which this Author F.T. dissembleth. He insinuates one of
them, and confuteth it mostly coldly, to wit, that by the name of him that has
not a principal Landlord, (or if we will needs have him called Lord)
Emperors, and absolute Kings are not to be understood, but other inferior
Landlords, or Officers, who are subject to Kings; seeing that the Emperor
Frederick five years after this Council was celebrated, made the same decree
almost in the very same words, changing only spiritual penalties into temporal,
who by the name of him that has not a principal Landlord, or also Lord, could
not understand himself, and other absolute Princes. Whereupon I probably
gathered, that those words, Non habens Dominum principalem, Not having a
principal Landlord, or also Lord, could not by force of the words comprehend
Kings, and absolute Princes, who, unless they be namely expressed in penal
laws, are not to be understood, to wit, by the general names of temporal
and principal Landlords, or Lords. And to say, that the Emperor did not
comprehend Kings in those words, and that the Pope did mean to comprehend
them, is barely to say, not to demonstrate: considering that if the Synod (of
Lateran) had meant to have comprehended Sovereign Princes in that decree, she
might as easily have named them by their proper names of Princes, as by the
general names of principal Landlords, Officers, or Lords, or who have no
principal Landlords, Officers, or Lords, especially seeing that the same
Council in other decrees has used the peculiar names of Princes. Wherefore
until some man shall clearly demonstrate, (I say not shall only show
probably) that those answers, which I gave to the Council of Lateran, are
altogether improbable, no effectual argument can be brought from that
Council, whereby it may certainly, and evidently be proved, that it is so
certain that the Pope has power to depose Princes, that the contrary cannot
without the note of heresy, error, or temeritie be defended by Catholics.

23 To this my answer Mr. Fitzherbert replieth thus: Chap. 9. nu. 3 and seq.
pa. 137.
Now then, says he, for as much as all our question here is concerning the
Canon of the Council of Lateran, and that some of those, who may read this
Reply, have never seen that Canon, or my Supplement, I think good to set
down here, what I said in my Supplement concerning that Council, and Canon:
Therefore having declared, that the Council of Lateran was gathered by the
general consent as well of the Greek, as of the Latin Church, and of the
Emperors of the East, and West Empire, I added, that there were present
thereat, S. Antonin. tit. 19.. 6. Paul. Aemil. lib. 6. Nauclar. generat. 41.
Blond. dec. 2. lib. 6. in fine. Platina in Innoc. tert. Council. Later. sub
Innoc. tert. tom. 3. conc. Matthew Paris, and Westmonast. ad annum. 1215. Can. 3.
Supplem. cap. 6. nu. 2.
the two Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, and the substitutes of
the two other Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antioch, 70. Archbishops, Greeks
and Latins: 412. Bishops, and 800. other Prelates, that is to say, above 1200.
Besides that there assisted also the Ambassadors not only of the Roman, and
Greek Emperors, but also of the Kings of Jerusalem, England, France, Spain,
Hungary, and Cyprus, and of other absolute Princes. So as I conclude, that it
was the greatest, and most general Council, that ever was assembled in the
Church of God: and then I added further as follows.

24 This was the great Council of Lateran held under Innocentius the third, in
the year of our Lord 1215. wherein it was decreed thus: Si Dominus temporalis,
etc. If a temporal Lord being required, and so forth, as you may see above.
Thus far the Decree of this Oecumenicall Council assembled by the consent of
all Christendom; wherein you see not only the Popes authority to depose
Princes was auowed, and acknowledged, but also the practice thereof expressly
ordained, and determined, when Princes shall neglect their duty to purge
their states of heresies, and contemn with all the Ecclesiastical Censures.

25 Thus said I in my Supplement: and now to come to Widdringtons answer,
first, he charge me (as thou have seen, good Reader) to have dissembled many
answers, which he made else where concerning this Canon. Secondly, he says,
that I have nevertheless insinuate ^one of them, and answered it most coldly;
and thirdly, he lays down his said answer with some other reason^, why he
thinks it to be probable, that absolute Princes are not comprehended in that
Canon. Whereto I answer, that I wonder upon what ground he could charge me
with the dissimulation of his former answers, which I protest I never saw,
until I chanced to have a view of this his last Treatise (I mean his
Theological Disputation) whereto is annexed the other which he mentions;
for truly if I had seen those answers whereof he speaks, I would not have
passed them over with silence, no more then I passed Mr. Dunnes and such other,
as were then come to my knowledge. And as for my cold answer, I cannot see how
it could be either cold or hot, to an argument, which I had never seen, but
how hoatly, and wisely he has answered for his part, it may appear partly by
the argument it self, and partly by my discourse in my Supplement, which he
will n^edes take for an answer thereto. His argument you see, is, that for as
much as the Emperor Frederick, etc.

26 But first, it is to be observed, that those words, Dominus temporalis, and
Dominus Principalis, are not well translated into English, a temporal, or
principal Lord, understanding the word [Lord] as it is taken by us for a title
of honor; for those words do signify temporal Landlords, Governors,
Magistrates, or Officers, as Mayors, Judges, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables,
whether they be Lords, or no, as any man of judgment may plainly see, for
that all these are Domini temporales, and many of them may be Domini
principales, and I will more clearly show the same beneath. So also when the
Council says, that condemned heretics are to be left to the Secular
Potestaes, or their Bailiffes to be deservedly punished, it did not understand
absolute Princes, as Kings, and Emperors, but other inferior Officers and
Magistrates, as Mayors, Consulls, chief Justices, Captains, and Governors of
Cities, to whom the execution of justice is committed, as both the Italian, and
French word, Potesta, does signify, and so in Italy the Governor of a City
is called the Potesta, and also it may more clearly appear by the Breues, See
Director. Inquisitor. circa finem.
or Apostolical letters of Pope Innocent the fourth, Alexander the fourth, and
Clement the fourth cited here beneath by my Adversary (for those of Honorius
the third, and Vrbanus the fourth I have not seen, neither is there any
mention made of them in the Directorie of Inquisitors) who direct their letters
to all Marcquesses, Earls, Barons, and Potestates, Governors, Consulls, and
Communities of Cities and other places, etc. as Pope Innocent does; or only to
Potestaes, Counsels, and Communities of Cities, and other places of Italy, as
Pope Alexander does; or to Potestaes, or Governors, Consulls, Captains,
A^tians, Counsels and Communities of Cities, as Pope Clement does; where it is
plain that by the word Potestaes are not understood so much as those Dukes of
Italy, who are in some sort absolute Princes, as the Duke of Sauoy, Florence,
Mantua, Parma, etc. but only inferior Magistrates and Officers, Rectours, or
Governors of Cities, and other places.

27 Secondly, the ground, and reason, for which I affirmed, that Mr.
Fitzherbert dissembled diverse of my answers to the decree of the Council of
Lateran, was, for that I supposed he had seen the Preface to my Apologeticall
Answer, wherein I discoursed at large of this decree against F. Les^ius, and
the reason why I supposed that he had seen that Answer, was, for that it was
published to the view of the world a year before he wrote his Supplement; and
whether I might not probably suppose the same, considering what particular
intelligence the College of Rome, where then he lived, has of all things that
pass in this Kingdom, especially in things, that greatly touch the Jesuits,
as that Preface does, I remit to the judgment of the prudent Reader. But
because he now protests, that he never saw that Preface, before my
Theological Disputation, whereunto it is annexed, came forth, I will believe
him therein, and take his protestation for an answer; and I do willingly
grant, that I was mistaken therein; as also I protest, that in any other thing,
wherein I shall find my self to be mistaken, I will most willingly acknowledge
the same: and if he, and the rest of my Adversaries, will as willingly
acknowledge their errors in all those things, wherein they do clearly find
themselves to be mistaken, I make no doubt, but that this controversy betwixt
us will quickly be at an end.

28 Thirdly, observe good Reader, how fraudulently Mr. Fitzherbert has
concealed a principal clause, which of set purpose I put down in this my
argument taken from the Constitution of the Emperor Frederick. For whereas I
argued thus, as you have seen before, that because the Emperor Frederick
enacting the self same law five years after, and using the very same words,
which the Council did use, to wit, a temporal, and principal Landlord,
Governor, or also Lord, and not having a principal Landlord, Governor, or
Lords and changing only spiritual penalties into temporal, neither did, nor
could by those words comprehend Kings, or absolute Princes, therefore from
thence it may be probably collected, that those words in the Council could not
ex vi sua, by force of the words comprehend Kings, and Sovereign Princes, who
in penal laws are not to be understood under general words, unless they be
expressed by name, Mr. Fitzherbert concealeth those words [ex vi sua, by force
of the words [which nevertheless are very material to the force of my
argument, as any man of judgment may clearly perceive. For as you shall see
beneath, for the same reason, why Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that Frederickes
constitution did not by those General words comprehend Kings, and absolute
Princes, I also affirm, that Kings, and absolute Princes are not under those
general words comprehended in the Decree of the Council of Lateran.

29 Now you shall see, how well Mr. Fitzher. impugneth this my argument taken
from the Constitution of the Emperor Frederick. Widdringtons argument is,
says he, Nu. 6. and seq. page 139. and seq.
that for as much as the Emperor Fridericke made the same Constitution five
years after the Council of Lateran, almost in the same words, changing only
the spiritual penalties into temporal, therefore he did not mean to include
therein either himself (who was free from the subjection of laws, or else
other absolute Princes, who were not subject to him. Thus argues he. But how
does it follow hereon, that the Canon of the Council of Lateran did not
include him, and all other Princes? For albeit they were free from all
temporal laws, yet being members of the Catholic Church, they were subject
to the laws of that Council, and the rather for that their Ambassadors being
present there, either ratified the Decrees thereof or at least did not
contradict them. But to the end that this controversy betwixt my Adversary
Widdrington and me, concerning the Emperor Friderickes law, may be the better
understood, I think it not amiss to lay down, what I have already said
concerning the same in my Supplement, where I proved against M. John Dunne,
that the said law was so far from preiudicing any way the Canon of the
Council, that it does notably confirm it; to which purpose I said thus.

30 Thou shall therefore understand, good Reader, that Frederick the second
Emperor of that name, being in the beginning of his reign an obedient child
of the Church, and willing to give public testimony thereof to the world,
thought good to imitate the example of many of his predecessors, as well in
the confirmation of the liberties, and privileges of the Clergy, as also in
employing his Imperial authority in the extirpation of heresy. Council.
Lateran. sub Innoc. 3. can. 44. and 46. Com. 4. ^oncil. See constitut. Frider..
Ad decus, and honorem.
And forasmuch as this Council of Lateran had then lately before promulgated
diverse Canons to both those ends, he published also certain constitutions on
his part, with manifest relations to the Canons of the Council. For whereas
the Council complained of the small charity of some Secular Princes, The
Council did not complain of Secular Princes but of Consuls and Rectors of
cities and such like Potestaes not Potentaes, as M. Fitzherbert says. Ibid..
Nos Fridericus Imperator.
and Potentates, who had made laws, and constitutions in prejudice of the
Ecclesiastical immunities, and privileges (which laws also the Council did
wholly abrogate and disannull) the Emperor in like manner, in the Preface to
his laws, lamenteth of the iniquity of such Potentates, and being desirous (as
he testifies) that the Church might enjoy plena quiet, and secura liberate,
full quietness, and secure liberty, abrogated by his first decree all such
constitutions, as any Cities, Places, Consulls, or other Potentates within the
Empire had made against the liberties of the Church.

31 And this he ordained under great penalties of infamy, banishment, and
confiscation of goods, Saluis nihilominus, says he, alijs paenis contra tales
in generali Concilio promulgatis; Reserving nevertheless the other penalties
promulgated against such persons in the general Council. So he; meaning by
the general Council that of Lateran, which was held but a few years before
he made these Constitutions: and therefore for as much as that most famous
general Council having been held so lately before, was then fresh in every
man's memory, it was needless to name it more particularly, which had been
requisite, if he had meant any other Council. Council. Constan. in fine.
Besides that the Council of Constance lays down the substance of the 46.
Canon of the said Council of Lateran made in favor of the liberties, and
immunities of the Church, and also makes mention of this law of Frederick,
and in relating the same sets down particularly the clause above mentioned,
to wit, Saluis nihilominus alijs poenis, etc. Reserving nevertheless the other
penalties promulgated against such in the general Council. Whereby it is
evident, that those Imperial Constitutions of Frederick have a special
relation unto the Canons of the Council of Lateran, and that they were made in
confirmation thereof.

32 This also appears by the other decrees ensuing, wherein the Emperor
either followed exactly the sense, meaning, and substance of some Canon of the
Council, or else used the very words thereof, so far forth as they might
stand with the style and form of an Imperial law, as it may be seen, not
only in the fragment alleged by Mr. Dunne, but also in diverse other parts of
those Constitutions, as in that, which concerns the receivers, abetters, and
defenders of heretics, being alike in the Imperial Constitutions, and in the
Canon of the Council, Council. Lateran. can. 3.. Credentes vero. Constit.
Freder.. Credentes praterea.
to wit, Credentes praeterea, receptores, defensores, and fautores
Haereticorum, etc. And the only difference betwixt the one, and the other is,
that the Council says, Excommunicationi decreuimus subiacere, We decree them
to be subject to Excommunication, and the Emperor in his Constitutions says,
Bannimus, we do outlaw them, because it did not belong to him to
excommunicate. And again, the Council in the end of that Canon imposes a
penalty upon Clergy men, which the Emperor does not in his Constitution,
because they were exempt from his Jurisdiction, and in all other things the
Canon and Constitution do agree word for word.

Council. Later. can. 3. Constitut. Freder.
33 The like also may be observed in the Constitution and Canon, concerning such
as are only suspected of heresy, beginning both alike, to wit, Qui autem
inuenti fuerint sola suspicione notabiles, etc. and differing only in that the
Canon exposes them to Excommunication, if they do not clear themselves
within a year, whereas the Imperial law inflicteth the penalty of infamy,
and banishment. Also the same form and style is kept in another Constitution,
touching an oath to be taken by all Magistrates, to do their best endeavor to
exterminate heretics; And finally, to come to the Constitution whereof we now
specially treat, it seems that the same is no other, then, as it were a
transcript, or Copy of that Canon of the Council, concerning the deposition
of Princes, mutatis mutandis, I mean, except only in such things as could not
agree with the form of an Imperial law, or exceeded the power of a Secular
Prince. Council. Later. can. 3.. Si vero Dominus.


34 Therefore whereas the Canon ordains, that the Metropolitan, and other
Bishops should excommunicate such Princes, as would not purge their Countries
of heresy, and afterward also (if they remained obstinate) denounce them to
the Pope, to the end he might absolve their subjects from their allegiance,
and expose their States to be taken by Catholics, Constit. Freder.. Si vero
Dominus.
the Emperors Constitution makes no mention of Excommunication, or
Denunciation, as neither compatible with his temporal power, nor conform to
the style of the Imperial laws, and therefore he says only instead thereof,
Post annum a tempore admonitionis elapsum, etc. After a year past from the
time of the admonition we do expose his land to be taken by Catholics, and
in this only consists the difference of the Canon and Constitution, for in
all other things they are all one.

35 Thus I said in my Supplement, and afterward having accusion to satisfy an
objection of Mr. Dunne, touching these words in the Emperors law, Exponimus
terras illius Catholicis occupandas, We expose his Lands to be taken by
Catholics (which words Mr. Dunne urges to prove, that the Emperor took the
authority out of the Popes hands) upon this occasion, I say, I showed, that
five several Popes, to wit, Honorius the third, Alexander the fourth,
Innocentius the fourth, Vrbanus the fourth and Clement the fourth; knowing
right well that the said Constitution of Fredricke might greatly avail, and
help to purge the Empire of heresy (yea and ease them of the labor, envy and
murmuration, which might be incident sometimes to the deposition of some Prince
within the Emperors Dominion) did ratify and confirm it no less, then his
other laws made in favor of the Church, which they would never have done, if
he had sought thereby to take any authority from the Sea Apostolic or to
prejudice the Canon of the Council. Thus discoursed I in my Supplement.

36 Whereby it is clear, that this Law of the Emperor Frederick, was no way
prejudicial to the Canon of the Council, but a notable confirmation of it,
ordaining the like to be practiced and executed in his Dominions in favor of
the Church, to show his obedience thereto, and to the Council of Lateran; and
therefore whereas my Adversary Widdrington will needs persuade his Reader,
that those general words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, and non
habens Dominum principalem (which are used alike in the Canon, and in the
Emperors law) have like restriction in both, he shows himself to be very
absurd. For what can be more clear, then that all laws are limited, etc?

37 Here you see Mr. Fitzherbert has made a long discourse to prove, that
this law of the Emperor Frederike was no way preiuciall to the Canon of the
Council of Lateran, but a notable confirmation thereof, which is nothing at
all against me: For I never intended to deny, that this Constitution of
Frederike was against the Canon of the said Council, but I expressly affirmed,
that it was the same law, and constitution containing the very same words with
that of the Council, changing only spiritual punishments into temporal: and
that therefore those words Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis* a
temporal and principal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, which are used alike in
both Decrees, have though not equally, yet proportionally the like restriction,
and limitation in both. For that which I affirm is, that this great, and
famous Council of Lateran, where almost all the Ambassadors of Christian
Kings, and Princes were present, did represent, as the Cardinal of Peron does
well observe, the whole Christian world, or Commonwealth, as well temporal as
spiritual, and was, as it were a general Parliament of all Christendom,
consisting both of temporal, and spiritual authority, of temporal Princes,
and spiritual Pastors; and that all the laws and decrees, which were enacted
therein concerning spiritual matters, as is the inflicting of spiritual
Censures for what crime soever either spiritual, or temporal, did proceed
merely from the authority of spiritual Pastors, and that all the laws, and
decrees, which were enacted concerning temporal matters, as is this decree,
whereof now we treat, concerning the inflicting of temporal punishments, for
what cause, crime, or end soever they be inflicted, did proceed merely from
the authority of Secular Princes, who are the head, and fountain of all
temporal authority, and of all power to dispose of temporal matters: for
that, as I have proved more at large in the first part of this Treatise by the
testimony of many learned Catholics, the Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
power, does not by the institution of Christ extend to the inflicting of any
temporal punishment, as death, exile, privation of goods, much less of
Kingdoms, nay nor so much as imprisonment, but that when the Church, or
spiritual Pastors do inflict such temporal punishments, it proceeds from
the positive grant, and privileges of temporal Princes.

38 And from this ground it evidently follows, that not only in this Canon
of the Council of Lateran concerning the temporal punishing of heretics, and
their abetters, but also in all other Canons of Popes, or Counsels, when the
inflicting of any temporal punishment is ordained, it is as probable that all
the force, which they have to bind, does proceed originally from the positive
grant, consent, and authority of temporal Princes, as it is probable, that the
spiritual power of the Church does not by the institution of Christ extend to
the inflicting of temporal, or civil punishments: and consequently, that
temporal Princes are not by any general words included in such decrees, as
being themselves supreme, and next under GOD in temporalls, and not to be
punished with temporal punishments, but by GOD alone. Wherefore, unless my
Adversaries do first prove, (which in my judgment they will never be able
to do) by some conuincing argument, grounded upon the authority either of the
Holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, or some clear definition of the Church, that
this doctrine, which denies the Pope to have by the institution of Christ
authority to depose Princes, and to inflict temporal punishments, is absurd,
and not probable, they spend their time in vain, and beat about the bush to
little purpose, whiles they bring never so many decrees, and canons of Popes or
Counsels, wherein the inflicting of temporal punishments is ordained, for
still the maine question remains yet a foot, by what authority, to wit,
temporal, or spiritual, those Canons, for as much as concerns the
inflicting of such temporal punishments, have force to bind; and the answer
of Almaine, and of many other Catholic Doctors will be still ready at hand,
that the Pope by the institution of Christ has only authority to inflict
spiritual punishments, as Excommunication, Suspension, Interdict, and that the
other punishments, which he uses, do proceed from the pure positive law,
authority, grant, and privileges of temporal Princes, and that therefore the
laws, or Canons of spiritual Pastors enacting them cannot bind, or
comprehend temporal Princes themselves.

39 And by this the Reader may clearly see both the ground, and reason, from
whence I deduced probably, that absolute Princes are not included under any
general words whatsoever in penal laws, and canons of the Church, wherein
temporal penalties are inflicted (for neither are they included, as you shall
see beneath in the next Chap. in penal laws, wherein spiritual punishments
are inflicted, under general words, or names, which denote titles of inferior
degree, place, and dignity, as are Dominus temporalis, Dominus Principalis, a
temporal, or principal Landlord, Governor, or also Lord, and such like) and
also how weakly, not to use Mr. Fitzherberts foul word, absurdly, he
proves, that I show my self to be very absurd in persuading the Reader,
that those words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, a temporal, or
principal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, which are used alike in the Canon,
and in the Emperors law, have like restriction, though not equally, yet
proportionally in both. For what can be more clear, says he, p. 145. nu. 15
then that all Laws are limited according to the power of the Prince, who
makes them, and that therefore the obligation of every Princes laws is
extended only to his own subjects? whereupon it follows necessarily, that
albeit the Canons of General Counsels, being made in general terms, do
comprehend all Christian men, as well absolute Princes as others (because they
are all subject thereto) yet the Laws of temporal Princes being made in the
like, or in the same general terms, can comprehend none but their own
subjects: and this being so, what an absurd argument has. Widdrington made,
who because the words are all one in the Canon of the Council, and the Law of
the Emperor, will restrain the sense of the Canon to the limits of the
Emperors temporal power, which could not exceed his own Dominion?

40 And therefore though the words, Dominus temporalis, or principalis, or non
habens Dominum principalem, be general in his Law, yet they can be understood
of none, but such as being his subjects, held their Lands, or states of him, or
of some other in his Dominions (in which respect Kings, and other temporal
Princes, which held not of the Empire, could not be comprehended therein)
though the same general words in the Canon must needs comprehend, as well all
Emperors, Kings, and absolute Princes, as other inferior Lords, because all
of them being Domini temporales, are subject alike to the decrees of a general
Council.

41 True it is, that nothing is more clear, then that all Laws are limited
according to the power of the Prince that makes them, and that therefore the
obligation of every Princes laws is extended only to his own subjects.
Whereupon it follows necessarily, that albeit the Canons of General
Counsels, being made in general terms, may comprehend all Christian men,
as well absolute Princes, as others, forasmuch as concern spiritual matters,
and the inflicting of spiritual punishments, because in these all Christians
are subject thereto, yet considering that it is probable, that Christian
Princes in temporal matters, and for as much as concerns the inflicting of
temporal punishments, are not subject to the spiritual power of the Church,
it is also probable, that the Canons of Popes, or Counsels made in general
terms concerning temporal affairs, as are the inflicting of temporal
punishments, cannot comprehend temporal Princes, who in these are absolute,
and supreme, and not subject to the spiritual power of the Church, which as I
have showed before, does extend to the inflicting only of spiritual
punishments. Which being so, the Reader may clearly perceive, that the
argument I brought from the Emperors constitution is not absurd, but very
probable, and that the absurdity, which his foul mouth so often casts upon
me, falls upon himself. For that, which I in bringing that argument
intended to affirm, was this, that for the same reason, for which those
general words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, or non habeus Dominum
principalem did not in the decree of Frederike comprehend either himself, who
was not subject to his own law at leastwise as it is coerciue, or absolute
Princes, for that they were not subject to him at all, the same general words
in the Canon of the Council, for as much as concerns the inflicting of
temporal punishments, do not comprehend absolute Princes, for that they are
subject to the authority of the Church only in Spiritual matters, and not in
temporal, as are the inflicting of temporal punishments.

42 Wherefore I do not restrain the sense of the Canon to the limits of the
Emperors temporal power, as Mr. Fitzherbert very grosely imposes upon me,
but I restrain the sense of the Canon thus, that if all Christian Princes had
made the like law, and in the same form of words, as Frederick did, then I
say, that all these laws had been a clear confirmation of the sense and
meaning of the Canon of the aforesaid Council, and that those general words,
Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, and non habens Dominum principalem in
all these laws together made by all Christian Princes, had signified the self
same persons, and no others, then now they signify in the decree of the
Council. For that, which I contend, is, that it is probable, that this Canon,
forasmuch as concerns the inflicting of temporal punishments, was made by
the Council, not as it had spiritual, but only as it had temporal
authority, or, which is all one, not by virtue of the spiritual power of the
Church, but by the authority, and consent of all temporal Princes, whose
Ambassadors were present thereat, because it is probable, as I have showed
above out of many learned Catholics, that the spiritual power of the Church
does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, but only of
spiritual. Whereby it is evident, that albeit Emperors, Kings, and all other
absolute Princes, and inferior Lords are subject alike to the decrees of
General Counsels, yea and of Provincial Counsels held in their own
kingdoms in matters spiritual, yet they are not subject alike to the Decrees
of general Counsels, wherein temporal matters, as are the inflicting of
temporal punishments, are decreed, for that these decrees are made by the
authority, and consent of absolute Princes, to whom only all other inferior
persons are subject in temporal affairs. And hereby all that, which Mr.
Fitzherbert adds in the rest of this Chapter is already satisfied.

43 So as you see, says he, p. 146. nu. 17.
what probable arguments Widdrington gives us, whiles nevertheless nothing
will satisfy him from us, but demonstrations: and therefore whereas I
signified all this in effect in my Supplement, he takes no formal notice of
it, but only as it were glanceth at it in a word, or two, saying, as you have
heard before, Dicere Imperatorem, etc. To say, that the Emperor did not
include Kings in those words of his law, and that the Pope did mean to do it
in the Canon, is to say so, but not to demonstrate. So he; requiring, as you
see, a demonstration of this point, and craftily concealing, and dissembling
the reason that I gave for my assertion, in my Supplement, as if I had given
none at all, but only had barely said, that Dominus temporalis in the
Emperors law, is not to be understood of Kings, as it is to be taken in the
Canon; whereas, you see, the reasons, which I have given of the difference of
the one, and the other (being grounded upon the different power of the General
Council, and the Emperor) is so pregnant, and clear, that it may serve for a
demonstration to any Catholic man of judgment.

44 For I think it is not more clear to any such, that two and two make
four, then that Dominus temporalis is a general term, including absolute
Princes, as well as other Lords, and that they are included in those words of
the Canon, because they being members of Christ's Church, are as subject to a
general Council, as the meanest temporal Lord in Christendom: As also it is
no less clear, that Dominus temporalis, in the Emperors constitution can be
extended no further then to such temporal Lords as were some way subject to
him, which my Adversary himself acknowledges, albeit he absurdly denies,
that the same words in the Canon are to be understood of Kings.

45 But first, whether my arguments and answers be probable or no, and
whether that foul aspersion of absurdity, wherewith Mr. Fitzherbert so often
charge me, does fall upon his own arguments, and answers, or upon mine, I
must remit to the judgment of the learned Reader. Secondly, no learned man can
deny, but that to prove any doctrine to be certain, and of faith, it is
necessary to bring demonstrations, and conuincing proofs, and that to prove
any doctrine to be probable, and the contrary not to be certain, nor of
faith, it suffices to bring only probable arguments, and answers: and
therefore it is no marvel, that I expect at my Adversaries hands clear
demonstrations, and invincible proofs, seeing that they take upon them to
prove their doctrine to be certain, and of faith, whereas it suffices for
me that only take upon me at this time to show their doctrine not to be
certain, and of faith, to bring probable arguments, and answers.

46 Thirdly, it is not true, that I have craftily concealed and dissembled the
reason, that he gave in his Supplement, why the words Dominus temporalis,
should in the Canon of the Council comprehend absolute Princes, and not in the
Emperors constitution. For all that he labors, as you have seen, to
prove in his Supplement, is that the Emperors constitution is no way
prejudicial to the Canon of the Council, but a clear confirmation thereof,
which I never denied, and that the Emperors law could extend no further then
to his own subjects, and that the Emperor himself, and all Sovereign
Princes, are under the jurisdiction of a general Council, and subject to her
decrees, whereof also no man makes doubt, if those decrees concern spiritual
affairs, but if they concern mere temporal matters, wherein temporal
Princes are supreme, and not subject to the jurisdiction of the Church, as are
the inflicting of temporal punishments, for what cause, crime, or end soever
they be inflicted, the whole drift of my Apollogie was to prove it to be
probable, that the spiritual authority and jurisdiction of the Church does not
extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, for any cause, crime, or end
whatsoever, and consequently that the inflicting of such temporal punishments,
although it be for a spiritual end, is a mere temporal matter, wherein
temporal Princes are supreme, and subject to none but God. Which being so, I
had no reason to take any formal notice in that brief Admonition of all the
idle discourses he made in his Supplement, and which either were nothing at
all against me, or might easily be satisfied by that I had said before in my
Apology. But Mr. Fitzherbert does shamefully corrupt my words, and meaning,
and fowlely abuse me, and his Reader, in affirming, as you have seen, that I
do restrain the sense of the Canon to the limits of the Emperors temporal
power, which could not exceed his own dominion, whereas I made no such
restraint, but extended the sense of the Canon, to the Dominions of all
Christian Princes, by whose consent and authority that Canon, for as much as it
concerns the inflicting of temporal punishments, was made, and had force to
bind.

47 Neither, as I said, does the reason which Mr. Fitzherbert brings
concerning the distinction of the Canon, and of the Emperors decree in
extension, any way impugn, but confirm the argument I brought from the
Emperors law, because or the same reason which Mr. Fitzherbert alleges, why
those general words Dominus temporalis, or principalis, cannot in the
Emperors decree comprehend absolute Princes, for that they are not subject to
him in temporals, I also affirm, that the same general words cannot in the
Canon comprehend absolute Princes, for that they are not subject to the Pope,
or Church in temporals, as is the inflicting of temporal punishments, to
which, as I have often said, the spiritual power of the Church does not
extend. And if my Adversary cannot bring more clear and pregnant
demonstrations then these to confirm his new Catholic faith, he need not to
waste any more time and labor, in producing such clear and pregnant
demonstrations, which every Catholic man of judgment may clearly see to be
apparent sophismes, and that notwithstanding all his vain brags of his clear
and pregnant demonstrations, and of my absurd arguments and answers so often
repeated by him, in the end the Reader will see, that Parturiunt montes,
nascetur ridiculus mus.

48 And although it be clear enough that Dominus temporalis is a general
term including absolute Princes as well as other Lords, yea, and Masters; yet
because it is clear that Dominus temporalis is not a proper term or title
belonging to absolute Princes, but common to all others of inferior degree, if
any man should speak of them, and give them only the titles of their
Masterships, Worships, or Lordships, he would both be accounted a rude and
unmannerly companion, and also he should wrong those persons, in giving them
only those titles of worship or honor, which are common to other persons of
inferior rank; neither he that should only use such inferior titles, would
be thought to speak of absolute Princes, unless some other circumstance
should enforce us to think the same. And although it be also clear, that
absolute Princes are subject no less then the meanest Lord in Christendom, to
the decrees of a general Council, which concern spiritual matters, yet
because in mere temporal matters they are supreme, and therein not subject to
any decree of Pope, or Council and it is also probable, that the inflicting of
temporal punishments is a mere temporal matter, and not belonging to the
spiritual power of the Church, it is also probable, and no way absurd, to say
that Dominus temporalis in the Canon of the Council, wherein the inflicting of
temporal punishments is decreed, is not to be understood of absolute Princes,
for the same reason that in the Emperors constitution, it is not extended to
them, but to such only as were subject to him in temporals.

49 But perhaps Widdrington will say, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 147. number. 19.
that he has added another reason to fortify the same, which was (as you have
heard before) that Kings, and absolute Princes, are not included in penal
laws, except they be specified therein by the names of Princes for so indeed
he says, inserting the same cunningly into his inference, to make his argument
(grounded on the Emperors law) to seem the more probable; and therefore
having said that the Emperor could not understand either himself, or other
absolute Princes, by the name of one who has no principal Lord, he
concludes, ex quo probabiliter collegi, etc. Whereupon I gathered probably,
that those words, Non habens Dominum principalem, not having a principal
Landlord, or Lord, could not comprehend absolute Princes, who are not to be
understood as included in penal laws, except they be namely expressed. Thus
he sliding subtly as you see, from the Emperors law, and the reason grounded
thereon, to the privileges of Princes, which belongs to another question,
and shall be fully debated, and cleared, as I hope in the next Chapter: And in
the mean time I conclude for the present, that in all this he has showed
himself very absurd, and that my cold answer, as he terms it, would have
been hot enough to dissolve his frozen and frivolous argument, if he had not
wholly dissembled the force and substance of my discourse in my Supplement
concerning this point.

50 It is very true, that I have in that brief Admonition also another reason,
why absolute Princes are not included in the Canon of the Council under those
general names, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, or such like, to wit,
for that in penal laws they are not comprehended under such general terms,
which denote titles of inferior degree and dignity: and in bringing this
reason I used no craft or cunning, but meant plainly and sincerely, neither did
I intend to slide cunningly and subtily, as Mr. Fitzherbert would guilefully
persuade his Reader, from the Emperors law, and reason grounded thereon, to
this reason: for that the reason why in the Emperors law absolute Princes are
not comprehended under those general names of Dominus temporalis, Dominus
principalis, is the chief and principal ground I stand upon, why they are not
also included under those general words in the Canon of the Council, as you
have seen before. Nevertheless there is this difference betwixt these two
reasons, that this later reason, whereof we shall treat more at large in the
next Chapter, only shows, why absolute Princes are not in penal laws of the
Church compreheded under such general words, which denote names, and titles of
inferior place and dignity, but the first reason grounded upon the Emperors
law, does also prove that absolute Princes cannot, under any general terms
whatsoever, be included in any Canons of Popes or Counsels, wherein the
inflicting of temporal punishments is decreed: For to deny, that absolute
Princes are not under any general words comprehended in such Decrees, is no
more absurd, then to deny, that the spiritual power of the Church does not
extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, which doctrine for that my
Adversary will never be able to prove absurd, he might well have spared to use
such absurd terms, wherewith he does so often defile his religious mouth, and
which, as you have seen, do more fitly agree to his own arguments and
answers, and to the whole discourse he has made in his Supplement concerning
this point, if he thereby intend to confute the aforesaid answer I gave to the
decree of the Council, and the reason thereof grounded upon the like decree of
the Emperor.

CHAP. X.
Wherein Widdringtons second answer to the Decree of the Lateran Council,
affirming that absolute Princes are not comprehended therein, because they are
not mentioned by their proper names, but by inferior titles, is proved to be
neither improbable nor absurd, but conform to the doctrine of learned Divines
and Lawyers, and Mr. Fitzherberts exceptions against the said answer are
showed to be very insufficient and fraudulent.

1 YOu have seen, Courteous Reader, how weakly Mr. Fitzherbert has in the
former Chapter impugned the answer I gave to the decree of the Lateran
Council, and the reason thereof grounded upon the like Constitution of the
Emperor Fredricke; now you shall see, how insufficiently also he impugneth in
this Chapter the other reason, which I brought to prove, that those general
words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, a temporal, or principal
Landlord, Governor, or also Lord, do not in the Canon of the Council
comprehend absolute Princes. Thus therefore he begins this Chapter.

2 You have heard in the last Chapter, how my Adversary Widdrington teaches,
that the Canon of the Council of Lateran concerning the deposition of
temporal Lords, does not comprehend Kings, and absolute Princes, because they
are not namely specified therein, Qui, says he, nisi nominatim exprimantur in
legibus paenalibus intelligendi non sunt; Who are not to be understood as
included in penal laws, except they be expressed by name. So he, which he
also more amply affirms in the Preface to his Apologetical answer (whereto
he remitteth me, and his Readers) for there he seems to ground his opinion in
this point, Widdrington Apolog. Respo^s. Praefat. nu. 44.
upon the rules of the laws, saying, that Secular Princes are not signified in
penal Laws, under the general names of Lords, Magistrates, and temporal
Judges, iuxta regulas Iurisprudentium, according to the rules of the Lawyers:
whereto he adds also for examples sake, that an Abbot is not comprehended in
the penal Laws under the name of a Monk, nor a Bishop under the name of a
Priest, nor the Pope under the name of a Bishop, because, says he, in paenis
benignior pars est eligenda, and odia restringi, favors conuenit ampliari,
The more benign or mild part is to be chosen in penalties, and it is
convenient that odious things be restrained, and favors amplified or enlarged,
So he.

3 Whereto I answer, that whereas he says, that Princes are not comprehended
in penal Laws except they be specified by the name of Princes, I say first,
that if this were true, this absurdity would follow thereof, that absolute
Princes should be exempted from diverse Laws and Canons, wherein all the world
has hitherto held them to be included, as from the Canon of the Council of
Lateran, ordaining, that Omnis vtriusque sexus fidelis, etc. Council. Later. 4.
can. 21.
Every Christian of both sexes shall confess, and communicate at Easter, upon
pain of Excommunication, and want of Christian burial; as also from the Bulla
in caena Domini, and from the Canon, Si quis suadente, Cans. 17. q. 4.
forbidding the laying of violent hands upon Cleargie-men, and diverse other
general constitutions, from the which they were never yet exempted in the
opinion of any man.

But if Mr. Fitzherbert had not meant to cavil, and to take every idle
occasion to carpe at my words without cause, he might easily have seen by
those words of mine, which here he cites out of my Apologeticall Preface,
and to which in my Admonition I remitted the Reader, that when I affirmed, that
absolute Princes are not understood to be comprehended in penal laws, unless
they be expressed by name, my meaning was, that they are not understood to be
comprehended in penal laws under those general names of Dominus temporalis,
Dominus principalis, of Lords, Magistrates, Judges, Landlords, and such like
general names, which denote some inferior office, dignity, or honor, but
they must be expressed by the names of the honor and dignity, which are
proper to them, as an Abbot is not comprehended under the name of a Monk, nor
a Bishop under the name of a Priest, nor the Pope under the name of a Bishop.
For to affirm that absolute Princes, as likewise Abbots and Bishops, are not
comprehended in penal laws enacted by the Church, under no general names,
although they denote no peculiar office, honor, dignity, or function, by which
some persons are distinguished from others, had been indeed somewhat absurd.
And so these Canons here alleged by Mr. Fitzherbert. Omnis vtriusque sexus,
etc. Si quis suadente diabolo, etc. and out of the Bull in caena Domini, or
such like are nothing to the purpose, for that they are not such general
names, which denote any peculiar office, honor, dignity or function, by which
some men are distinguished from others, and therefore this my Adversaries first
Answer is nothing at all against my doctrine.

5 Secondly, I say, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 150. nu. 3.
that Widdrington might have done well to have told us, or at least quoted in
his margent (as he does not) in what Lawyers we may find that privilege or
exemption of Princes whereof he speaks; for sure I am, that they who write of
Princes make no mention thereof, as may be seen in Restaurus Castaldus,
Restaur. Castald. q. 110. de Imper.
who sets down above a hundred privileges of the Emperor, and yet does
not mention any such.

6 But first the Reader may easily perceive, that the reason which I brought,
why absolute Princes are not in penal laws, and odious matters comprehended
under the general names, of temporal Landlords, Governors, Judges, Lords,
or such like, was not grounded upon any peculiar privilege proper to absolute
Princes, for the like I affirmed of a Bishop and an Abbot, but upon the known
rules of the law which there I cited, and upon the authority of learned
Lawyers: and therefore Mr. Fitzherbert might have saved his labor in seeking
out of Restaurus Castaldus, or others any such privilege peculiar to absolute
Princes. Neither also did I affirm, that all Lawyers are of opinion, that in
penal laws, and odious matters an Abbot is not comprehended under the name of
a Monk, nor a Bishop under the name of a Priest or Clearke, nor an absolute
Prince under the name of a temporal Landlord, Governor, Judge, or Lord, but
that some Lawyers are of this opinion: and this is enough to prove it to be
probable, that in the Canon of the Lateran Council, Emperors, Kings, and
absolute Princes are not comprehended under those general words of a
temporal or principal Landlord, Governor, Judge, or Lord. Wherefore
although the opinion of Hostiensis (of whom I will speak beneath) or of any
other Lawyer, or Divine whatsoever be expressly against this doctrine, it is
nothing to the purpose, except it be also against the opinion of all Lawyers
and Divines.

7 Secondly therefore, that M. Fitzherbert may also see, that I have not
invented this doctrine of my own head, I will now for proof of the same
relate some Catholic Authors, whom then I omitted to rehearse, for that I
thought it so manifest, that no man of any reading would make doubt thereof. An
Abbot, says Bartholomaeus Fumus in his Armilla aurea, Armilla verbo Abbas nu.
11.
in an odious matter is not comprehended by the name of Monks, although he be
in a favorable matter, according to the Doctors in cap. Armilla verbo
Clericus. nu. 2.
finali de Simonia. And again, by the name of Clearkes, says he, in a
favorable matter are understood all that have any Clearkely dignity, but in an
odious matter under the name of a Clerk are not comprehended Bishops, no
Canons, nor others placed in dignity, nor Monks, nor Religious men that are
exempted. Vide Panormit. in cap. bonae memoriae de postulat. Praelatorum.
Armilla verbo. Sacerdos. nu. 1
And again, by the name of a Priest, says he, in a favorable matter are
understood not only Prasbyters, but also Deacons and Subdeacons, but in an
odious matter only Presbyters, and not therefore Bishops are to be
understood; arg. cap. si quisque de cohab. Cleric. and mulierum, where
Panormitan observes the same. Thus writes Armilla.

Felinus cap. vlt. de Simonia.
8 The like has Felinus cap. vlt. de Simonia. prima conclusio. By the name of
Monks, says he, Abbots are understood in a favorable matter, but this
conclusion is not true in an odious matter; and for the same he cites
Panormitan, Pope Innocent, and others. And a little before out of diverse textes
of the Canon Law he deduceth this general rule, Quoties species aliquid addit
generi, nunquam appellatione generis venit species. Whenever the particular
does add something to the general, the particular is not to be comprehended
under the name of the general, which is the same in sense with that rule,
which he afterward relates out of Antonius de Butrio, that in penal things
the mixed, or compound, is not comprehended under the simple; which rules
Felinus limiteth thus, unless the punishment, or odious matter does tend
principally to favor the soul, but how to know this for certain, it is very
heard, as you shall see beneath.

Sayrus tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 33.
9 The like teaches our learned Countreyman, Gregorius Sayrus expounding the
Canon, Vt periculosa. Ne Clerici, vel Monachi lib. 6. Wherein are
excommunicated all Religious men, who go to any Schools of learning, unless
they have first license granted them by their Prelate with the advice of the
greater part of the Convent. An Abbot, says he, going to Schools without the
license of his Superior, and Convent, does not incur this punishment,
according to Archidiaconus, Geminianus, Angelus, Antoninus, and Nauarrus in the
places above cited, because it is a penal constitution, and therefore rather
to be restrained, then extended. The same has Navarre upon cap. finali de
Simonia. From the aforesaid it is also, says he, inferred, that the
disposition, Nauar. tom. 2. Comment. in cap. finali. de Simonia nu. 5.
or constitution, which speaks of a Monk, does not comprehend an Abbot if
the matter be not favorable, as Doctors here upon this Canon do seem to be of
opinion.

10 And Syluester treating of the Canon in Clement. Vnica de vsuris, wherein
are excommunicated, quicunque communitatum ipsarum Potestates, Capitanei,
Rectores, etc. All Potestaes of Communities themselves, Captains, Rectours, or
Governors, Consulls, Judges, Counselors, or any other Official, or Officer,
who do make, write, or dictate Constitutions, that usurers are to be paid, or
being paid are not to be restored, Siluest. verbo. Excommunicatio 19. nu. 82..
quadragessima tertia.
etc. affirms, that because this is a penal constitution, consequently it is
not extended to persons, that are not expressed, or which is all one, expressly
named therein; and he proves this by that rule of the Law, in Sexto, In
penalties the milder part is to be chosen. Moreover Pope Innocent the third
himself, under whom this Council of Lateran was held, In can. Seeds
Apostolica de Rescriptis.
does expressly decree, that when in his Commissions, persons of less worth,
and more base are only signified, persons of greater worth, and dignity are
not understood to be included in a general clause. Now what man of judgment
can make any doubt, but that Dominus temporalis, is a person of less worth,
honor, and dignity, then Dominus principalis, who in the Canon is
distinguished from Dominus temporalis, and both of them are persons of less
worth, honor, and authority, then are Domini supremi, as are Emperors,
Kings, and absolute Princes. And therefore these general words, Dominus
temporalis, Dominus principalis, being names of less worth and dignity, then
are Domini supremi, must not according to Pope Innocent his own rule,
comprehend Emperors, Kings, and absolute Princes, who are the most worthy,
most noble, and most principal Lords, and persons upon earth.

11 But we will conclude this point with so plain and manifest an authority,
that my Adversary both in respect of the Author, and also of his words being
so clear, can take against it no colorable exception. Lastly therefore,
Andreas Duuallius, a famous Doctor of Paris, and at this present the Kings
Public professor of Divinity, and also a man otherwise much favoring the
Popes temporal authority over absolute Princes, Andr. Duual. de suprema Rom
Pont. in Ecclesiam potestate. part. 2. q. 4. p. 264.
and his spiritual authority over a general Council, contrary to the
custom of that renowned University, writes thus: Notum est nomine
Clericorum, etc. It is manifest, that in an odious matter Bishops are not
comprehended under the name of Clerks, nor sometimes in the same matter
Religious men under the name of Monks, neque similiter nomine Dominorum Reges,
nor likewise Kings under the name of Landlords, Governors, or Lords, in regard
of the height, and Majesty of Kingly dignity. I will say more, that perchance
in an odious matter the King of France in regard of the singular prerogatives,
wherein he excels other Kings, is not comprehended under the name of Kings.
Thus D. Duual.

12 And by this the judicious Reader may clearly perceive both what censure my
ignorant Adversary deserves both in branding this doctrine with the
temerarious note of absurdity, and also that from hence it follows
evidently, that the answer, which I gave to the decree of the Laeteran
Council is not absurd or improbable; For all this may be not only a probable
persuasion, but also a manifest demonstration to any Catholic man of
judgment, that in the foresaid Canon, wherein temporal penalties are
inflicted, Emperors, Kings, and absolute Princes, are not included in those
general names of Dominus temporalis, and Dominus principalis, a temporal and
principal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, which denote titles of honor,
office, or dignity, far inferior to the height, and Majesty of Kingly
Soueraingtie, and that therefore no conuincing, or demonstratiue argument can be
brought from this Canon, to prove that the Pope has authority to depose
absolute Princes, who according to the doctrine of so many learned men, and
also the decree of Pope Innocent himself, are not in penal laws, and odious
matters comprehended under general words, which denote titles of inferior
worth, honor, or dignity. Wherefore although it be needless, the premises
considered, to make any further answer to the rest of my Adversaries discourse
in this Chapter, yet for better satisfaction of the studious Reader, I will set
down, what weak objections he continues still to urge.

13 Besides that, says Mr. Fitzher. Page 150. nu. 3. 4.
I find the opinion of Lawyers expressly contrary thereto. For whereas the
famous Canonist, and Card. Hostiensis (who wrote above 300. years ago) says,
that Deponitur haereticus, etc. Hostiens. in Sum. tit. de haereticis. qua
paena. nu. 9.
an heretic is deposed from all dignity, whether he be a Clerk, or a Layman,
Pope, Emperor, or any inferior: he alleges for the same three Laws,
whereof the second, and the third do directly prove our intent. For the second
is an ancient Decree of Liberius the Pope, wherein he ordained, that, 24. q. 1.
Qui contra Ecclesiae pacem.
Qui contra Ecclesiae pacem sunt, etc. They who are against the peace of the
Church, if they have any dignity, or the military girdle, let them be
deprived of it; if they be private men, and yet nobly borne, let them forfeit
all their substance, or goods, but if they be ignoble, or base people, let
them be not only whipped, but also banished: which I wish my Adversary
Widdrington well to note for two respects, the one, for albeit he seems to
admit the authority of the Ecclesiastical Canons, yet he denies often, as you
have heard, that the Church can inflict any corporal and temporal punishment,
which he may see was ordained by this ancient Decree, admitted, and set down
in the body of the Canon law, besides many other clear Canons and Decrees to
the same purpose. The other, because he says that Princes are not included in
penal laws, if they be not specified by the name of Princes, whereas
nevertheless he may see, that this ancient Canonist Hostiensis includes them
in this Decree, though the terms thereof are very general, without any
particular mention of Princes.

14 But first, what Cardinal Hostiensis, a man wholly addicted to the
advancing of the Popes temporal Monarchy, and his authority in temporals over
absolute Princes, not only indirectly, but also directly, or any other
Canonist, Civil Lawyer, or Divine affirms concerning this point, is little
to our purpose, considering that other Divines and Lawyers are contrary to him
herein. And therefore it is not sufficient for Mr. Fitzherbert to bring the
testimony only of Hostiensis, or of many other Doctors joined together with
him, to prove my aforesaid doctrine to be improbable, but it is necessary for
him to bring conuincing proofs, and he must also show, that no other approved
Authors moved with probable grounds, do maintain the same.

15 Secondly, observe, good Reader, what kind of conuincing proofs this man
brings out of Hostiensis, and how grossly thou art abused through the manifest
fraud, or ignorance of this my unlearned Adversary. For first this Decree of
Pope Liberius, admitted, as he says, and set down in the body of the Canon
law, is not authentical, but of a suspected credit, whereof also Mr.
Fitzherbert could not have been ignorant, if he had read in the Counsels set
out by Binnius the whole Decree, which is taken out of a Decretall Epistle,
which is pretended to have been written by Pope Liberius to S. Athanasius,
which Epistle Binnius himself calls in question. The Consulls, says
Binnius, Binnius tom. 1 Council. page 470 in fine Epistolae 13. Liberij.
which are added to this Epistle, to wit, Asclepius, and Deodatus, do show it
to be of a suspected credit, for I could never find their names to be in oath r
places subscribed to deeds, writings, or Calender books.

16 Secondly, if Mr. Fitzherbert had related the words immediately going before
that, which here he cites out of the Canon, and wishes me to note well for
two respects, the Reader would presently have perceived his fraud, or
ignorance, and that from this Canon no argument at all can be brought to
prove, that the Pope has authority to inflict temporal penalties, but
rather that temporal Kings have authority to inflict spiritual punishments.
For the entire words of this Canon, as it is set down by Binnius, are these:
Binnius vbi supra.
Whosoever shall presume to transgress these things, first let them be subject
to the terrible judgment of Almighty God, Deinde autem qualem cunque Regalem
indignationem reuereantur, per quam si Episcopi, etc. and afterward let them
reverence or fear all Regal indignation, by which if they be Bishops, or
Clergy men let them fall, or be deprived, wholly from the order of their
Priesthood, or Clergy, but if they be Monks, let them be separated from
their places; but if they be in dignity, or have the military girdle, let
them be deprived thereof, but if they be private men, yet noble, let them
forfeit all their substance, or goods; but if they be ignoble, let them not
only be whipped, but also perpetually banished, that all men being repressed
by the fear of God, and fearing deserved punishments threatened against them,
may keep immooueable, and without perturbation the peace of the holy Churches
of God. Given the eight Calends of June, Asclepius, and Deodatus most excellent
men being Consulls.

17 Now what will Mr. Fitzherbert say to this ancient decree of Pope Liberius,
which he wishes me well to note, wherein it is decreed, that Bishops, if
they perturbe the peace of the Church, shall be deprived of their Priesthood by
Regal or Kingly indignation? For that secular men being placed in dignity, may
be deprived of their honor and dignity, and if they be private men, yet noble,
may forfeit all their goods, and if they be ignoble, may be whipped, or
perpetually banished by Regal or Kingly power, or indignation, which this
Canon also, of what credit soever it be, does ordain, is not any way repugnant
to my doctrine. Thus thou see, good Reader, how grossly thou art abused
through the fraud or ignorance of this unlearned man, who nevertheless presumes
to direct thy soul, and conscience in this so high and dangerous a point of
thy allegiance due to God and man, wherein he clearly shows himself to have
so little skill.

18 Thirdly, in what sense I affirmed that Kings and absolute Princes are not
included in penal laws under general words, unless they be expressed by
name; for which respect also Mr. Fitzherbert wishes me to note well this Canon
of Pope Liberius, I have declared before, to wit, that they are not in such
laws comprehended under general words, which denote some inferior office or
title of honor for I never intended to deny, as this man imposes upon me,
that they are not included in any general words, except they be specified by
the name of Princes, if such general words denote no inferior office, or
title of honor. So that neither Hostiensis, for as much as concerns this
Canon of Liberius, contradicts my doctrine, because those general words, Qui
contra pacem Ecclesiae, They who are against the peace of the Church, do denote
no inferior office, or title of honor, and although he were against my
doctrine, it is too little to the purpose, seeing that other Lawyers and
Divines do contradict him herein, and moreover this Canon cited by Hostiensis,
is neither authentical, and of sufficient credit, nor any way gaine-saith
that, which I affirm concerning this point.

Page 151. nu. 5.
19 Now you shall see the third testimony, which Mr. Fitzherbert brings out of
Hostiensis. And this, says he, c will be much more clear by the third
testimony, cited out of the Canon law by Hostiensis, which he takes out of
the title de haereticia, Decret. lib. 5. tit. 7. de Haretices.
wherein there is no particular mention of absolute Princes, by the name of
Princes. neither is there in any other Decree concerning their deposition but
only this Canon of the Council of Lateran now in question: so as Widdrington
may see, not only that Kings, and absolute Princes have no such exemption from
penal Laws, as he pretends, but also that they are included in the general
terms oven of this Canon of the Council of Lateran, in the opinion of a
famous Canonist, who wrote not past fifty years after the said Council. And
if he say that they have had this exemption, or privilege since that time, let
him show us when, and where they had it, which I am sure he cannot do, as it
may appear by the Canonists, who comprehend absolute Princes in other penal
laws, wherein they are not otherwise mentioned then in general terms, as he
may see in Simanca, in his Institutions, Tit. 23.
and Emericus in his third part of the Directorie, Q. 31.
and Penna in his Annotations upon the Annot. 96.
same.

20 But first it is untrue, that in the whole title dehaereticis, there is not
any other Canon, or decree concerning the deposition of Princes, except this
Decree of the Lateran Council, if we once suppose, as Hostiensis does
suppose, that the Pope by the institution of Christ has authority to depose
temporal Princes, and to inflict temporal punishments: for this once
supposed, they may very well be included in the last Canon of this title De
haereticis, wherein Pope Gregory the ninth does Decree and declare, that
whosoever are bound, or obliged to manifest heretics by any covenant
strengthened with never so great security are absolved from the bond of all
allegiance, homage, and obedience: for in those words, whosoever, and manifest
heretics, and such like general terms, which denote no title of office,
honor or dignity inferior to Kingly majesty, all men whatsoever, even Kings
and absolute Princes may be included, if it be once granted, that the Pope has
power to depose absolute Princes. But because it is probable, as I have proved
at large above in this Treatise, that the Pope by the institution of Christ,
has no authority to depose temporal Princes, or to inflict temporal
punishments, it consequently follows, that it is also probable, that neither
the aforesaid Canon Absolutos, nor any other Canon made in such general words,
wherein temporal punishments are inflicted, can comprehend absolute Princes,
but that all such like Canons are made either by the Pope, as he is a temporal
Prince, and consequently are of force only in the territories of the Church,
or the Popes temporal dominions, or else that they are made by the consent of
temporal Princes, and have their force to bind from their authority, and
consequently do concern only inferior persons, or subjects, and not
absolute Princes themselves, who are free from the coerciue power of those
laws, which are made by their own authority.

21 So that although I will not now contend, neither do I much regard of what
opinion Hostiensis be concerning the sense and meaning of this Canon of the
Lateran Council, yet it is plain, that Mr. Fitzherbert has not hitherto
proved out of Hostiensis, as he pretended to prove, that absolute Princes
are comprehended in the penal laws of the Church, under such general names,
which denote some office, honor, dignity, or title inferior to Kingly
Majesty. Neither does Simancas, Emericus, or Pegna in the places cited by my
Adversary teach contrary to my doctrine in this point, to wit, that in penal
laws, and odious matters Abbots are understood by the general name of Monks,
Bishops, by the general name of Priests, and Emperors, Kings, and absolute
Princes by the general name of Dominus temporalis, a temporal Landlord,
Governor, or Lord.

22 For Simancas in the 23. title cited by my Adversary nu. 10. does clearly
distinguish betwixt Dominos temporales, and Reges, temporal Lords, and Kings:
and nu. 11. he proves, that heretical Kings and Princes are forthwith
deposed, and their subjects absolved from their allegiance, by the aforesaid
Canon Absolutos of Gregory the ninth, which, as I said, is a sufficient
proof, supposing, as he does, that the Pope has authority to depose
temporal Princes, and to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, but
because this supposition of his is not certain, his proof grounded thereon
cannot be certain. And Emericus in the 31. question cited by my Adversary,
to prove, that the Inquisitours have authority to proceed against Kings,
brings only the authority of Pope Clement the 4. and Vrbanus the 4. and
those general words contained in their Breues, of what condition, dignity, or
degree soever they be; and the same only confirms Pegna in his Commentary
upon that question, which does not contradict my doctrine, for I never denied,
that in penal laws, absolute Princes may not be comprehended under such
general words, supposing, as they suppose, which I deny, that the Pope by his
spiritual authority may inflict temporal punishments.

23 But secondly and principally, albeit these Doctors should, as in the
places cited by my Adversary they do not, contradict my doctrine in this
point concerning the not comprehending of Abbots under the general name of
Monks, Bishops of Priests, and absolute Princes under general names of
temporal Lords, Governors, Potestaes, and such like, yet it were little to
the purpose, seeing that other learned Lawyers, and Divines, as I have showed
before, do agree with me in this point. And therefore to prove my doctrine
in this point to be absurd and improbable, as this man after his vain
glorious bragging fashion boasts it to be, it is not sufficient, (as I said,
and this I wish him to note well) to bring the authority of one, two, twenty,
yea a hundred Lawyers, or Divines, if other learned Lawyers, and Divines,
although the far fewer in number, do contradict them therein.

24 Now let us proceed to the rest of Mr. Fitzherberts discourse. And whereas,
says he, p. 151. nu. 6.
Widdrington seems also to ground this his devise upon two rules of the law,
to wit, that in penal Laws the milder, or more favorable part is to be
chosen; and that odious things are to be restrained, and favors amplified,
the same is commonly true, when the text of the Law is so obscure, or the case
so doubtful, that two, or more opinions may be probably gathered thereof
touching the quantity, or quality of the pain, and how far, and to whom
the same is to be extended; for in these cases of debt, or such like, the more
favorable, or less rigorous opinion is to be followed; but in this Canon,
both the words, and sense are so clear, that hitherto no doubt has been made
amongst the Canonists, whether Kings, or absolute Princes are comprehended
therein.

25 It is very true, that my aforesaid answer, to wit, that in penal laws,
and odious matters, an Abbot is not included in the general name of a Monk,
nor a Bishop in the general name of a Priest or Clerk, nor a King in the
general name of a temporal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, or the like; I did
partly ground upon those rules of the law, and partly upon the authority of
learned Lawyers, and Divines, who, as you have seen, do confirm the same;
and therefore the words, and sense of this Canon are not so clear, but that
those Authors will consequently deny, that Emperors, Kings, and absolute
Princes are not in this Canon comprehended, under those general words, of a
temporal, or principal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, as neither an Abbot is,
according to them, in penal laws, and odious matters comprehended under the
general name of a Monk, nor a Bishop under the general name of a Priest, or
Clerk, nor a King under the general name, of a Landlord, Governor, or also
Lord. And if the words, and sense of this Canon be so clear, as this man
would make it to be, I wonder, that neither Cardinal Bellarmine in his
Controversies, nor Molina, nor Corduba, nor Victoria, nor D. Sanders, nor Azor,
vehement defenders of the Popes authority to depose absolute Princes, could
not see the clear sense of this Canon, whereof they could not be ignorant,
thereby to confirm their doctrine, by a manifest decree of a general
Council, without flying to the particular facts of Popes oftentimes deposing
Kings, and Emperors, which all learned men know to be no good argument to
prove, that the Pope has true right, and authority so to do.

26 Besides that, says Mr. Fitzherbert, page 152.
these rules have many exceptions, which are very considerable, and have place
in this case. For first, whereas all the obscurity that can be imagined in
this Canon, and case, is in the general words, Dominus temporalis, and non
habens Dominum principalem, the Lawyers teach us, that verba generalia non
dicuntur obscura, general words are not said to be obscure.

And the Lawyers also teach, that in penal laws, and odious matters, such
general words, as denote some inferior dignity, order, title, office, or
function, as a temporal, or principal Lord, Governor, Judge; or Landlord, a
Monk; a Clerk, and a Priest, are obscure, and are not understood to
comprehend absolute Princes, Abbots, or Bishops.

27 Secondly, this rule of restriction, says he, is not to be understood
quantum ad vim verborum, of the force of the words, and therefore the Lawyers
also teach, that penalties are to be extended as far, as the propriety of
the words do permit.

And the Lawyers also teach us, that in penal laws, and odious matters, such
general words, as denote some inferior title, dignity, office, order, or
function, are not to be extended as far as the priorietie of the words do
permit: and that therefore an Abbot is not comprehended under the general name
of a Monk, nor a Bishop under the general name of a Priest, nor a King under
the general name of a Lord, Governor, or Landlord, albeit an Abbot be
properly a Monk, and a Bishop be properly a Priest, and a King be properly a
Lord, Governor, and Landlord. But Mr. Fitzherbert does not distinguish
betwixt proper, as it is distinguished from improper, or metaphorical, in
which sense it is true, that the words of penal laws are to be understood in
a proper sense, and not to be restrained to an improper, or metaphorical
sense, and as proper is distinguished from common, or general, in which sense
an Abbot is not properly a Monk, nor a Bishop is properly a Priest, nor a King
is properly a temporal Lord, Governor, or Landlord, for that a Monk is not
the proper name of an Abbot, nor a Priest the proper name of a Bishop, nor a
temporal Lord the proper name of a King, but they are names, which are common
also to inferior Monks, inferior Priests, and inferior Lords.

28 Thirdly, the rule, says he, fails, when the reason is expressed, as it
is in this Canon. But Mr. Fitzherbert should have declared, what reason
expressed in the law is required to have the aforesaid rule to fail. For in
this Canon of the Lateran Council there is no reason expressed, why Dominus
temporalis, a temporal Land lord, Governor, or Lord must comprehend absolute
Princes. For the end, and reason of making this Canon was to put in execution
the holy laws before enacted by Christian Princes for the rooting out of
heretics, which laws were not put in practice by the negligence of inferior
Governors, Magistrates, and Officers, to whose charge the execution of justice
is immediately committed, for which reason it was sufficient to comprehend in
that Canon only inferior Lords, Governors, Magistrates, and Landlords, who
were negligent to put in execution the godly laws before enacted by pious
Emperors, and Kings for the repressing of heretics; but of this reason more
beneath.

29 Lastly, the rule, says Mr. Fitzherbert, holds not, say the Lawyers, when
there is question of the public good, or the favor of the Church, or of the
faith, or of souls; for in these ^ases penalties are to be extended, and the
law interpreted in prejudice of the delinquent. So as these rules do help
Widdrington nothing at all, seeing that these exceptions, which are admitted by
the Law, do clearly exclude the restriction, which he requires by virtue of
the rules.

30 And the Lawyers also do absolutely, and without the aforesaid exceptions
affirm the aforesaid rules to be true. Wherefore Sayrus, citing diverse
Lawyers for the same, does by virtue of this rule, except Abbots from
Excommunication, although Excommunication be rather medicinal, then penal,
and ought not to be inflicted but for the good of the soul. And Andreas
Duuallius did by virtue of this rule exempt the King of France from the Canon,
Vnam sanctam, of Pope Boniface the eight, which nevertheless was made in
favor of the Church. Neither is there any law either spiritual, or civil,
which ought not to concern the public good, neither has the Pope any
authority either directive, or coerciue granted him, but for the good of
souls. So as these rules, according to the opinion of learned Lawyers, and
Divines do help me greatly, and favor my doctrine concerning the not
including in penal laws Abbots, Bishops, and Kings under the general names
of Monks, Priests, and Lords, although they be enacted for the public good,
the health of souls, and in favor of the Church.

31 But the maine, and principal ground, whereon I stand, why absolute Princes
are not comprehended in this Canon of the Lateran Council, under those
general words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, is this, as you have
seen before, for that, albeit I should grant my Adversary only for
disputation sake, that in penal laws, and odious matters Abbots are included
in the name of Monks, and Bishops in the name of Priests, and Kings in the
name of temporal Lords, which nevertheless he will never be able to
convince, yet seeing that it is most clear, as Mr. Fitzherbert also
confesses, that all laws are limited according to the power of the Lawmakers,
and that therefore the obligation both of Princes, and Church laws is extended
only to their own subjects, it necessarily follows, that temporal Princes
cannot be comprehended under any general words, in any Canon, or constitution
of the Church, but only in those things, wherein they are subject to the
spiritual power of the Church. From whence it clearly follows, that if it
be probable, as in very deed it is, that the spiritual Pastors of the
Church have no authority by the institution of Christ to inflict temporal
punishments, or to depose temporal Princes, it is also probable, that this
Canon of the Lateran Council, as also all other such like decrees, wherein
temporal punishments are in general words inflicted upon temporal Lords,
Governors, or Landlords, was not made by spiritual, but by temporal
authority, and therefore cannot comprehend absolute Princes, who in temporals,
and for as much as concerns the inflicting of temporal punishments, are
supreme on the earth, and not subject to the spiritual power of the Church,
but that it was either made by the authority, and consent of all temporal
Princes, if we will needs have it to bind all Christian Kingdoms, or else
that it has force only to bind in the Popes dominions, wherein he has the
place both of a spiritual Pastor, and also of a temporal Prince.

32 And whereas Widdrington gives an instance, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page
153. number. 8.
without any quotation of Law or Author, that Bishops, and Abbots are not
included in penal laws, except they be mentioned, it is true in Bishops in
the case only of suspension, or interdict, from the which they are by an
express Canon exempted, except they be named, as it appears in the Decretals
lib. Tit. 11. cap. 4.. Quia periculosum. Glossa ibidem in verbum, suspensionis.
5. de sententia excommunicationis, where also the Gloss says expressly,
that they are not privileged from a general penalty of Excommunication,
because the Pope (who gives them the aforesaid privilege) would not have them
to be exmpted from the Canon, Si quis suadente, and such like, which inflict
the penalty of Excommunication in general terms: and the same is to be said
of Abbots, or any other persons of dignity, to wit, that they have no
exemption from the general terms of penal laws, except they be privileged
namely by some express Canon. And therefore, when my Adversary shall show me
such a Canon, whereby Princes have the privilege that he pretends in their
behalf, I will grant that he has reason to exempt them from the Canon of the
Council of Lateran. In the mean time he has no more probability in this
point, then in the former.

33 But first I never said, as Mr. Fitzherbert to make some color of a
probable answer falsely lays to my charge, that Bishops or Abbots are not
included in penal laws, except they be mentioned. For I make no doubt, but
that they are included in penal laws under such general words, which denote
no particular dignity, order, degree, or function of Christian men, and that
therefore they are included in the Canon, Si quis suadente Diabolo, and in the
Canon, Omnis vtriusque sexus; but that which I said was, that in penal laws
and odious matters, Bishops are not included in the general name of Priests,
nor Abbots in the general name of Monks. And for the proof thereof I brought
neither Canon, nor Author, for that I thought it so manifest, that no man of
any reading would make doubt, but that learned Lawyers and Divines do affirm
the same. But now finding my Adversary for want of reading, learning, or
sincerity, to make doubt thereof, I have brought, as you have seen, to prove
the same, both learned Lawyers, and Divines, and also a Canon of Pope Innocent
himself, who called, and ended this Council of Lateran, wherein he declares,
that he does not intend in his commissions to comprehend under a general
clause greater and worthier persons, when less worthy, and less noble
persons are expressed. And therefore, seeing that I have now showed him both
learned Authors, and also a Canon of Pope Innocent himself, to prove that
Bishops are not in penal laws comprehended under the general name of
Priests, or Clearkes, nor Abbots, under the general name of Monks, nor Kings
under the general name of Lords, Governors, or Landlords, he must according
to his own confession grant, that I have reason to exempt Emperors, Kings,
and absolute Princes, from the Canon of the Lateran Council.

34 Neither did I ground this my doctrine upon the Canon, Quia periculosum,
wherein it is decreed, that in the case of Suspension, and Interdict, Bishops
are not comprehended under any general words whatsoever, unless they be
expressed by the name of Bishops, but upon the authorities aforesaid, and
chiefly upon that reason which Mr. Fitzher. himself acknowledges to be most
true, that all laws are to be understood according to the power of the
Lawmakers, and that therefore the obligation of every Ecclesiastical Canon is
extended only to those, who are subject to the spiritual authority of the
Church, as absolute Princes are not in mere temporal matters, as is the
inflicting of temporal punishments, for what cause, crime, or end soever they
be inflicted, according to the probable doctrine of many learned Catholics,
whom I have named above in the first part of this Treatise, and defended them
from the frivolous exceptions, which D. Schulckenius has made against them.

35 Finally, says Mr. Fitzherbert, whereas Widdrington says, that the Synod
would have specified Princes by that name, as well in this Canon (if it had
meant to include them therein) as it did in some other Canons and Decrees
concerning other matters, who sees not the vanity of this conjecture? For why
should they be named more particularly then they are, seeing that they are
sufficiently comprehended in the general term of Dominus temporalis, a
temporal Lord, He might as well have translated it a temporal Landlord.
To wit, no temporal Landlord above the^, but the King.
which is also sufficiently explicated in this very Canon, wherein we see that
a temporal Lord, He might as well have said a tempprall Landlord, for Dominus
temporalis signifies both.
is divided into two sorts, the one of those who have principal Lords And also
Landlords.
above them; and the other of such as have none, of which sort are all absolute
Princes, that hold of none, And also other principal Landlords, who have no
principal Landlord above them, but the King, who is not comprehended in odious
matters, under the name of a Landlord.
and therefore seeing that such are declared by the Canon to be subject to the
penalty, no less then those, who hold of others, it was needless to name
them in other manner: But belike my Adversary will take upon him not only to
interpret the Council, but also to teach it how to speak, and what words to
use, or else it must be of no force.

36 No, Mr. Fitzherbert, God forbid, that either I, who profess my self to be
a Catholic, should be so arrogant, as to take upon me to teach the Council
how to speak, or what words to use, or that you, who profess to be a teacher,
and to instruct others in this difficult controversy, which you will needs
make a point of faith, should be so ignorant, as not to know that the sense
and meaning of the Council, is to be gathered from the sense and property of
the words, and that by the words we are taught what is the sense and meaning of
the Council: Now I have sufficiently showed before, both by the authority of
learned Lawyers and Divines, and also by conuincing reason, that absolute
Princes are not sufficiently comprehended in this Canon, under the general
name of a temporal, or principal Landlord, Governor, of Lord, both for that
it is a penal law, wherein an Abbot is not comprehended under the general
name of a Monk, nor a Bishop under the general name of a Priest, nor a King
under the general name of a Landlord, Governor, or Lord, and ciefely for that
it is such a penal law, which is probable to be a temporal, and not a
spiritual law, for that it inflicteth temporal punishments, which, according
to the probable doctrine of many learned Catholics, cannot be inflicted but by
temporal or civil power, and that therefore those general words, Dominus
temporalis, Dominus principalis, a temporal, or principal Landlord,
Governor, or Lord, cannot comprehend absolute Princes, who in temporals are
not subject to the spiritual power of the Church, for that the words of every
law are to be limited according to the power of the Prince that makes them,
and that therefore the obligation of every Princes law, whether he be a
temporal or spiritual Prince, is extended only to his own subjects.

37 And if my Adversary fly to his ancient shift, that all Emperors, Kings,
and other Christian Princes are children of the Church, and therefore subject to
the spiritual Pastors thereof; It is true in spiritualls, but not in
temporalls, as is the inflicting of temporal punishments, wherein they are not
subject, but absolute and supreme. True also it is, that Dominus temporalis, a
temporal Lord, is in this Canon divided into two sorts of Lords, taking a
Lord, as the canon here does take him, to wit, not only for a title of honor,
which Knights, Gentlemen, and many inferior Magistrates, as Shiriffes,
Bayliffes, Constables have not; but for every person, who has tenants,
vassals, or other persons any way subject to him, in which sense every
Landlord, and Magistrate is called Dominus temporalis, a temporal Lord,
Governor or Landlord. The one sort is of those, who have principal and
chief Governors or Landlords above them, as are all inferior Magistrates,
and those who hold any land of others: The other is of those, who although they
be subject to the King, yet they have no other principal Landlords or
Governors above them; and of this sort are both those who let their lands to
others, and yet hold their lands of none, nor perchance of the King, and also
all principal Governors of the commonwealth, who are subject to no other
then the King, as are all the Lords, or the body of the Kings privy Council
together, and in some sort the Lord Chancellor, the Lord chief Justice, who
have no one principal Lord or Governor above them, as all other subjects
have, but the King alone: yet neither of these sorts do sufficiently express
a King or a supreme and absolute Prince, for that they are titles belonging
also to subjects and inferior persons. And therefore, the premises being
considered, it is probable, that if the Council had meant to have comprehended
Kings and absolute Princes in that Canon, she would have given them their
proper titles of honor, as she did in other Decrees, and not include them in
those common titles of honor, which are given to persons of inferior state
and condition.

38 And by this which I have said in these two Chapters, the Reader may
clearly see, that these answers, which I have given to the decree of the
Lateran Council, are very probable and sufficient, and that therefore Mr.
Fitzherberts conclusion of this Chapter (to use his own words) is no less
vain, impertinent and insufficient, then of his former Chapters; for these be
his words Page 154 nu. 10.


Thus thou see, good Reader, that these few exceptions (being all that
Widdrington has taken) to the Council of Lateran in his answer to my
Supplement, are no less vain and impertinent, then his former arguments and
answers to the rest of my discourse: and this is as much as at the first I
meant, and undertook to perform; nevertheless, forasmuch as he has charged
me to have dissembled his other answers and arguments touching the Council of
Lateran in another work of his (which as I have signified before I never saw
till now of late) I will take a little more pains, and crave thy further
patience, whiles I examine the validity thereof, which I might forbear to do
if I did write in Latin, because the same arguments and answers of my
Adversary, are very learnedly and clearly confuted in Latin, as well by M. D.
Weston Iuris. Pontif. Sanctuar. q. 27. per totum.
in his Sanctuary (whereof I have spoken before) as also by M. D. Singleton in
an excellent Treatise concerning only the Decree of the Council of Lateran,
to which two Authors I might, and would wholly remit my Reader, Disscussio
decreti etc. nu. 4. and seq.
were it not that I desire to give satisfaction in this point, as well to such
as do not understand the Latin tongue, as to those that have not the commodity
and means to see the said Treatises; besides that, I shall now and then, upon
some special occasions, touch some things which seem to me very considerable,
and are not touched by them, or any other, for ought I know.

39 But on the contrary side thou see, good Reader, that these answers,
which I have given to the Council of Lateran, are sound, sufficient, and very
probable, and that the exceptions which Mr. Fitzherbert has taken against
them, are no less vain and impertinent, then are his arguments and answers
in the former Chapters; and that according to his own confession, who
grants, that all laws are limited according to the power of the Lawmakers,
and therefore the obligation of Ecclesiastical Canons is extended only to
them, who are subject to the authority of the Church, if it be probable that
the spiritual Pastors of the Church have by the institution of Christ no
authority to inflict temporal punishments, and that consequently absolute
Princes are not subject to them therein, it clearly follows that it is also
probable, that the Council of Lateran did not intend to include absolute
Princes in that penal law under the general names of Dominus temporalis,
Dominus principalis, but that this decree inflicting temporal punishments, was
made by the authority and consent of temporal Princes, and did therefore only
include those inferior Landlords, Governors or Lords, that were subject to
them.

40 Wherefore to conclude this point, unless, as I said before, my Adversaries
do first prove out of the holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, or some clear
definition of a general Council, or a demonstratiue reason grounded thereon,
that it is certain, and of faith, that the Pope has authority to depose
temporal Princes, they cannot draw any conuincing argument from this Canon of
the Lateran Council, to prove that doctrine to be certain, and of faith, for
still the aforesaid answer will be ready at hand, that it was made by the
authority of temporal Princes, seeing all laws are limited according to the
power of the Lawmakers, and it is probable, that the spiritual power of the
Church does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as Almaine,
and very many Doctors do affirm. So that unless in arguing from the Lateran
Council they will manifestly petere principium, and suppose that, which they
ought to prove, they can never bring any conuincing argument from the
aforesaid Canon, to prove that the Pope has power to depose Princes, as any
man of judgment may clearly see, but they must still suppose the same as
certain, which is a great vice in the disputer, although the answerer, who
takes not upon to prove, but only to defend, may without any fault or note
give such answers, which suppose that the Pope has no such power, until by
force of argument he be driven from that his supposition, and this I wish the
Reader, and all my Adversaries well to note, for in most of their arguments
they suppose that which is in question, which is a fault in the Disputant, but
not in the Respondent, who does always answer supposing his own grounds and
doctrine, but the Disputer must not only suppose them, but also prove them.
And as for the rest of Mr. Fitzherberts Replies, which he confesses to have
taken out of D. Weston, and D. Singleton, I will also examine with him in the
ensuing Chapters, as also that which he has now and then, as he says, upon
some special occasions touched, and which seem to him very considerable, and
yet are not for ought he knows touched by them or any other.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein Widdringtons first answer to an objection propounded by himself is
proved to be sufficient, and that the consent of temporal Princes is
necessary to the validity of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which inflict
temporal punishments, and consequently are not made by true spiritual
authority; Also the doctrine of the Lord Cardinal Peron in his speech to the
lower house of Parliament, against the Oath propounded by them is examined: And
lastly Mr-Fitzherberts objections grounded upon the Decrees of Pope Callixtus,
Vrbanus, the Council of Eliberis in Spain, and the Constitution of the
Apostles are clearly confuted.

1 NOw Mr. Fitzherbert, with the help of D. Weston and Fa. Lessius masked
under D. Singletons name, takes upon him in the three next ensuing Chapters to
prove three answers, which I gave to an objection made in favor of this
Decree of the Lateran Council, to be absurd. And thus he begins.

My Adversary Widdrinton in his Preface to his Apologeticall answer to an
English Doctor, has not only urged the arguments, Praefat. Ad. Resp. Apolog.
nu. 46. which I have here already confuted, but undertakes also to answer
certain of ours against the same arguments; and therefore he obiecteth in our
behalf, that although it were true, that
Kings, and absolute Princes are not included per se, and principally in that
Decree of the Council, yet it seems to be manifest, that secondarily, and
consequently they are; or at least may be comprehended therein. For if the
Pope, says he, have power to deprive the subjects of other Princes of their
temporal states for heresy, without the consent of the said Princes, it
seems that no sufficient reason can be assigned, why he may not also for the
same cause deprive Sovereign Princes of their Dominions.

2 Thus argues he for us, and not much amiss, and therefore let us see how he
will answer it. He gives to this objection three answers; The first is, that
both Popes, and Counsels do oftentimes decree many things, which belong
rather to the political or temporal, then to the spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical power to decree, with the express, or tacit consent of
Princes, who are there present by themselves, or their Ambassadors, or at
leastwise presuming, or hoping, that Princes will ratify the same. And this
say some Expositours of the Canon law, says Ioannes Parisiensis. For
Hostiensis extra de haereticis cap. Ad abolendam, where the Pope commands
the goods of heretics to be confiscated, demands what the Pope has to do
with temporalls? And he answers with his Lord, Pope Innocent, that in very
deed he has nothing to do therewith, but he made this Decree with the assent
of the Emperor, who being then present at Padua gave his consent.

3 This is Widdringtons first answer, wherein you see he relyeth specially
upon the authority of Ioannes Parisiensis, who grounding his opinion upon
Hostiensis, alleges him to no purpose at all, partly for that no such thing
is to be found in Hostiensis in the place, which he quoteth (to wit, extra de
haereticis cap. Hostiens. in cap. Quod super his de voto, and volt redempt.
ad Abolendam) and partly because Hostiensis not only teaches evidently
elsewhere, that the Pope has direct Dominion over all temporal States
(whereupon it follows that he may dispose thereof, and of temporal things,
as he shall have just cause) but also affirms, and teaches expressly, that
absolute Princes may be deposed by the Pope, and their states exposed to be
taken by other Catholics, Hostiensi. lib. 5 Rub. de haereticis qua poena.
if they be negligent to purge their states of heresy, and to this end he
cites this very Canon of the Council of Lateran, whereof we now treat, to
wit, cap. Excommunicamus, Si vero Dominus temporalis; yea and adds further,
that the Pope may depose a Prince for his negligence in Government, alleging
for the same, not only 17. q. 4. Si quis deinceps; but also the example of
Zacharias the Pope, who, says he, deposuit Childericum Regem Franciae, deposed
Childericke King of France. How then can Ioannes Parisiensis, or any man else
truly say, that Hostiensis was of opinion, that the Pope has nothing to do
with temporal things?

4 But first, where does Mr. Fitzherbert find Ioannes Parisiensis to say, that
Hostiensis was of opinion, that the Pope has nothing to do with temporal
things? For that which Parisiensis says, is only this, that Hostiensis gives
this answer, that the Pope has nothing to do with temporal things, and that
it belongs not to him to make general decrees concerning the confiscation of
goods, and that this Decree was made with the assent of the Emperor, who was
then present at Padua, and gave his consent thereto, but whether Hostiensis
gave this answer according to his own opinion; or of other Lawyers, whom he
does not condemn, Ioannes Parisiensis neither affirms, nor denies, but
only says, that Hostiensis gave this answer, which is very true. But these
be usual tricks of Mr. Fitzherbert, as you have often seen above, to
misconstrue the words, and meaning of his Adversary, thereby to make some
colorable show of a probable answer. Wherefore although it be most true, that
Hostiensis is of opinion, that the Pope may upon just cause dispose of the
Dominions of all Christian Princes, and of all temporal things, for that he
expressly teaches, that the Pope is not only a spiritual, but also a
temporal Monarch of the whole world, and has direct dominion over all
temporal States, yet I do not find Hostiensis to be so peremptory in his
opinion, as to condemn the contrary doctrine of heresy or of absurd, and
temerarious improbabilitie, as all my Adversaries not without great temeritie
now vsallly do.

5 Secondly, therefore it is also true, that Hostiensis upon the aforesaid
Chapter, Ad abolendam, gives also that answer, whereof Ioannes Parisiensis
makes mention, and does not reject it as improbable, in which sense
Parisiensis did call it Hostiensis his answer. And this answer Mr.
Fitzherbert might have easily found in the foresaid place, if he had not relied
upon Fa. Lessius word, who says as much, but had read over the whole Chapter
himself. For whereas Pope Lucius the third did in that Canon, Ad abolendam,
ordain (from whom it is probable Pope Innocent the third took that decree of
the Lateran Council, seeing that in substance they little differ) vt Comites,
Barons, Rectores, etc. that Earls, Barons, Governors, and Consulls of
Cities, and of other places (whom the Council of Lateran comprehends under
the names of Dominus temporalis, Dominus principalis, and non habens Dominos
principale) shall promise by making a corporal oath, according as they shall
be admonished by the Bishops, that they will faithfully, and effectually, when
they shall be required by them, help the Church against heretics, and their
partakers, unfeignedly according to their office and power: and if they shall
not observe the same, let them be deprived of the honor, which they have, and
let them in no wise be assumed to other honors, etc. The Cardinal Hostiensis
upon these words, vt Comites etc. to prove the validity of this Canon, among
other answers he gives also this, which he does not confute, that some
Doctors do say, that therefore this Canon was of force, because the Emperor
was present, and gave his consent secundum D. N. according to Pope Innocent the
fourth, whom he called Dominum nostrum.

6 The same answer also has Ioannes Andreas, expounding that word, Comites;
Note, says he, that the Pope does decree concerning laymen, but this is in
regard of sin. Others say, that therefore these decrees were of force because
the Prince gave his consent, and was present. And also the same answer makes
Pope Innocent the fourth expounding the same word, Comites; Note, says he,
that the Pope may ordain concerning Laymen, but this is in regard of sin.
Others say, that these decrees are therefore of force, because the Prince was
present. Wherefore it is very true, which Ioannes Parisiensis said, that
Hostiensis with his Lord Pope Innocent, among other answers concerning the
validity of this Canon gave also this, which they did not confute, that it was
therefore valued, and of force, because the Prince was present, and gave his
consent. And therefore I marvel, how Fa. Lessius, a man otherwise very
learned, and as I ever supposed, of great reading, should be so ignorant in the
study of the Canon law, as not to know, and much more so boldly to deny, that
Hostiensis did write upon the Chapter Ad abolendam, or upon other textes;
whereas there is no book more known, and more commonly cited by the Canon
Lawyers, then is the Lecture of Hostiensis upon the Decretalls. And thus much
concerning Hostiensis, and his answer alleged by Parisiensis to great
purpose, whatsoever my Adversary, giving overmuch credit to Fa. Lessius, has
untruly said to the contrary.

7 Now concerning Ioannes Parisiensis Mr. Fitzherbert writes thus: Page 158.
nu. 4.
But it is no marvel if Ioannes Parisiensis showed himself partial toward
Princes in some things concerning the Popes authority, seeing that he lived and
was a Reader in Paris in the time of the troubles betwixt Pope Boniface the
eight, and Philip le Bell, King of France, who being excommunicated by the said
Pope, and extremely incensed against him could not want learned men to second
his humor; especially such as were his borne subjects, and lived within his
dominions; Nevertheless howsoever Ioannes Parisiensis may seem in the words
alleged by my Adversary to affirm, that the Pope has no power at all to
dispose of temporal things; yet it is clear that he teaches elsewhere, that
in some cases the Pope may dispose of the temporal goods, not only of
Ecclesiastical persons, but also of all the faithful.

8 And of this Widdrington might have taken notice, when he wrote against me,
if it had pleased him, seeing that he was admonished thereof by Schulckenius
Shulck. page 64.
, who shows that Ioannes Parisiensis teaches expressly, Joan. Paris. de
potest. Reg. and Papali cap. 7.
that the Pope being the supreme head of Priests, and of the faithful, may (as
the general informer of faith and manners) dispose the goods of the faithful,
and decree them to be exposed, so far forth as the common and extreme
necessity of faith and manners shall require; and Ibid. cap. 13.
further, that if the King be an heretic, and incorrigible, the Pope may not
only excommunicate him, but also force the people to depose him,
Excommunicando omnes, qui ei vt Domino obedirent, Excommunicating all those,
which should obey him as their Lord: and again afterward he says Ibid. cap.
16.
, that if the Prince be an heretic, his vassal is not bound to follow him,
and that the Pope may deliver his subjects from the obligation of their oath of
allegiance.

9 By all this it appears, that albeit Ioannes Parisiensis does give less
unto the Pope then he ought (as Schulckenius well notes) yet he gives him as
much as suffices for our purpose, seeing that it little imports to the
substance of the maine question betwixt our Adversary and us (which is, whether
the Pope may depose a temporal Prince) I say it little imports how, and in
what manner he may do it (whether by a Iuridicall sentence of deposition or
otherwise) so as it is granted, that he has authority to discharge the
Princes subjects of their Oath of allegiance, yea and to compel them to depose
him, which Ioannes Parisiensis expressly teaches; whereupon it may be inferred,
that his meaning was in the place before objected, that the Pope may not
dispose of temporal things directly, but only indirectly, and in some cases,
which overthrow the foundation of our Adversaries doctrine touching this
question: and this may suffice for him and Hostiensis.

10 But first, besides that Ioannes Parisiensis was never taxed by any ancient
Author for writing partially in favor of the King of France, the like words
that Mr. Fitzherbert here uses against Ioannes Parisiensis, may be retorted
back upon Hostiensis, and diverse other Divines, and Canonists, to wit, that it
is no marvel, that Cardinal Hostiensis, and diverse other Roman Divines, and
Canonists showed themselves partial toward Popes in some things concerning
the Popes authority, seeing that they lived and were Readers in Rome, or in
the Popes Dominions in the time of the troubles betwixt the Popes and Christian
Princes, which Popes since the time of Pope Gregory the seventh took upon
them to dispose of all temporalls, and to depose temporal Princes, and
therefore could not want learned men to second their humors, especially such
as either were their borne subjects, and lived in their Dominions, or else
might expect spiritual preferment, and to be advanced to Bishoprikes, or other
spiritual dignities by the Pope, and this also the said Ioannes Parisiensis in
the same book does well observe. But more probably, says he, Joan. Paris. de
potest. Reg. and Papali cap. 21. ad 41. arg.
it may be said on the contrary side, that those Doctors, who so undutifully
advance the Popes authority, do speak for fear, or favor of him, seeing
that they are Clergy men, who may rather be promoted by him: and especially
seeing that they themselves do say, though not well, that the Pope does
graciously embrace those that do extend, or amplify his authority, and
represseth those that speak against the same.

11 Secondly, Ioannes Parisiensis does not teach that the Pope has power to
dispose of temporal things, and of the temporal goods, not only of
Ecclesiastical persons, but also of all the faithful, except only by
declaring the law of God, and by compelling the faithful by Ecclesiastical
censures to observe the same, and haec Papae ordinatio non est nisi iuris
declaratio, and this ordaining, or disposing of the Pope, is nothing else, then
a declaring of the Law of God, says Parisiensis in that very place; Cap. 7:
and this I have declared and proved at large above in the first part against
D. Schulckenus. And the same he teaches concerning the absoluing of vassalls
from their oath of fealty. To that, says he, Cap. 16. ad 11.
which is objected that the Pope has sometimes absolved soldiers from their
oath of fealty. Besides that it is an argument De facto, which is only
introduced concerning Frenchmen, I answer, that it was rather a declaring of
the law, to wit, that the Oath did not bind in that case, then an absoluing
from the oath of fealty: Now what Catholic man makes doubt, but that the
Pope has authority to declare the Law of God, it being a spiritual thing,
and proceeding from spiritual power?

12 Wherefore, as I declared at large above in the first part, Ioannes
Parisiensis teaches three things; The one is, that the Pope has no authority
to depose, or deprive by way of sentence an heretical Prince of his Royal
right, and authority, and this is the maine question betwixt my Adversaries,
and me: The second is, that the Pope has power to declare and interpret the
law of God, and to compel by Ecclesiastical Censures all the faithful to
observe the same, and in this I agree with Parisiensis, saving that there is
yet a great controversy betwixt the Divines of Rome, and Paris, what things
are required to make the Popes definition, declaration, or interpretation to be
certain and infallible, as also inferior Bishops have authority to declare
and interpret the law of God, and to compel their spiritual subjects to
observe the same, yet their declaration and interpretation of the law of God,
is not always certain and infallible. The third is, that the people or
Commonwealth have authority in some cases, and are bound to depose their
Prince, and consequently, that the Pope may by Ecclesiastical censures compel
them thereunto: And with this question concerning the power of the
Commonwealth, as I have often said, I will not intermeddle, before it be
agreed upon betwixt my Adversaries and me, concerning the maine and principal
controversy, whether the Pope has authority to deprive by way of sentence an
heretical King of his right to reign, or, which is all one, to make by his
iuridicall sentence a King to be a private man; for this is that, at which our
King and Parliament, in making the new oath of allegiance, did only aim.

13 And by this it is apparent, how fraudulently, and perniciously Mr.
Fitzherbert following therein D. Schulckenius, seeks to abuse, and delude his
Reader, in laboring to persuade him, that it little imports to the substance
of the maine question betwixt my Adversaries and me, whether the Pope may
depose a Prince by a iudiricall sentence of deposition, and deprive him of all
his Regal authority and right, which before that sentence he had to reign, or
whether the Commonwealth has authority, and also is bound in some cases to
depose their King, and consequently, whether the Pope, having authority to
declare the law of God, and the duty which all Christians owe to God, may by
Ecclesiastical censures compel them thereunto, and absolve them from their
oath of allegiance, by declaring that their oath in that case does not bind,
which absoluing, as Parisiensis said above, is rather a declaring of the law,
then an absoluing from the oath of allegiance: And nevertheless there is
nothing more clear, then that the maine question betwixt my Adversaries and
me, is not what authority the commonwealth has over their Prince, which is
rather a philosophical question, and grounded upon the principles of state and
policy, then upon the positive law of God, but what authority the Pope has to
deprive by way of sentence heretical Princes of their Princely right, and
authority: or which is all one in substance, whether the coerciue, or punishing
power of the Pope (for about his derectiue, declaratiue, and commanding power,
to which his authority to declare the law of God, and what we are bound by the
law of God to do, is reduced, I do not contend) does by the institution of
Christ extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as all my Adversaries
most vehemently contend, or only of Ecclesiastical Censures, as Ioannes
Parisiensis does most expressly affirm. Whereby the Reader may see, to what
narrow shifts these men are brought, when they seek to fly from the true
state and substance of the maine question, and controversy to by-questions and
difficulties altogether impertinent.

14 Wherefore, to retort back my Adversaries words, albeit Ioannes Parisiensis
gives more power to subjects, then perchance he ought, yet concerning the
Popes power, he denies him as much as suffices me, seeing that it little
imports to the substance of the maine question betwixt my Adversaries and me,
which is, whether the Pope may inflict temporal punishments and depose
temporal Princes by way of iuridiall sentence, that is by depriving them of
their right to reign, which Ioannes Parisiensis expressly denies, I say, it
little imports, whether the Commonwealth has authority, and sometimes is
bound to depose their Prince, and consequently the Pope may indirectly, Joan
Pari^ takes indirectly in an other sense, th^^ the Divines do take it, when
they say, that the Pope may depose Princes, not directly, but indirectly.
or per accidens, to wit by declaring the law of God, and compelling faithful
subjects by Ecclesiastical Censures to do their duty, may concur to the
same, which indeed Parisiensis expressly affirms: Neither does this manner of
deposing Princes indirectly, and disposing of temporal things indirectly
overthrow the foundations of my doctrine touching the maine question of the
Popes power to depose, and dispose by a iuridicall sentence. And all this I
answered before against D. Schulckenius; neither could I in that brief
Admonition take particular notice of all that, which my Adversary wrote in his
Supplement, or D. Schulckenius in his Apology: but seeing that I have now
taken particular notice of both their answers and arguments, we will now
expect, what a learned Reply Mr. Fitzherbert will make against the same. And
this may suffice for Ioannes Parisiensis.

15 But before I go any further, I think it not amiss upon this occasion to
admonish the Reader by the way of a brief digression, in what a cunning manner
the most Illustrious Cardinal of Peron, in his oration to the third estates,
confounds these two questions, and consequently says little, or nothing
against my doctrine touching the Popes power to depose Princes, and the new
Oath of Allegiance established here in England. Thus therefore he propounds
the state of the question betwixt him, and the lower house of Parliament. Page
13. according to the English edition.


There remains the third point, which is this; whether if Princes having made
an Oath to GOD, and their people, either themselves, o^ their Predecessors, to
live and die in the Christian and Catholic Religion, and do afterward
violate their Oath, rebel against Christ, bidding him open war, that is to
say, fall not only to open profession of heresy, or Apostacy from Christian
Religion, but with all pass to force their subjects consciences, and go about
to plant Arrianisme, or Mahometisme, or any such like infidelity within their
states, and thereby to destroy, and root out Christianity: whether, I say, in
this case, their subjects on the other side may not be declared absolved from
their Oath of Loyalty, and Fidelity: And this coming to pass, to whom it
appertains to pronounce this absolution.

16 This then is the point in controversy between us: For your article
contains the negative; that is to say, that in no case whatsoever the
subjects may be absolved from the Oath of Allegiance made to their Princes. As
on the contrary side all other parts of the Catholic Church, together with
this of France, since the institution of Schools of Divinity, until the
coming of Calvin, held the affirmative proposition, which is, that when the
Prince breaks the Oath he has made to GOD, and his subjects to live, and dye
in Catholic Religion, and does not only become an Arrian, or a Mohammedan,
but manifestly wars against Jesus Christ, in compelling his subjects in
matters of conscience, and constraining them to embrace Arianisme, or
Mahometisme, or any other detestable infidelity: That then this Prince may be
declared fallen from his right, as culpable of felony toward him to whom he
has made the Oath of his Realm, that is to Christ; and his subjects may be
absolved in conscience, both at the spiritual, and Ecclesiastical Tribunal,
from the Oath of Allegiance they have made unto him. And that in this case, it
belongs to the authority of the Church, resident either in her head the Pope,
or in her body a Council, to publish this declaration. And not only all the
other parts of the Catholic Church, but likewise all the Doctors who lived in
Farance from the first setting up of Schools of Divinity amongst them, have
held the affirmative opinion, that in the case of heretical, or infidel
Princes, and such as persecute Christianity, or Catholic Religion, their
subjects may be absolved from their Oath of Allegiance. By means whereof
though the contrary doctrine were the truest, yet notwithstanding all the
other parts of the Church being against it, you cannot hold it for more them
problematicall in matter of faith. I call that doctrine problematicall in
matter of faith, which we are not bound to believe, by necessity of faith, and
the contradictorie thereof does not bind them that believe it with
Excommunication, and disunion, or separation from the community. Otherwise you
must acknowledge that the communion which you exercise with the other parts of
the Church, holding the contrary doctrine, yea even that communion which you
conserve with the memory of your predecessors, was unlawful, defiled with
heresy and excommunication.

17 Thus you see, that the Cardinal of Peron does altogether avoid the maine
question, which is betwixt my Adversaries and me, to wit, concerning the Popes
power to deprive a Prince of his Regal authority, wherewith before his
sentence of deprivation he was endued, and joins two questions together,
which nothing belong to our new Oath. The first is, whether if a Prince, who
either by himself, or by his Predecessors, has made an oath to live and die
in the Christian Catholic Religion, and afterward becomes an heretic, or
infidel, and labors to draw his subjects to the same, may not be declared
fallen from his right, as culpable of felony toward Christ, to whom he has
made his Oath, and his subjects may not be declared absolved from their oath
of allegiance. The second question is, whether the Pope or Church have not
authority to publish this declaration. Now neither of these two questions
appertain to our new Oath, nor are as yet called in question by me. For as
concerning the later, supposing that a Prince by reason of heresy, or Apostasy
either is actually deprived, and fallen from his right to reign, which the
Cardinal of Peron following therein Philopater, seems here to maintain, or
else may for the same be deprived thereof by the Commonwealth, no Catholic
will make any doubt, but that this being supposed, the Pope, or Church, may
declare him an heretic, or Apostata, and consequently to be fallen thereby
from his Royal dignity according to Philopaters doctrine, or to be deprived
thereof by the Commonwealth, as others contend, and to declare that his
subjects are either actually discharged, or to be discharged of the natural
and civil bond of their temporal allegiance, and consequently of their Oath,
or sacred bond, which was made to confirm the same: For no Catholic can make
any doubt, that to declare the law of God, and who is an heretic, or
infidel, is a spiritual action, and belongs to the spiritual authority of
the Church.

18 But with the former question, forasmuch as it may concern, what authority
the Commonwealth has to deprive her Sovereign Prince of his Royal right, in
case that he should forsake the Catholic faith, which he has once professed,
although, as I have often said, I will not intermeddle, for not giving my
Adversaries occasion, to decline the principal question concerning the Popes
authority to deprive heretical Kings of their Regal power, which they had
before his sentence of deprivation, nevertheless this scandalous, and
desperate position of Philopater, against which I was somewhat vehement in my
Apology, and yet is quite passed over with silence by D. Schulckenius (which
may be some conjecture, that he also favors that doctrine, to wit, that a
Prince, who makes open profession of Arianisme, or Mahometisme or any such
like infidelity and goes about to plant the same within his dominions, does
fall thereby ipso facto from his Regal authority and right to reign, albeit
either himself, or his predecessors, have made an oath to live and die in the
Catholic faith, I account to be a very false, damnable, and seditious
doctrine, tending to the perturbation and subversion of all temporal States,
wherein there is not a perfect unity of Religion, giving occasion to
heretical and infidel Princes not to become Catholics, favoring that
damnable doctrine, which teaches, that among heretics, and infidells there
is no true civil dominion, authority, or Jurisdiction: and what Roman
Catholic soever he be that maintains and teaches the same in this
kingdom, I account him, to speak plainly, a manifest Arch-traitour, for that
he must consequently maintain, that our Sovereign Lord KING JAMES is not our
true, and rightful King, because albeit not he himself, yet some of his
predecessors, have solemnly sworn to live and die in the Catholic Roman
faith.

19 For seeing that by Gods permission heresies must be, according to that of
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. Oportet and haereses esse, what State can be secure
from continual fears of tumults, and insurrections, when the subjects
according to this doctrine must be persuaded, that their Prince, if he be of
a contrary Religion to that which they in their hearts profess, and think to
be Catholic, and seek to draw them to his Religion, as all Princes usually
do, is not a true, and rightful Prince, but fallen from his right to reign,
and by their Church (which they, as also all heretics think to be the true
Catholic Church) may be declared so to be? With what security can any King,
whether he be a Catholic, or no, permit in his dominions any Religion contrary
to his own, when his subjects of the contrary Religion must be persuaded, that
he is fallen from his right to reign, if he seek to draw them, as all Princes
usually do, to his own Religion? With what security also can any heretical,
or infidel Prince, whose kingdom is wholly, or for the greatest part infected
with heresy, or infidelity, become a Catholic, and seek to draw his subjects
to Catholic Religion, when his subjects, who are no Catholics, must according
to the principles of this doctrine be persuaded, that he is a rebel to God,
and an enemy to that Religion, which they think to be true, and has broken
the oath, which he, or some of his predecessors have made, to live and die in
their faith and religion, and consequently is fallen from his right, as
culpable of felony toward GOD, to whom he has made the oath of this Realm?

20 Besides, this assertion favors that false, not to say, erroneous
doctrine, which teaches, that civil dominion is founded in grace, or faith,
and that in heretics, or infidells, especially who seek to draw their
subjects to their heresy, or infidelity, as all heretics, and infidels
commonly do, there is no civil authority, dominion, and jurisdiction. From
whence it follows, that the Jews persecuting Christ, and Christian Religion,
lost thereby, ipso facto, their civil dominion, and all those Roman
Emperors, who either being Pagans, or Arrians, did persecute the Church of
Christ, were not true and rightful Emperors, but fallen from their right, as
being culpable of felony toward Christ bidding him open war, and compelling
their Christian subjects to rebel against Christ, and to embrace heresy, or
infidelity, and seeking thereby to destroy, and root out Christianity. For
this declaration of the Pope, or Church, which the Cardinal mentions, does
not deprive them of their right to reign, but supposes them deprived thereof,
and serves only to make it certainly known, that they are not rightful
Kings, but by their heresy, or infidelity to which they seek to draw their
subjects, to be actually fallen from all Royal right and authority. From whence
it follows, that this declaration is not necessary in evident and manifest,
but only in doubtful cases, as also in all vows, and oaths when it is
evident, that one is not bound to observe the vow, or oath, there needs no
dispensation (which, according to the Thomists doctrine, is only a declaration
concerning the matter of the vow, or oath) but only when it is doubtful, or
not certain, whether the thing which is sworn or vowed, be now a sufficient
matter of an oath, and vow, or no. Whereupon experience teaches, that when a
King either for age or infirmity does publicly resign over to this son,
and heir, not only the administration, but also all his Kingly authority, and
right to reign, the subjects need not to procure any declaration,
dispensation, or absolution of the Pope, or Church, from the oath of their
temporal allegiance, for that it is now evident, that their temporal
allegiance to their former King cease, and is no sufficient matter of an
oath, and consequently their oath is void, which was made to confirm the same.

21 And albeit the Cardinal in propounding the state of his question makes
mention of an Oath, which Princes, either themselves, or their predecessors
have made to God, and their people to live and die in the Christian Catholic
faith, as though the breach of this promise and oath were the chief, or only
cause, why heretical, and Apostata Princes seeking to draw their subjects to
their heresy or Apostacy, do fall from their Royal right, yet in my opinion
this oath, which the Cardinal has put down in the state of his question, is
a mere cloak, and color to cast over the eyes of the unlearned, and to make
his doctrine, and position to seem the less improbable, and yet it does not
take away the improbabilitie thereof. For first, if this oath, which Christian
Princes, or their predecessors have made to God, and their people to live and
die in the Catholic faith, be the only effectual cause, why Christian
Princes do fall from their Royal right, and their subjects absolved from the
bond of their temporal allegiance, and consequently from the oath, or sacred,
and spiritual bond, which was made to confirm the same, then if a Prince
become an Arian or Mahomitan, or profess any other heresy, or infidelity
without drawing his subjects to the same, he does neither fall from his Royal
right, nor his subjects are thereby absolved from the bond of their natural
and civil allegiance.

22 Secondly all Christians do in baptism according to the opinion of some
Divines, and also ancient Fathers See Suarez. in 3. par. q. 71. art. 1.
make a certain vow and promise to live and die in the Christian Catholic
faith; and yet I think neither the Cardinal, nor any other learned man will
affirm, that if they break this vow or promise, and forsake the Catholic
faith, they are fallen thereby ipso facto, from that civil dominion, right,
power, and authority, which they did not receive by Baptism, or by making that
vow or promise to live and die in the Christian Catholic faith. Thirdly, no
promise, vow, or oath to do any thing, does ipso facto deprive any man of any
civil right, authority, dominion, or jurisdiction, unless that civil right or
authority be given, or received with a condition, and covenant, that if he do
not perform that oath, or promise, he shall forthwith fall ipso facto from
his right dominion or jurisdiction: but no probable show, or color of an
argument can be brought to prove, that Christian Princes, although they, or
their predecessors have made an oath to live and die in the Christian
Catholic faith, have received their kingly power and authority, with this
condition and covenant, that if they shall forsake the Catholic faith, they
shall forthwith fall from their Royal dignity, seeing that this oath, which
Christian Princes, who come to their Crown by inheritance, do make to live and
die in the Christian Catholic faith, belongs only to a certain ceremony used
at the time of their coronation, whereas all their Kingly power and authority,
they had before by the right of succession instantly upon the death of their
Predecessor.

23 Fourthly, abstracting from all oaths, which Christian Princes or their
Predecssours have made to live and die in the Catholic faith, yet if they
sorsake the faith, which they have professed in Baptism, and do become
Arians, or Mahometans, and seek to draw their subjects to the same, they do
rebel against Christ, and bid him open war, and do force their subjects
consciences, and go about to destroy and root out Christianity within their
states, which are the chiefest causes which the Cardinal of Peron sets
down in propounding the state of his question, why such wicked Princes do
fall from their Royal right, or, which is all one, are ipso facto, and
actually deprived thereof: And therefore that Oath, which he mentions, to
live, and die in the Catholic faith, is only a shift, and color to make some
show of a feigned contract and covenant betwixt the King and his subjects, that
if he forsake the Catholic faith, he shall forthwith fall from his Royal
dignity, seeing that the chiefest reasons of the Cardinal, why he does fall
from his Royal right, are of force, although no such oath or covenant be
supposed.

24 Fifthly, albeit we should grant, which cannot in my judgment with any
probable argument be proved, that Christian Princes, or their predecessors,
do make an oath to God, and their people, with an express condition, pact, or
covenant, that if they forsake the Catholic faith, they shall forthwith fall
from their Royal dignity, and be ipso facto deprived thereof, yet supposing
that in heretics and infidels, although they seek to draw others to their
heresy, and infidelity, there is true civil power, dominion, and
jurisdiction, no learned man can make any doubt, but that as it was in the
power of that heretical or pagan Kingdom, or Commonwealth, to make, or admit,
confirm, and approve this pact or covenant established by oath, so it may be
released by the same Kingdom or Commonwealth, and also that it may be truly
presumed, that they do release the same, if they choose, or admit; confirm,
and allow likewise an infidel, or heretic to be their King. For if the
heretical or infidel Kingdom, has true civil power, dominion, and
jurisdiction, why shall not likewise the heretical or infidel Prince, whom
they shall choose, or confirm, be capable of the same civil power, dominion,
and jurisdiction? So that this pact, covenant, and agreement, which is
pretended to be made betwixt the predecessors of an heretical Prince, and his
people, can be no sufficient cause, and ground, to make an heretical Prince,
who is chosen, or confirmed by an heretical Kingdom, to fall from his Royal
dignity, and be ipso facto deprived thereof, for the confirming and
establishing of that heresy, which that Kingdom does profess.

25 Wherefore concerning the deposition of heretical Princes, as the state of
this question is propounded by the Cardinal of Peron, many particular
questions are inuolued. The first may be, whether a Prince having either
himself, or his predecessors made an oath to live, and die in the Catholic
faith, and do afterward fall to open profession of heresy, and seek to
force his subjects consciences to do the same, is fallen thereby forthwith
before any declaration of the Pope, or Church, from his Royal right, and
dignity, and his subjects are absolved, or freed, ipso facto, from the civil
and sacred bond of their temporal allegiance: and the affirmative part, which
Philopater teaches and affirms to be certain, and undoubted, I account to
be a very false, scandalous, seditious yea, and flat traitorous doctrine. The
second question may be, supposing this damnable doctrine to be true, touching
the cause and ground why such an heretical Prince does fall ipso facto from
his Royal dignity, to wit, whether the breaking of the oath which he, or his
predecessors made to live, and die in the Catholic faith, or his open
profession of heresy, or forcing of his subjects to do the same, whether, I
say, all these, or some of them together may be necessary, or else any one of
them be sufficient that an heretical Prince be ipso facto deprived of his
princely power and authority.

26 The third question may be, supposing still this false doctrine to be true,
whether the Pope or Church have authority to declare such a Prince to be an
heretic, a breaker of his oath, and promise, and a persecutor or enemy to
Christ, and Christian Religion, and consequently to be fallen from all his
Princely right: And of this no doubt can be made, supposing the former, seeing
that to declare authentically what is heresy, and who is infected therwth, is
a spiritual action, and consequently belonging to the authority of the Pope, or
Church. The fourth question may be, what effect this declaration of the Pope or
Church does work, seeing that before this declaration the aforesaid heretical
Prince has lost, and is deprived of all his princely authority, and whether
this declaration of the Pope, or Church, be necessary, when the fact is so
notorious, and public, that no Subject in the Realm can make any doubt but
that the Prince is become an heretic, has broken his oath to live and die in
the Catholic faith, and does force his Subjects consciences to follow his
heresy: And of this question also no great doubt in my opinion can be made,
supposing the former false doctrine to be true, seeing that this declaration
does not deprive the Prince of any right at all, but only serves to make it
known, and public, that he is deprived thereof, and therefore is not greatly
necessary, when the fact is so public and manifest to the view of the whole
Kingdom, that no man can make any doubt thereof.

24 The fifth question may be, that supposing such a Prince does not fall ipso
facto from his Royal dignity, neither by his open profession of heresy, nor
by breach of his oath, nor by forcing his Subjects consciences to forsake their
Religion, whether the whole Kingdom, or Commonwealth, which the Parliament
does represent, has authority to deprive him of the same; or, which is all
one, whether the whole Kingdom or the King be the supreme and absolute
temporal Judge, and Superior: And this question does nothing appertain to
the Oath of England, and it is grounded rather upon the principles of moral
Philosophy, and Aristotle's Politikes, then of Divinity. The last and
principal question is, whether the Pope, or Church, has authority to deprive
such a Prince for the aforesaid crimes of his right to reign, and really, and
truly to absolve his subjects from the natural bond of their temporal
allegiance, which being once dissolved, the sacred or spiritual bond of the
oath of allegiance, which is grounded upon the former civil bond, and
obligation, and was made only to corroborate the same, is forthwith unloosed,
or whether the Pope, or Church, has only authority to declare such a Prince to
be an heretic, and an enemy to Catholic Religion, and a breaker of his oath
and promise, and to command and compel by Ecclesiastical censures the
Commonwealth, supposing they have such an authority to deprive him of his
Regal power and authority, and consequently to discharge every subject from
the natural and civil bond of his temporal allegiance, which being taken
away, the sacred obligation of the oath, without any other absolution,
dispensation, or declaration of the Pope, or Church, is forthwith dissolved.

28 All these questions the Lord Cardinal of Peron does so cunningly inuolue
in his question touching the oath of France, that, if we descend to
particulars, I cannot see either what opinion he does follow concerning the
deposing of heretical Princes, or how his doctrine impugneth our English oath,
(although he would seem to disprooue the same) which only denies the Popes
authority to deprive the Kings Majesty of his Royal dignity, and to absolve
his subjects from the civil bond of their temporal allegiance, and does not
meddle at all with the temporal authority, which a Kingdom or Commonwealth
has to depose their Prince.

29 Wherefore these words of the Cardinal of Peron, affirming, that not only
all the other parts of the Catholic Church, Page 15.
but likewise all the Doctors that lived in France, from the first setting up
of Schools of Divinity amongst them, have held, that in the case of
heretical or infidel Princes, and such as persecute Christianity, or
Catholic Religion, their subjects may be absolved from their oath of
allegiance. And again, Page 63.
says he (citing Widdrington in the margent) The English writers, who have put
their hand to pen for the defense of the Oath made by the present King of
England against the Pope, having used all their endeavor to find some
Doctors, and in particular, French, who had held their opinion before these
last troubles, could hitherto bring forth never any one, neither Divine, Page
65.
nor Lawyer, who says, that in case of heresy, or Apostacy from Christian
Religion, the Subjects could not be absolved from the oath of allegiance, or
from the obligation that they owe to their Princes; these his words, I say, do
neither contradict those English Catholics, who defend our English oath to be
lawful, nor do show, or signify that Widdrington has not brought any
Divines or Lawyers, both Frenchmen, and of other Nations, who affirm, that
the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, and to absolve subjects from the
bond of their temporal allegiance. For the Cardinals words are to be
understood secundum subiectam materiam, according to the matter which he
treats of, and which he would persuade his Reader, the three estates of
France, endeavored to establish by their oath, to wit, that the subjects of
the King of France could not be absolved from the bond of their temporal
allegiance by any authority whatsoever, either spiritual or temporal.

30 Now it is evident, that I neither produced, nor intended to produce any
Authors, who in these general terms expressly affirm, that the Subjects of
an heretical Prince, cannot be discharged of their allegiance, neither by the
spiritual authority of the Pope, nor by the temporal power of the
Commonwealth, for that it was not my meaning, as being a thing altogether
impertinent to our Oath of England, to examine what authority the civil
Commonwealth has over their Prince in the case of heresy or Apostacy. For
our oath only denies the Popes authority to depose our King, and to
discharge his subjects from their temporal allegiance, and with the authority
of the Commonwealth, it does not intermeddle. But that the Pope has no
authority to depose temporal Princes, and that the spiritual power of the
Church does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as death,
exile, imprisonment, deprivation of goods, and such like, but only to
Ecclesiastical censures, I have brought many Authors both French, and others,
to prove the same, among whom are Ioannes Parisiensis, and also Iacobus
Almainus cited here by the Cardinal in his Treatises, Joan. Paris. de potest,
Reg. and Pap. cap. 14.
de Domino naturali, civilly, and Ecclesiastico Concls. 2. and in probat. 2.
conclus.
, and de authoritate Ecclesiae Cap. 2. Mayor. in 4. did. 24. q. 3.
, where he writes according to his own opinion, though not in his Treatise,
de potestate Ecclesiastica, which the Cardinal cites, where he commenteth
Occam, and speaks according to Occams doctrine; albeit these Doctors do on
the other side affirm, that the Commonwealth has authority to depose a
wicked and incorrigible King and so that the Pope may according to them depose
him per accidens, as Joan. Parisiensis writes, or to use Ioannes Mayor his
words, applicando actiua passiuis, as he that applies fire to straw, is said
to burn the straw, to wit, by persuading, aduising, commanding, and also by
spiritual censures compelling them, who have authority, to wit, the people, or
Commonwealth, to depose him, and after he is deposed by the people, or
kingdom, by declaring his subjects absolved and discharged from the natural,
and consequently also spiritual bond of their allegiance, but this is
impertinent to our oath of England, wherein only the Popes authority to depose,
and deprive our King of his Dominions by way of iuridicall sentence is denied.

31 Wherefore the English Translatour of the Cardinals oration, does with as
great boldness, as with little truth shamefully affirm, In his Preface to the
Reader.
that this difference is found between these two oaths, that whereas the
English oath in one of the clauses seems to exclude not only the authority of
the Church over Kings, but even of the commonwealth also (yea though it should
be accompanied with that of the Church) that of France shootes only at the
abnegation of the Churches authority: For contrariwise, although the oath of
France may, as you shall see, at the first sight seem to deny both the
authority of the Church, and also of the Commonwealth, to depose the King of
France, yet our Oath shootes only at the abnegation of the Popes authority to
depose our King, and to absolve his Subjects from the bond of their temporal
allegiance. For as I have showed in my Theological disputation, our oath does
only affirm, Cap. 3. sec. 4
that the Pope neither of himself, that is, by the spiritual authority which
is granted him by the institution of Christ, nor by any authority of the
Church or Sea of Rome, for that the Church, or Sea of Rome has no such
authority, nor by any other means with any other, that is, neither as a total
or partial, as a principal or isntrumental cause, has any power or authority
to depose the King, etc. which last words do only at the most import, that
whether the temporal Commonwealth has any authority over the King, for any
cause or crime whatsoever, or no, with which question the King and Parliament
did not intermeddle, yet the Commonwealth has given no such authority to the
Pope either by himself, or with any other to depose the King, etc.

32 But the oath of France does expressly affirm, that there is no power on
earth, whatsoever either spiritual or temporal, which has any right over his
Majesty's kingdom to deprive the sacred persons of our Kings, nor to dispense,
or absolve their subjects from that loyalty, and obedience, which they owe to
them for any cause, or pretense whatsoever: for these be the express words of
the oath of France, which our English Translatour, as it seems, either has
not seen, or maliciously abuses his Reader, in affirming so shamefully, that
the oath of France shootes only at the abnegation of the Churches authority:
which words of the oath of France also the Cardinal of Peron seems to
understand generally of all temporal and spiritual power whatsoever either
out of the kingdom, or of the kingdom it self, as both by the propounding
the state of his question, and also by the whole drift of his oration any
judicious man may gather: for which cause, as I imagine, he affirms, Page 115.
that our Oath of England is more sweet and modest, or moderate, then that of
France. And truly although the words may seem to any man at the first sight
to have that sense, which the Cardinal pretends, seeing that they expressly
deny all power on earth, both temporal, and spiritual, yet both the
Translatour of his oration applies them only to the Popes authority, and also
if those words [which has any authority over his Majesty's kingdom to
depriue] be well observed, they may in my judgment have a very true sense, to
wit, that the temporal power, which there is mentioned, is not to be referred
to the authority of the kingdom it self, seeing that no kingdom has truly
and properly right power and authority over itself, neither has the kingdom
of France any right over the kingdom of France to deprive, etc. Which are the
express words of the oath of France, and therefore they must be applied to the
temporal power of some other foreign Prince, or Kingdom: and they seem
chiefly to shoot at the abnegation of that doctrine and position, which John
Tanquarell by a Decree of the Parliament of Paris Anno 1561. in Tract. de
Iuribus etc. p. 289
was enjoined to recall, and to ask pardon of the King for his offense in
defending the same, to wit, that the Pope Christ's Vicar, and a Monarch, having
spiritual and secular power, has authority to deprive Princes, who rebel
against his precepts of their kingdoms, and dignities.

33 But howsoever it be, whether in the oath of France, the authority of the
temporal Commonwealth over the King be denied, or no, it is plain, that
neither our King and Parliament, who established our oath, did intend thereby
to meddle with the authority of the Commonwealth, but only of the Pope, nor I
who disputed of our oath, did mean to treat of any other authority then of the
Pope, which only in our oath is denied. And therefore the Lord Cardinal of
Peron, to impugn the oath of France deals very cunningly, when he affirms,
as you have seen before, that Widdrington has not found out one Author,
either Divine or Lawyer, who has said, that in case of heresy or infidelity,
the subjects cannot be absolved from the oath of fidelity, and the obligation,
which they owe to their Princes.

34 For albeit I have not brought any one Author, only D. Barclay excepted,
who affirms these two things together, to wit, that in the case of heresy or
infidelity, Princes can neither by the authority of the Pope, nor of the
Commonwealth be deposed, and their subjects released of the bond and oath of
their temporal allegiance, for that those Doctors of France, who absolutely
deny the Popes authority to depose Princes, and to inflict temporal
punishments, do commonly maintain that the temporal Commonwealth may depose
their Prince for heresy, or infidelity, and consequently discharge the
subjects of their temporal allegiance, which being once released, the
spiritual bond of the oath made to confirm the same is forthwith dissolved;
nevertheless I have brought diverse Authors, both Divines and Lawyers, who
absolutely and without any exception of heresy, or infidelity do in express
words affirm, though not jointly and together, yet severally and apart, that
neither the Pope has any authority to depose Princes, or to inflict temporal
punishments, not that the kingdom, or commonwealth has any power, or
authority over their absolute Prince to depose him.

35 For among those Doctors, who affirm, that the commonwealth has
authority over their Prince in some cases to depose him, there are many, whom I
cited in the former part of this Treatise, and also answered all the objections
that D. Schulckenius has made against some of them, who do absolutely, and
without any exception affirm, that the Pope has not authority to depose
Princes, and that the power of the Church, does not extend to the inflicting of
temporal punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods, imprisonment, etc.
which their general assertion would be false, if the Pope had authority to
depose Princes, and to inflict temporal punishments for any cause, crime, or
end whatsoever. For if the Pope has power to inflict temporal punishments for
heresy, then it would be true, that the power of the Church does extend to the
inflicting of temporal punishments, and if the Pope can depose temporal
Princes for heresy, then it follows that the Pope can depose temporal
Princes, which those Doctors do absolutely deny.

36 And among those Doctors, who are vehement for the Popes authority to
depose Princes, and to inflict temporal punishments, I brought In Apol. nu.
411.
also diverse, who deny that the people, or commonwealth has authority to
depose their Prince. The Pope only has authority to deprive, or depose
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, says Bartholus, Baldus, and Petrus Andreas
Gambara. And Gregorius, Tholosnus, Barth. in leg. si Imperator. Cod. de Legibus
nu. 4.

Bald. in proaemio ff. veteris. Gambara in tract. de officio and potest. legati
l. 2. tit. de varijs ordinar. titulis nu. 220.

Gregor. Thol. l 26. de Rep. c. 5 nu. 14. 24. 25


albeit a French Doctor, yet denies that the people, or commonwealth has
authority to judge, punish, or depose their King. And therefore he does not
approve that fact of the Peers of France in depriving Childericke, and
expressly affirms, that Pipin usurped the Kingdom, and he reprehendeth also
the Pope, who called, says he, Pipin into Italy to help him against the
Longobards, and when he came he absolved him from the oath he had made to his
King Childerike, being neither heard, nor called, nor defended, nor accused, as
Abbas Vspergensis, and Entropius do affirm, and afterward he says, that the
Pope might be deceived in his opinion, for that he would reward Pipin
bringing an army in his defense, with the hurt of another. And this in my
judgment is one of the chief causes that moved the other French Doctors to
be commonly of this opinion, that the commonwealth may depose their King in
some cases, to excuse that fact of the French Peers in deposing Childerike
their true and rightful King.

37 Also Alexander Carerius a vehement defender of the Popes direct power in
temporalls, Carer. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 2. 3
in favor of the Canonists against Cardinal Bellarmine, is of the same
opinion: He that has no Judge upon earth, says he, Cap. 3.
we must confess that many Judges cannot Judge. For in denying a singularity
by a collectiue and general word, pluralls are accounted to be denied. It is
manifest therefore, as has been said before, that the Barons, and people for
want of coactiue power, or authority, which Vassalls have not over their Lord,
cannot judge, nor depose their Prince. And in the former Chapter answering the
authority of Aristotle, The Philosopher, says he, speaks of a King, who is
instituted by the election of the Community, for such a one is punished and
deposed by the Community, which does principally institute him, as the
Venetians, and people of Genoa, who choose to themselves a Duke, and if he
offend against the commonwealth she may depose him: But it is otherwise in a
King, who naturally, and by succession, and descending of a certain race does
reign. And this assertion of Carerius, and others seems agreeable to the
common doctrine of the ancient Fathers cited by me elsewhere, Apol. nu. 5. and
seq. and in Append. ad Supplicat. calu^. 17. nu. 14.
who expressly affirm, that Kings and Emperors are inferior to none, but God,
to wit, in temporalls, and that they can be punished, to wit, with temporal
punishments by God alone, to whom only they are subject in temporalls. So that
you see, how cunningly the Cardinal of Peron handles this controversy
touching the deposition of Princes, confounding and inuoluing both questions
concerning the authority of the Pope, and also of the commonwealth to depose
Princes together in one, and then in affirming, that Widdrington has not
brought any one Author (only D. Barclay excepted) who says, that Princes for
heresy cannot be deposed, to wit, neither by the Pope nor the commonwealth,
which is very true, but it is not true that he has brought no Authors who
absolutely affirm, that the Pope has no power to depose Princes, and that the
Ecclesiastical power of the Church does not extend to the inflicting of
temporal punishments.

38 An other cunning the Lord Cardinal of Peron may use in confounding the
oath, or religious bond of temporal allegiance with the civil, or natural
bond thereof, which perchance he did for this end, that his speech concerning
the Popes authority to absolve from the oath of allegiance might seem more
plausible to his audience, for that an oath is a sacred, and spiritual thing,
and therefore not exceeding the object of the Popes spiritual power; and all
Divines do hold, that the Pope has authority to absolve from oaths, either
by releasing directly the spiritual bond it self, or consequently by
declaring the thing, which is sworn not to be hic and nunc, in this particular
case a fit matter of an oath, but temporal allegiance, and temporal kingdoms
are temporal things, and therefore that the Pope by his spiritual power
should have authority to dispose of temporal things, and to absolve from
temporal allegiance, and to give, take away, translate, and dispose of
temporal kingdoms, would have seemed very harsh in the years of the greatest
part of true Frenchmen.

In Apol. nu. 148. 149.
39 But, besides that, as I have showed elsewhere, the Pope cannot, according to
the doctrine of S. Thomas, and his followers, absolve from the oath of
temporal allegiance, but by declaring the natural, or civil bond it self of
temporal allegiance to be void, and of no force, and consequently to be no fit
matter to be sworn, it little imports to the maine question, which is
betwixt my Adversaries and me touching the Popes power to depose Princes, and
to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, whether the Pope can
release, or take away the spiritual bond, and obligation of the oath of
allegiance, it being a sacred and spiritual thing, and made only to confirm
and corrobarate the former natural bond of temporal allegiance. For it does
not follow, as well notes Ioannes Parisiensis, Joan. Paris. de potest Reg. and
Pap. c. 16. ad. 11
and I also observed in my Theological Disputation, Cap. 6. sec. 3.
that because the Pope can release, or take away the sacred, and religious bond
of temporal allegiance, he can also release and dissolve the natural and
civil bond, wherein all subjects by the law of God and nature stand bound to
their temporal Prince, before they make any oath of temporal allegiance; and
very few subjects in comparison of others do usually make any such oath of
allegiance. And therefore perchance the Cardinal would for the cause
aforesaid, rather discourse of the Popes power to absolve subjects from the
oath, that is, the sacred and spiritual bond of temporal allegiance, then to
depose Princes, and to take away their Crowns, and Regal authority, which
being taken away, both their temporal allegiance, and also the sacred and
spiritual bond thereof, is by a necessary consequent forthwith dissolved.

37 And to omit diverse other cunning shifts, which the Cardinal of Peron has
used in his discourse touching the deposition of heretical Princes, and which
the Kings Majesty in his answer to the Cardinals oration, has in my opinion,
very clearly, and excellently discovered; two notable cunnings, or rather
frauds he has used in translating into French the decree of the Council of
Lateran, whereof now we treat. The first is in translating into French those
words, Si Dominus temporalis, if any Prince, whereas it is manifest, that those
words, Dominus temporalis do signify every Landlord, Mayor, Judge, Consul,
Potesta, Governor, Shiriffe, Bayliffe, Constable, or any other inferior
Officer, or Petty Lord: and although the Cardinal will perchance affirm,
that in those general words, Dominus temporalis, all Emperors, Kings, and
absolute Princes are included, which nevertheless I have above confuted, yet
to translate those words Dominus temporalis, any Prince, as though the Council
had named Princes expressly, and by the name of Princes, cannot in my opinion
be excused from an egregious fraud and falsehood. The second is, in translating
those words, vt ipse (Summus Pontifex. Vasallos ab eius fidelitate denunciet
abfolutos, that he (the Pope) may absolve his subjects from their oath of
fidelity, whereas the words of the Council only are that he may denounce, or
declare his Vassals absolved from their fidelity which words of the Council
do expressly signify, that the vassalls were before absolved from their
fidelity, either by the decrees of Popes, or of temporal Princes, and that the
Pope does only denounce, or declare them absolved; besides that the word,
vassalls, he translateth subjects, which have far different significations,
and that word a fidelitate, from their fidelity, he translateth from their oath
of fidelity, which in a Translator, who is to set down not only the sense, but
also the words, cannot be excused from an egregious corruption.

38 Lastly, I would gladly be resolved of this question, either by the
Cardinal of Peron, or any other learned Catholic, whether if the Doctors of
Sorbon, who hold the doctrine of the Counsels superiority above the Pope, to
be true and conform to the word of God, and to the definitions of the general
Councels of Constance, and Basil, and consequently the contrary doctrine to be
false, impious, and detestable, and contrary to the word of God, should make a
decree, that all of their University should in their public Readings,
Disputations, and writings defend it as certain, that is, should not maintain
or teach the contrary doctrine as probable or in any sort: Or if the Doctors
of Mentz, who are of opinion, that the doctrine for the immaculate Conception
of the B. Virgin is true, conform to the word of God, and to the decree of the
Council of Basil, and that the contrary is false, and against the word of God,
and consequently impious, and detestable, should also make a Decree, as Surius
affirms Upon the year 1501.
they have done, imitating, says he, the decree of the Council of Basil, that
it should be altogether held, that the most blessed mother of God was
conceived without the spot of original sin, and did strictly ordain, that
none hereafter should in that University be promoted in sacred Divinity,
unless he should before by oath make promise, that he would neither maintain
in his mind, nor any wise approve the contrary opinion: and the same question
may be made concerning the Jesuits doctrine de auxilijs gratiae: whether I say
it must from hence be necessarily inferred, that the aforesaid Doctors should
thereby take upon them to determine an article of faith, to make a manifest and
inevitable schism in the Church of God, yea and to precipitate men into a
manifest heresy, and account the Pope, if he should not hold the same, not to
be the head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar, but an heretic, and
Antichrist, and all the other parts of the Church, who should maintain the
contrary, not to be true parts of the Church, but members of Antichrist? Of
this question I would gladly be resolved; for the resolution thereof would give
no small light, whereby the judicious Reader may see, of what force are the
chiefest objections and inferences, that the Cardinal of Peron urges aginst
the oath of France, and the decree of the Parliament of Paris made the second
of January 1615.

39 And thus much concerning the Lord Cardinal of Peron, whom in truth I was
very loath to mention for the great reverence and respect, wherewith I honor
his Grace in regard of the singular gifts of honor, and nature, wherewith he
is adorned, but that the defense of truth in this important question, touching
our duties to God and Caesar, and of my innocence, which the slanderous tongues
of some have unjustly branded with the infamous note of error, and heresy,
for impugning their new invented Catholic faith, touching the Popes power to
depose Princes; and also the publishing of his oration to the view of the
world, whereby many unlearned Catholics, not being able to discern his
artificial and cunning manner, both in propounding and handling this dangerous
question touching the deposition of Princes, are pitifully deluded, and
seduced, have urged me thereunto. Now to the matter from whence upon this
occasion given me by my Adversary touching the doctrine of Ioannes
Parisiensis, I have made this digression.

40 And as for the matter it self, says Mr. Fitzherbert, page 160. n. 7.
for the which my Adversary Widdrington produces their testimonies, (to wit,
to prove, that many decrees of the Popes, and general Counsels touching
temporal things have been always made with the express, Nu. 47.
or secret consent of Princes) I cannot see what he could gain, or prove
thereby for the question now in hand, if it should be granted him. For would
he infer, that because many things have been decreed by Popes, and Councels
touching temporal matters, therefore no such thing could be decreed in the
Council of Lateran without them? Who sees not the weakness, and absurdity
of this inference, seeing that nothing else can follow of those premises
directly, but that, as diverse other decrees concerning temporal matters, have
been made with the consent of the Princes, so also it may be, that this Canon
of the Council of Lateran was made in like manner with their consent; which no
man will deny; yea we willingly grant not only that it might be so, but also
that it was so and infer thereupon, that forasmuch as all Christian Princes
gave their consent to this Canon in that famous general Council ( which was,
as I may say, the Parliament of all Christendom) therefore they are, and ever
shall be subject thereto, except it be repealed by some other general Council
of like authority. But how does it follow, that because this, and diverse other
Canons concerning political matters, have been ratified by temporal Princes,
therefore they could not be lawfully made without their consent? which is the
point, that Widdrington must prove, if he will argue to the purpose.

41 But if Mr. Fitzherbert had been pleased to consider with an indifferent
eye my answer, and the principal drift and scope thereof, he might easily
have seen that my answer was good and strong, and the authority which I
brought from Ioannes Parisiensis, and Hostiensis, sufficient to confirm the
same. For my principal answer was this, that the decree of the Council of
Lateran did not in those general words, Dominus temporalis, Dominus
principalis, and non habens Dominos principales, comprehend absolute Princes,
but only inferior Landlords, Magistrates, or Lords, it being made by the
consent and authority of absolute Princes, as ordaining the inflicting of
temporal punishments, which to ordain does not belong to the spiritual, but
only to the temporal power, and that therefore not only it did not, but also
it could not in those general words comprehend absolute Princes themselves, by
whose authority it was made. And to prevent an objection, which I foresaw some
might make, to wit, that the decrees and Canons of Popes and Councels, have
their force to bind from the authority of the Church, and not from the
consent, approbation, ratification, or authority of temporal Princes, I gave
the aforesaid answer, that Popes and Councels do oftentimes ordain many
things, which to ordain belongs rather to the civil, then to the
Ecclesiastical power, by the express or tacit consent of Princes, who are
present by themselves, or their Ambassadors, or else presuming, or at
leastwise hoping that temporal Princes will ratify the same: and for the
confirmation hereof, I brought the authority of Hostiensis, who affirms that
according to the opinion of some Doctors, which also Pope Innocent, and Io.
Andreas do affirm, that the Canon Ad abolendam, de haereticis, wherein it is
ordained, that if Counts and Barons, Rectours and Consuls of Cities, and of
other places do refuse to take an oath to defend the Church against heretics,
they shall be deprived of their honor, had therefore force to bind, because
the Emperor gave his consent thereunto. And that therefore it is no marvel
if this decree of the Lateran Council, for as much as concerns the
inflicting of temporal punishments, had therefore force to bind, for that
temporal Princes consented thereunto.

42 And by this it is clear, that my meaning was not only to affirm, that
the decree of the Lateran Council, for as much as concerns the inflicting of
temporal punishments, was made by the consent of absolute Princes, only in
that manner as absolute Princes do give their consent to the making of
Ecclesiastical laws, and Canons, which do merely proceed from
Ecclesiastical or spiritual authority, but also that it was made by the
consent and authority of absolute Princes, for that to ordain the inflicting
of temporal punishments belongs rather to the Civil, then to the
Ecclesiastical power, and therefore it would not have had force to bind,
unless absolute Princes had consented thereunto: As likewise the Canon, Ad
abolendam, wherein temporal punishments were inflicted, was therefore of
force, according to the opinion of some Canonists, as Hostiensis relates, for
that the Emperor consented thereunto, although the ordaining or inflicting of
Excommunication, which in that Canon Ad abolendam, was joined together with the
deprivation of temporal honor, as it is also joined in the decree of the
Lateran Council, did proceed, and had force to bind, from the spiritual
authority of the Church, to whom only it belongs to inflict Ecclesiastical
Censures.

43 Now Mr. Fitzherbert, is it possible, that you should be so ignorant, as not
to understand the force of my answer, and that I brought the testimonies of
Ioannes Parisiensis, and Hostiensis to great purpose? Do not you see what I
gain for the question which is in hand, if you grant me that the decree of
the Lateran Counsel, as also that Canon, Ad abolendam, according to those
Doctors cited by Hostiensis, had their force to bind from the consent of
temporal Princes? Can you be so blind as not to see, how this inference is
not weak, and absurd, but strong and certain, that because this, and other
decrees of Popes and Councels, concerning the inflicting of temporal
punishments were, I do not only say, ratified by temporal Princes, but had
their force to bind from the consent of temporal Princes, therefore they could
not be lawfully made without their ratification, and consent, which is the
point you say I must prove if I will argue to the purpose? unless your
weakness will admit that a law may lawfully or legally be made without that,
by virtue whereof it has force to bind, as those Canonists cited by
Hostiensis, Pope Innocent, and Ioannes Andreas do affirm, that the Canon, Ad
abolenda^, ideo valuisse quia Imperator, aut Princeps consensit, Was therefore
of force, because the Emperor or Prince gave his consent?

44 And as for that inference you make, that if that Canon of the Lateran
Council (which was as it were a Parliament of all Christendom) was made by
the consent, and I also add by the authority of all Christian Princes,
therefore it cannot be repealed, but by some other general Council of like
authority, although it nothing concerns the deposition of absolute Princes;
by whose authority it was made, but only of inferior Landlords, Magistrates,
or Lords; yet of what force this inference is, you may for your better
instruction see above Chapter 8. nu. 27.
by the doctrine of Suarez, who declares in what manner the law of Nations may
in this or that Nation be repealed, for that a law of a general Council made
by the consent and authority of all Christian Princes, is, as I may say, a law
of all Christian Nations.

45 But let us go on, and see how well you prove that it is absurd to say,
that the Canon of the Lateran Council, and diverse other Canons, concerning
political matters, could not be lawfully made without the consent of temporal
Princes. But how absurd is this, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 161. number. 8.
, it may appear even by Widdringtons former grant, and express doctrine
Chap. 2. number. 1. and 2.
, touching the Popes power to command corporal and temporal things, as they
serve, or are reduced to spiritual: for this power being spiritual (in
respect of the spiritual end whereto it reduces all temporal things) must
needs be independent of temporal Princes, unless we shall also grant them a
supreme spiritual authority.

46 But how vain this inference is I have clearly showed before, Chap. 6.
number. 66 and seq.
by declaring the difference betwixt the directive and coerciue power, and the
proper acts and objects of them both, which my Adversary not distinguishing
does thereby confound the understanding of his unlearned Reader. For the object
of the spiritual power as it is directive, or commanding, are all those things
spiritual or temporal, which by the reference or reduction of them to a
spiritual end, may become spiritual things, to wit, virtuous or vicious
actions, which are the acts and objects of the spiritual power, as it is
directive, and this spiritual power is independent of temporal Princes: but
the object of the spiritual power, as it is coerciue or punishing, are not all
spiritual things, but only spiritual punishments; and because no reduction
of temporal punishments to a spiritual end can make temporal punishments to
become spiritual punishments, therefore temporal punishments, although by
reducing them to a spiritual end, may become spiritual things, which are the
object of the spiritual power, as it is directive, yet still they remain
temporal punishments, and therefore cannot by any reduction become the object
of the spiritual power, as it is coerciue, or punishing; whereupon the
inflicting of such punishments, for what end soever they be inflicted, must
needs remain dependant upon the consent and authority of temporal Princes.
Neither also can my Adversary be so ignorant, as to affirm that temporal
Princes cannot use their supreme temporal power to a spiritual end, as to
the rooting out of heresy, adultery, and all other crimes, unless we grant
them a supreme spiritual authority.

47 Besides that this may be convinced, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 161. number. 8.
, by the practice of all the primitive Church in the time of the Pagan
Emperors, when not only corporal, and temporal things were commanded by the
Church, but temporal and comporall penalties ordained without the
ratification, or consent of any temporal Prince.

This indeed were somewhat to the purpose, if Mr. Fitzherbert could convince,
that in the primitive Church, before Kings, and Emperor were Christians,
temporal penalties were not only commanded, but also ordained as to ordain
is distinguished from to command, for then it must needs follow that the
primitive Church did not only command the inflicting of temporal punishments,
without the consent and authority of temporal Princes, and that temporal
punishments were then the object of the spiritual power, as it is directive,
which I never denied, but also did inflict temporal punishments, and that
temporal punishments were then the object of the spiritual power, as it is
coerciue, or punishing, which I utterly deny. Observe now what pitiful
arguments this silly man brings for conuincing proofs.

48 This may appear, says he, by a decree of Pope Calixtus Epist. 2. Callixt.
tom. 1. Council.
, in the time of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, whereby as well Laymen, as
Priests, and Cleargie-men were forbidden upon pain of infamy to make
conspiracies against their Bishops.

48 The words of Pope Calixtus to the Bishops of France, are these: We have
heard that the crimes of conspiracies do reign in your parts; and it has
been made manifest unto us, that their people do conspire against their
Bishops. The subtilty, or malice of which offense is abominable, not only
among Christians, but also among Heathens, and is forbidden by external laws;
And therefore not only Ecclesiastical, but also Secular laws do condemn them
that are guilty of this crime, and not only those that do conspire, but those
also who consent to them. And our predecessors with a great company of Bishops
have commanded all them that are placed in Priestly dignity, or are Clergymen,
to fall from the dignity, which they have, and have commanded, that the rest be
deprived of Communion, and to be banished from the Church, and have thought, or
judged all men together of either order to be infamous, and not only the
doers, but those also that consent to them. And a little beneath, And these are
not to be admitted to the accusing of any man, nor the word of the^, or of
excommunicated persons can hurt or accuse any man.

49 But this authority of Pope Calixtus, and all other such like, as of Pope
Anacletus, Pope Pius, and others related by Gratian 3. q. 4. are easily
answered. For as there are two sorts of Laws, Courts, or Tribunals, the
spiritual and the temporal; so also there are two sorts of infamy, as
infamy is taken for a penalty ordained by the law Vide Siluest. verbo infamia.
Greg. Tholo. in Syntag Iuris lib. 31. cap. 29. number. 7. and other Doctors, Cod.
ex quibus causis infamia irrogatur, and ff. de ijs qui notantur infamiae.
, the one is called infamia iuris Canonica, infamy of the spiritual Court, by
virtue whereof the person made infamous is deprived, and made incapable of
spiritual dignities, and his word or testimony is of no force to hurt any man
in this spiritual Court, and for as much as concerns spiritual dignities,
punishments, or Censures; and of this infamy, the aforesaid decree of
Callixtus, and all other Ecclesiastical Canons made by spiritual authority,
wherein the penalty of infamy is inflicted, are to be understood. The other
infamy is ordained by the Civil law, and is called by the Lawyers, infamia
iuris Ciuilis, infamy of the Civil law, or Court, by virtue of which the
person made infamous is deprived, or made incapable of Secular dignities, and
his testimony is not admitted to hurt any man in the Civil, and criminal
Court, and for as much as concerns temporal dignities, and temporal
punishments. And of this civil infamy, the words of Pope Calixtus are not to
be understood. Neither can any man be so senseless as to conceive, that the
Popes of the primitive Church, declaring those to be infamous, and not to be
admitted to accuse or give testimony against any man, who did forsake the
Christian Religion, and became Apostataes, and made conspiracies against
Bishops, and excommunicated persons, did intend to make them incapable of
Secular dignities, and not to be admitted to accuse, or give testimony in the
Secular Court, wherein the Popes themselves, and all Christians were punished,
and persecuted for Christian Religion, and Apostataes and accusers of Bishops
were rewarded.

50 The second conuincing proof that the Popes of the primitive Church, in the
time of the Pagan Emperors, did not only command, but also ordain temporal
punishments, Mr. Fitzherbert brings from the authority of Pope Vrbanus:
Epist. Vrbani tom. 1. Council. and 17. q. 4. can. Attendendum est.
And his Successor Vrbanus, says he, Pa. 161. nu. 9
ordained in like sort the penalty of infamy, adding also imprisonment, and
perpetual banishment for such as should go about to vex and molest Churches,
and to deprive them of their goods, and possessions.

But this proof is as insufficient as the former: First, for that this Epistle
of Vrbanus is not authentical, but counterfeit and falsely imposed upon Pope
Vrbanus, as may evidently appear by the subscriptions of the Consulls, to wit,
of Antoninus, and Alexander, whereas it is evident, as Baronius, Adamu^ 224
and other Historiographers do witness, that Antoninus was slain in the
fourth year of Pope Callixtus in the year of our Lord 224. two years before
Vrbanus was created Pope.

51 Secondly, for that it is also evident, that the whole Canon, Attendendum,
wherein the penalty of infamy, imprisonment, and of perpetual banishment is
ordained, as it is set down, 17. q. 4. by Gratian, has been thrust in by
some one, or other to this Epistle, for that it has no coherence at all with
the words of the Epistle, which immediately follow, wherein the reason of this
decree is given, whereas if the whole Canon Attendendum be left out, the sense
is perfect, and the reason there alleged very apt and sufficient. For what
coherence, I pray you, is there betwixt these words of this Canon, that if any
man molest Churches, he shall be condemned of perpetual infamy, and he
imprisoned, and banished for ever, with these words, which in the Epistle
immediately follow, because we ought, according to the Apostle, to deliver such
a man to Satan, that the spirit may be safe in the day of our Lord, etc.
Which nevertheless is a very fit reason of that which immediately goes before
this whole Canon Attendendum; to wit, that Church-goods ought not to be taken
away by any man, and applied to profane uses, least they incur the
punishment, and death of Ananias, and Saphira, and which is worse be made
Anathema maranatha, and if they shall not fall dead in body, as Ananias, and
Saphira did, yet there soul which is of more worth then the body does fall
dead, and be separated from the company of the faithful, and does slide into
the deep pit of hell, because, according to the Apostle, we ought to deliver
such a man to Satan, etc. which words, as you see, have a perfect sense, and
give a very fit reason of the former words, if the whole Canon Attendendum be
left out, and with it there is no sense, and coherence of the words at all.

52 Thirdly, what man can be so simple as to imagine, that either Pope Vrbanus,
or any other Pope of the primitive Church in the time of the Pagan Emperors,
when not only the goods of the Church were profaned, taken away, and spoiled,
but also the Christians themselves imprisoned, banished, and put to cruel
death, would make a Decree, that whosoever did take away, or profane the goods
of Churches should be committed to prison, or perpetually banished; even as if
Mr. Archpriest should now make a decree, that whatsoever Catholic shall take
the oath of allegiance, or repair to Protestant Churches shall be imprisoned,
or perpetually banished: and yet these in my Adversaries judgment, are,
forsooth, conuincing proofs. Nevertheless this punishment of infamy is to be
understood, as I showed before, of spiritual infamy, to wit, forasmuch as
concerns the spiritual Court: and the penalty of perpetual banishment, is
to be understood of spiritual banishment, or of banishment from the Church,
as it is expressly affirmed in the decree of his Predecessor Pope Callixtus.
And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert may use some fraud, in urging from the decree of
Pope Vrbanus the penalty of banishment, and in concealing the said penalty,
in the decree of his Predecessor Pope Callixtus, who in express words made
mention of banishment from the Church.

53 The third conuincing proof, Mr. Fitzherbert takes from the authority of a
Provincial Council page 162. nu. 9
held at Eliberis De Consecrat. did. 1. can. Omnis homo.
in Spain in the time of Constantius, father to Constantine the great, and
Galerius, which enacted, that men should abstain from their wives, not only
some days before they received the B. Sacrament, Barchard. l. 19. c. 17. and
Iuo p. 15. c. 88 vide Binium tom. 1. Council. in notis in Council. Eliber. and
Baron tom. 2. Annal. anno 305. in fine.
but also in time of Lent, and Easter, assigning for the later ayeeres penance,
or to pay five and twenty shillings to the Church, or to the poor: and in
another Canon they ordained that Bishops, and their Ministers Burchard. l. 11.
c. 67. Iuo p. 14. c. 115.
might whip husbandmen with rods, for great crimes, to make them do penance
against their wills, least they might perish eternally; in which Canons, as
also in the former Decrees of the Popes Callixtus, and Vrbanus, the penalties
imposed were mere temporal, albeit there was not then, as I have said, any
Christian Prince to ratify the same.

54 But this proof also is as insufficient as the former. First, for that many
learned men, as the Reader may see in Binnius, to whom Mr. Fitzherbert
remitteth him, do reject this Council, and account it erroneous for decreeing
certain errors: so Melchior Canus, Canus l. 5. de locis c. 4. Bellar. l. 2.
de Imaginib. c. 9.
and Cardinal Bellarmine. And although Baronius cited also by Binnius,
excuses the Fathers of that Council, yet for that they seemed in diverse of
their decrees to favor the errors of Nouatian, which were displeasing to
their Successors, his opinion is, that there is no mention made by name of this
Synod by ancient writers, and so it did remain almost abolished; and yet my
Adversary will from this Council bring, forsooth, a conuincing proof.

55 Secondly, for that these two decrees cited here by Mr. Fitzherbert, are not
placed with the other Canons of the Council, but are adjoined as certain
fragments belonging thereunto. Wherefore if some Authors, as Vasquez
witnesses, stick not to affirm, Vasq. 3. part. disp. 105 cap. 2 tom. 1.
that diverse decrees, which are placed among the Canons of this Council, were
not made by the Council, but by some one, or other adjoined afterward, with
far greater reason it may be said, that these two decrees, which by Binnius
are reputed only as fragments, and not placed among the rest of the Canons,
were not made by the Council, but adjoined afterward by some one or other,
whom Burchardus, Iuo, and others following did attribute them to this Council,
in that manner as diverse books are attributed to S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom,
and other Fathers, and are printed among their works, and under their names,
which were never made by them

56 Thirdly, for that some learned men, as Garsias Loaisa, Whom Binnius in the
place above cited calls a most learned Interpreter.
a Collectour of all the Counsels held in Spain, are of opinion, that this
Council was not celebrated in the time of Constantius, and Galerius, but after
the Council of Nice in the time of Constantine the great: and therefore no
conuincing proof can be brought from the authority of this Council, as my
Adversary pretends, to show that in the time of the Pagan Emperors,
temporal and corporal punishments, were not only commanded, but also
ordained by the Church, without the ratification and consent of any temporal
Prince: seeing that, according to the opinion of learned men, this Council was
not held in the time of the Pagan Emperors, but after the Council of Nice, in
the time of Constantine the great, who, as we may well suppose, would ratify
whatsoever the Pastors of the Church should think expedient, and necessary
for the spiritual good thereof, and the eternal salvation of souls.

57 But lastly, from these two Canons here cited by my Adversary, this only,
at the most, can be forcibly deduced, that spiritual Pastors have authority
to impose, command, and enjoin temporal and corporal penances, punishments,
and afflictions, as to abstain for certain days from carnal copulation, and
likewise to fast, to wear haire-cloth, to give alms, and such like, which was
ordained in the first Canon, or to beat themselves, or else to suffer
themselves for their penance to be beaten with rods, which was ordained in the
second Canon: and of this I never made doubt, but I did ever grant, that the
Church has authority by the institution of Christ to impose, enjoin, or
command temporal and corporal afflictions, penalties, or punishments, but all
the difficulty betwixt my Adversaries and me, is concerning the coerciue,
compulsiue, or punishing power of the Church, that is, if they should refuse to
obey the commandment of their Pastors, and would not abstain from the acts
of matrimony, nor beat themselves, nor suffer themselves to be beaten with
rods, with what kind of punishments could the Church, by her spiritual
authority, which she has received from Christ, force and compel them
thereunto; to wit, whether by inflicting upon them temporal and corporal
punishments, as my Adversaries contend, or only spiritual Censures, by
depriving them either wholly, or in part of spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
communion, as many other Catholics do probably according to my doctrine
affirm: this is the plain, and maine controversy, as I have often said.

58 Neither can it be proved by any of these Canons, that the coerciue, or
compulsiue spiritual power of spiritual Pastors, does extend to the
inflicting of corporal, or temporal punishments, but only of Ecclesiastical
Censures, as it may sufficiently appear by the second Canon here cited,
wherein is decreed, that Si seniores ipsorum colonorum, etc. If the more
ancient of these husbandmen (giving thereby to understand, that the
husbandmen, who were to be whipped by the Bishops, or their Ministers for
penance, were boys or youths) shall take it in ill part, or will therefore use
any revenge, or shall presume to defend them, that they be not beaten, they
shall be punished with the sentence of Ecclesiastical Excommunication.
Wherefore those words of this Canon, that they may do penance against their
wills, are not to be understood, against their wills simply and absolutely, by
corporal force and violence, which takes away all willingness, for such kind
of penance, or satisfaction is not acceptable before almighty God, or of any
merit at all before God, but they are to be understood against their wills,
secundum quid, in some sort, as Merchants against their wills, for fear of
being drowned cast their goods into the Sea, to wit, that they shall be
compelled to do penance, and suffer themselves to be beaten against their
wills, for fear of being otherwise thrust out of the Church, and deprived of
Ecclesiastical communion, which kind of compulsion being simply voluntary,
See Disputat. Theol. c. 9. sec. unit.
and inuoluntarie only secundum quid, may stand with that free will, which is
the ground and root of meritorious, and willing satisfaction acceptable in the
sight of God. Neither does Mr. Fitzherbert by the rest of his examples grounded
upon the authority of the Apostles, prove any other thing, but that spiritual
Pastors may by their spiritual authority, without the consent and authority
of temporal Princes impose, enjoin, or command, temporal and corporal
penalties, afflictions and punishments, and in this sense ordain, and depose
of them. For thus he writes:

59 Heereto may be added, says he, Page 162. nu. 10. 11.
the Constitution of the Apostles themselves in their Council held at
Jerusalem, wherein they imposed upon the Christians a burden (as they called
it) whereof part was merely temporal, to wit, to abstain from blood, and
that which was strangled; Act. 15.
Visum est, say they, Spiritui sancto, and nobis, etc. It has seemed good to
the holy Ghost, and us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these
necessary things, that you abstain from things immolated to Idols, and blood,
and that which is strangled, and fornication. Thus said they in their Canon,
disposing, as you see, of a temporal thing by their own Apostolical
authority, without any hope, or expectation of the consent, or ratification of
any temporal Magistrate; as they also did the like in the institution of Lent,
which, as all the Fathers do acknowledge, is an Apostolical tradition, and
consists in a mere temporal affliction; and the like may be said, not only
of all the examples alleged by me before, See c. 2. nu. 2 3. and 4.
concerning the practice of the Apostles (partly in Act 5.6. and 13
corporal punishments, and partly in the disposition 1. Cor. 6.
of temporal things) but also of the custom of the primitive Church, to
impose corporal penances Cypr. epist. 10 ad Clerum. Tertul. de paenit. cap. 10.
consisting in fasting, watching, wearing of haire-cloth, and such like, which
albeit they were temporal things, yet were imposed by the Church upon her
children, by her own authority, though always for a spiritual end, to wit,
for the good of souls, and Gods greater glory and service.

60 Whereupon it follows, that the Church may also now in like manner dispose
of temporal things to the same end, by her own authority, without demanding
the consent, or ratification of any temporal Prince: for no sufficient reason
can be assigned, why the Church could do it then, and not now; neither yet
why it may for a spiritual end punish a man temporally, in his body, by some
corporal affliction, and in his honor by infamy, and not in his temporal
goods, and state; especially seeing that all temporal goods are inferior to
the body, and both body and goods, ordained for the service of the soul, and
for spiritual ends; Whereupon, I say, it follows evidently, that the consent
of temporal Princes is altogether needless to the validity of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning temporal things, albeit the Church
has always used to avail her self of their authority and power, for the
execution of all her Decrees, as well spiritual, as temporal matters and to
that end admits, and requires the assistance of temporal Princes, or their
Ambassadors in general Counsels; so as by all this it appears evidently,
that the Council of Lateran needed not the consent, or ratification of the
Emperor, or other temporal Princes for the validity of the Canon now in
question; and consequently that my Adversaries first answer to the objection
proposed by himself, is to no purpose.

61 Here you see, how Mr. Fitzherbert rangeth up and down to no purpose,
spending many words idly to prove that which no man denies, to wit, that the
Church by her spiritual authority may without the consent of Princes command,
enjoin, or impose temporal, and corporal penalties, which I have always
granted, yet craftily confounding in his inferences ordaining with commanding,
disposing with imposing, and punishing temporally with enioyning temporal
punishments, which I have ever distinguished. He took upon him, as you heard,
to convince by the practice of all the primitive Church in the time of the
Pagan Emperors, that corporal and temporal things were not only commanded,
but also ordained by the Church without the ratification, and consent of any
temporal Prince, because a little before See nu. 45.
he does acknowledge, that I do grant, and expressly teach, that the Pope has
power to command corporal, and temporal things, as they are reduced to
spiritual, and yet here he proves nothing else either by the Constitutions
of the Apostles, or by the practice of the primitive Church, but that
spiritual Pastors may by their ordinary power (for our question is not
concerning the extraordinary power which the Apostles had to work miracles)
command, impose, and enjoin temporal, and corporal things, as to abstain
from blood, and that which is strangled, from the eating of flesh upon certain
days, as in Lent, rather to suffer wrong, and to appoint arbitrary Judges
among themselves to compose quietly their strifes, then to have recourse to the
tribunalls of infidel Judges, and to do corporal and temporal penances; and
that the Church may now also do the same, and that therefore the consent of
temporal Princes is altogether needless to the validity of such
Ecclesiastical Canons, and constitutions, which do only command, impose, or
enjoin corporal, and temporal penances and punishments; and of this no
Catholic makes doubt.

62 But that the primitive Church, did by her ordinary power (for of miraculous
and extraordinary power, which is not to descend necessarily to Successors, I
do not speak) not only command, and impose, but also did inflict temporal
and corporal punishments without the consent of the party who was punished,
and did dispose of temporal things, as to dispose is distinguished from to
impose, or command, to wit, by depriving Christians of temporal right, power,
and authority, or that the consent and authority of temporal Princes is not
necessary to the validity of such Ecclesiastical Canons, and Constitutions, as
is this decree of the Lateran Council which is now in question, wherein
temporal punishments are not only commanded, or imposed, but also inflicted,
or that the assistance of temporal Princes, or their Ambassadors is not only
required in general Counsels for the execution, and not for the confirmation
and validity of such decrees, wherein temporal punishments are inflicted, and
temporal things not only commanded, or imposed, but also disposed of, Mr.
Fitzherbert has not brought here from the practice of the Primitive Church so
much as any probable, or colorable, much less, as he vaunted, any conuincing
proof: and consequently my first answer to the objection which I propounded,
stands yet firm, and solid, and what he has objected to the contrary is to
no purpose at all.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein an other answer of Widdrington grounded upon certain Glossers, or
Expositours of the Canon Law is confuted, and M. Fitzherberts exceptions
against the same are proved to be fraudulent, and insufficient, and moreover
it is showed, that from no Canon of the Church it can be proved, that the
custom of the Church is to inflict by her spiritual power, I do not say, to
command or impose temporal penalties: and the true difference between the
Divines, and Canonists concerning the Popes power in temporalls, is declared.

1 MY second answer to the objection before mentioned was taken from an
exposition of the Gloss upon the Canon Adrianus did. 63. Where the Pope
commands the goods of those who do violate his Decree to be confiscated,
and upon the Canon, Delatori 5. q. 6. where he ordains the tongues of
calumniatours, or false accusers, to be pulled out, or being convicted their
heads to be stricken off. For to these Decrees the Gloss answers thus, Hic
docere Ecclesiam quid facere debeat Iudex Secularis, The Church teaches here,
what a Seculiar Judge ought to do. Which answer of the Gloss may be
accommodated or applied to the like Decrees, wherein the sacred Canons do
inflict temporal punishments. And this answer the words of Siluester do also
favor etc. Thus I answered in the foresaid Preface.

2 Now to this my answer Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth, Page 166. nu. 1. 2.
that it is as idle as the former. For although it were true, says he, that
this Gloss were to be understood, as Widdrington would have it, yet it would
not follow thereon, that the same may be truly applied to all other Decrees of
the Church, which concern the imposition of temporal punishments (especially
to the Canon of the Council of Lateran, which ordains the deposition of
Princes) for this Gloss does treat only of such, as are subject to the
jurisdiction of Judges, and Secular Magistrates, whereas the Canon of the
Lateran Council speaks of absolute Princes, on whom no Secular Judge, or
Magistrate can execute any penalty, and therefore there is such disparitie in
these cases, that the Gloss objected by my Adversary Widdrington cannot be
justly applied to both alike.

3 But this Reply of Mr. Fitzherbert is as idle, and insufficient as his
former. For first, he supposes as certain, that the Council of Lateran
ordained the deposition of Emperors, Kings, and all absolute Princes, which,
as you have seen, he has not as yet, by all the helps he has had from Fa.
Lessius, sufficiently convinced. Secondly, if we respect the force, and
propriety of the words, these two Canons, especially the former, are,
according to Mr. Fitzherberts own grounds, rather to be understood of absolute
Princes then is the Decree of the Lateran Council, for that the words of these
Canons, especially of the former, are general, and do not denote titles of
inferior honor, or dignity: The Pope, says the Canon Hadrianus, did
excommunicate, and commanded, unless he should repent, his goods to be
proclaimed, or confiscated, whosoever should infringe this Decree, whereas the
Council of Lateran does not speak in such general terms, but only it
mentions persons of inferior state, dignity, and title, then are Emperors,
Kings, and absolute Princes, to wit, temporal and principal Landlords,
Governors, or Lords, or who have not any principal Landlords, Governors, or
Lords above them, but only Emperors, Kings, or absolute Princes: But the
truth is, that both the Decree of the Lateran Council, and these Canons do
not comprehend absolute Princes, but only inferior persons, and subjects.

4 Thirdly, if this exposition of the Gloss is to be approved, my Adversaries
can bring no sufficient reason, why the same may not also be applied to all
other such like Canons of the Church, wherein the inflicting of temporal
punishments is ordained, and especially to the Decree of the Lateran Council,
to wit, that all such Canons do only teach, or declare, what has been done,
or is to be done by Secular Princes, or their Officers. For, besides that the
reason, which here Mr. Fitzherbert brings, why the Decree of the Lateran
Council cannot be expounded in this sense, (because says he, the Canon of the
Lateran Council speaks of absolute Princes, is a mere prtitio principij, a
giving that for a reason, which is the maine question between us, and has not
as yet been sufficiently proved by him) the words of the Lateran Council,
according to their proper signification do chiefly import this sense. For the
Council does not decree, that the Pope may absolve those vassal from their
fidelity, but the words of the Council only are, that the Pope may denounce,
that is, may declare, or teach, that those vassalls are absolved from their
fidelity, to wit, by the consent, and authority of absolute Princes.

5 And if the Gloss, and diverse other Doctors, whom I related elsewhere;
expounding the Canon Alius, 15. q. 6. wherein Pope Gregory the 7th. in his
Epistle to the Bishop of Mentz, affirms, Xpolog. nu. 444.
that an other Bishop of Rome called Zachary deposed the King of France from
his kingdom, and absolved all the Frenchmen from their oath of allegiance,
do thus interpret those words, he deposed the King, and absolved the
Frenchmen, that is, he consented to them that deposed him, and declared him to
be lawfully deposed, and the Frenchmen to be lawfully absolved from their
allegiance, why may not this Canon of the Lateran Council be understood in
this sense, that from that time the Pope may denounce, that is declare, and
teach, that the vassalls of that temporal Landlord, Governor, or Lord, who,
for neglecting to purge his territories from heresy, is for a whole year
excommunicated, are absolved from their fealty, and their territories exposed
to be taken by Catholics, especially seeing that the word, denounce, or
declare is in this Canon expressly contained?

6 And if any one object, that the words of the Lateran Council cannot be well
understood in this sense, that the Pope may denounce, that is, may declare, and
teach, that the vassals are absolved from their fealty, to wit, by force of
some temporal law, or constitution, made by the consent and authority of
absolute Princes, for that before this Council of Lateran there was no such
decree or constitution of temporal Princes, by virtue whereof the vassals of
such a temporal Landlord, were absolved from their fealty, and therefore
those words of the Council are so to be understood, that the Pope may not
only declare and teach that they are absolved, but also really absolve such
vassals from their fealty. To this objection I answer, that albeit I have not
seen any such temporal law, or Constitution of any temporal Prince, before
it is was enacted by Frederike the second Emperor five years after this
Lateran Council, by virtue whereof such Vassalls are absolved from their
fealty, yet we find, that Pope Gregory the seventh, long before in the
Canon Nos Sanctorum 15. q. 6. did absolve them, who either by allegiance, or by
oath were obliged to excommunicated persons, from their oath of fidelity, to
which Canon those words of the Lateran Council, if they be understood in the
aforesaid sense, may have reference, but then we must consequently to our
doctrine say, that both this decree of the Lateran Council, forasmuch as it
concerns the inflicting of this temporal punishment, and also the Canon, Nos
sanctorum have only force to bind in the territories of the Church, or the
Popes Dominions, wherein he being a temporal Prince has authority to
inflict temporal punishments, or that they have force to bind by the consent,
and authority of temporal Princes.

7 Neither have I used any fraud in alleging and applying the words of the
Gloss to my purpose, as Mr. Fitzherbert untruly affirms: Besides that,
says he, pa. 166. nu. 3
my Adversary Widdrington has used no small fraud in the allegation, and
application of the Gloss to his purpose: for whereas he mentions the Gloss
upon two several decretalls, he sets down only the later, as though the
same might serve indifferently for both, and were so meant by the Glosser, or
that the two Decrees were both of one substance, and nature, as they are not,
but far different, and therefore do require a different consideration.

8 But it is not true, that in setting down the words of the later Gloss, to
wit, upon the Canon, Delatori, I have omitted the words of the former Gloss
upon the Canon Hadrianus, seeing that the words of both Glosses are in
substance all one, and have the same sense, and signification. For the words of
the later Gloss are these, Sed qualiter dat Papa etc. But how does the Pope
make laws concerning the punishment of blood, against that decree of the
Council of Toledo 23. q. 8. his a quibus? But here the Pope teaches what the
Secular Judge ought to do according to the Imperial law 27. q. 1. si quis
rapuerit. And the words of the former Gloss upon the Canon Hadrianus, where
the Pope commands the goods of all those who do violate his Decree to be
confiscated, are these: Hic Ecclesia publicat, etc. Here the Church does
confiscate the goods of Laymen, and sometimes she deposes Laymen from their
dignities 3^. q. 5. praeceptum in fine. Or else say, that here the Church
teaches what ought to be done: so 24. q. 3. de illicita, and 5. q. 6.
Delatori. Wherefore it is manifest that the words of both the Glosses have the
self same sense, seeing that for the understanding of the former Gloss, he
remitteth his Reader to the words of the later Gloss, upon the Canon
Delatori, which I did set down.

9 Neither did I intend to set down all the expositions, which were brought by
the former Gloss: It was sufficient for me to bring that exposition of the
Gloss, which served to my purpose, to wit, that as the Pope in the Canon
Delatori ordaining a temporal punishment, though criminal, did according to
the Gloss teach, and declare what ought to be done by the Secular Judge
according to the Imperial law, so also the Pope in the Canon Hadrianus
ordaining a temporal punishment, though civil, to wit, the confiscation of
goods, did also according to one exposition of the Gloss teach and declare
what ought to be done by the Secular Prince, or Judge: and that therefore the
same words, or answer of the Gloss upon the Canon Delatori, which I only set
down, to which he remitteth his Reader upon the Canon Hadrianus, might serve
indifferently for both And although civil, and bloody, or criminal
punishments, as criminal is opposed to Civil, and the decrees which ordain,
and inflict the same, are of a different substance, and nature in particular,
yet in general they are of the same substance, and nature, for that both of
them are temporal punishments, and cannot, according to the probable doctrine
of many learned Catholics, be inflicted by the spiritual, or Ecclesiastical,
but only by the civil, or temporal power; and that therefore when either of
them are inflicted by spiritual Pastors, this proceeds from the civil
authority, privileges, or consent of temporal Princes, or if we will needs
have such decrees to be made by true spiritual authority, the Church in
making such decrees, as well concerning civil, as criminal, or bloody
punishments, does according to the expositions of the Gloss before rehearsed,
teach, and declare, what a Secular Prince, or Judge ought to do.

10 But to the end, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 166. number. 4.
that the Reader may the better understand this matter, and the true sense, and
meaning of these two Glosses, it is to be considered first, that the Glosses
of the Law being commonly very brief (and therefore many times obscure) are to
be understood according to the drift, sense, and circumstances, not only of
the particular Canons glossed, but also of other Canons, and Glosses in other
parts, and places of the Law.

11 True it is, that when the Glosses, or expositions of the law are obscure,
as being commonly brief (although not so brief, and for this respect not so
obscure, as the law it self, for to little purpose were that Gloss, or
exposition, which is more obscure then the text it self) we must gather the
sense, and meaning of such Glosses from the drift, sense, and circumstances not
only of the particular Canons glossed, but also of other Canons and Glosses of
the same Expositour, or glosser, in other parts, and places of the law; but
with this caveat and prouiso, that if the same Glosser or Expositour bring two
diverse or contrary Expositions of the same Canon, which are grounded upon two
contrary opinions, we must have a regard to distinguish these two contrary
opinions, and the Glosses grounded thereon, and for the understanding of the
Gloss, or exposition, which supposes one opinion, not to fly to that Gloss,
which supposes the contrary doctrine and opinion, for otherwise we shall make
the sense and meaning of the Glosses to be more obscure, and intricate, then
plain, and manifest. As for example, if the same Glosser or Expositour give
two diverse expositions of the same Canon, whereof the one supposes the Pope to
have either direct, or indirect dominion in temporals, and to have authority
either directly, or indirectly, to dispose of temporals, and to inflict
temporal punishment, and the other Gloss supposes that he has no such
dominion or authority in temporals, for the understanding of that Gloss, which
supposes the Pope to have such a dominion or authority in temporals, we must
not fly to that other Gloss, which supposes that he has no such dominion
or authority.

Page 167. number. 5.
12 Secondly, says Mr. Fitzherbert, the penalties imposed in the two decrees
here glossed, are of different nature and quality, the one concerning only the
confiscation of goods, which is expressly ordained in diverse places of the law;
and the other touching only the effusion of blood by death, or mutilation,
which is no where ordained, or permitted, but expressly forbidden to all
Ecclesiastical Judges.

13 But first, although it be true that the penalties imposed in these two
Canons are of different nature, and quality in particular, for that the one
ordains a civil punishment, to wit, the confiscation of goods, the other a
criminal penalty, to wit, the effusion of blood by mutilation, and also
death, yet both of them are, as I said before, of the same nature, and quality
in general, for that both of them ordain temporal punishments, which cannot
be inflicted by spiritual Pastors, by that authority which they have received
from Christ, but only by the authority, privileges, and consent of temporal
Princes, who only have authority to inflict temporal punishments, as death,
exile, confiscation of goods, imprisonment, and such like. But with all this
difference is to be observed betwixt these two punishments, that although some
Ecclesiastical persons, as diverse Bishops of Germany, being temporal Princes,
have authority to inflict both kind of punishments, and to hang and draw, as
our English proverb says, within their temporal Dominions, yet
Ecclesiastical leuitie, as Saint Leo says, does shun these bloody
punishments, and the Canons of the Church do forbid Cleargie-men to use the
same and to pronounce the sentence of death against any malefactor whatsoever,
immediately by themselves, but only by their Officers. Nevertheless, seeing
that these Ecclesiastical persons have by the grant of temporal Princes
authority, as we say, to hang and draw, and what their Officers, or Ministers
do in this case, they do it by their authority, the aforesaid prohibition of
the Church does not take away, or deprive them of their authority and
jurisdiction, but does only forbid them to execute the same by themselves
immediately, but only by their Ministers. So that if a Cleargie-man, who is a
temporal Prince, as are the Bishops of Collen, and Ments should,
notwithstanding the prohibition of the Church, pronounce the sentence of death
against any malefactor, who deserves the same, although he should offend
against the prohibition of the Church, yet he should not offend against
justice, usurping the power which he has not, and by doing that which for want
of temporal jurisdiction he has no authority to do, in that manner as an
other man, who having no temporal jurisdiction, and condemning one to death,
should offend.

14 Secondly therefore, although I do not deny, that the confiscation of goods
is expressly ordained in diverse places of the Canon law, as also the effusion of
blood by mutilation, and death is expressly ordained in this Canon, howsoever my
Adversary very boldly says, that the effusion of blood by mutilation, or death
is no way ordained therein, yet if we distinguish ordaining from commanding or
imposing (because I have ever granted, that spiritual Pastors have authority
to command, impose, and enjoin, but not to inflict temporal punishments) all
such Canons wherein temporal punishments are inflicted, are either an
approbation of the Imperial law, or a teaching and declaring what ought to be
done by the Secular Prince, or Judge, as the Gloss expounds both this Canon,
Delatori, wherein the effusion of blood by death and mutilation is decreed, and
also the Canon Hadrianus, wherein only the confiscation of goods is ordained,
or they were made and had force to bind by the consent of temporal Princes,
as other Doctors, according to Hostiensis, Ioannes Andreas, and Pope Innocent
interpret that so often urged Canon, Ad abolendam, wherein Earls, Barons,
Governors, and Consuls of Cities, and other places, if they neglect to help
the Church against heretics, are deprived of their honor.

15 Nevertheless these Canons, wherein temporal punishments are ordained, for
that they are made by sacred, spiritual, or Ecclesiastical persons, though
not by sacred, spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, but by temporal and civil
authority, granted them by the privileges, gift, or consent of temporal
Princes, may be called sacred, Ecclesiastical, and Apostolical Canons, Gerson
de potest. Eccles. consider. 4.
according to that which I. Gerson writes that there are some of opinion that
Excommunication is the last punishment which the Ecclesiastical power of
Jurisdiction by the first institution of Christ can inflict, so that it is not
extended to imprisonment, nor that any man be adjudged to death, or corporal
whipping, but when the Ecclesiastical Judge does this, he does it by the grant
of Princes, as the Clergy by the devotion of Princes, has received great
authority of temporal Jurisdiction, which jurisdiction, or censure is
nevertheless called spiritual, as also the temporal goods of Ecclesiastical
persons are called spiritual, because they are dedicated and applied to them
who serve the Church, as also the breads of proposition the first fruits, the
tithes, also the vessels of the Temple, the Vestments and such like, were in
the old law called sacred, or holy, so also the new law does observe the same.
Thus Gerson.

16 Thirdly, the Gloss it self does teach, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 167.
number. 6. Glossa in verb. publicat.
, that by the former decree the Church does ordain the confiscation of goods,
and deposition from dignities saying; Hic Ecclesia publicat bona Laicorum, and
quandoque deponit a dignitatibus: Here the Church does confiscate the goods of
Laymen, and sometimes deposes from dignities. Thus says the Gloss here,
which Widdrington wholly dissembleth, because it makes flatly against him, and
he takes hold, as it seems of the words immediately following, though he do
not allege them; the words are, Vel dic, etc. Or say, that the Church teaches
here what ought to be done. Wherein it cannot be with reason imagined, that the
Gloss contradicts the former interpretation, seeing that it teaches also in
many other places that the Church may, and does use to impose temporal
penalties by confiscation of goods, imprisonment, infamy, and banishment, as
it may be seen in the Glosses, Lib. Detret. cap. Licet. tit. de Paenis.
upon 17. q. 4. Attendendum est, 16. q. 1. Statuimus, 27. q. 4. Quisquis, and
upon the Decree, Licet. tit. de poenis, where the Gloss affirms expressly,
that if the Law do ordain only a spiritual punishment, or a corporal, the
Judge cannot change it into another, except he can dispense in the crime
committed; and that when the Law determines nothing concerning the penalty of
the crime, it is left to the will of the Judge, whether he will impose a
pecuniarie penalty or any other; and lastly, when the Judge can dispense
touching the crime, he may inflict a penalty of, or some other. Thus says the
Gloss.

17 But first, it is not true, as you have seen above, that I either omitted
to allege the second answer of the Gloss upon the Canon Hadrianus, seeing
that it is all one with that, which I did allege upon the Canon Delatori, to
which the Gloss remitteth himself for his second answer, or that I
dissembled the first answer of the Gloss, which teaches, that the Church
does ordain the confiscation of goods, seeing that I only intended to bring
there, those answers of the Gloss which made for my doctrine, and not those
which made against it, as if a man intend only to set down Authors, who
favor any one opinion, may without any dissimulation omit to relate those
Authors, who are against it.

18 Secondly, is it possible, that Mr. Fitzherbert can be so ignorant, as to
conceive, that the Gloss does then contradict it self, when it brings two
diverse expositions of one text or Canon, which suppose two contrary opinions
of Doctors, and whereof the one contradicts the other? Will he say, Bell.
l. 2. de Romans ^ont. cap. 29.
that Cardinal Bellarmine contradicts himself when to that text of holy
Scripture John 19. Thou should not have any power against me, unless it
were given thee from above, brings two answers, or expositions, whereof the
one contradicts the other; the first of Saint Cyrill, and Saint Chrysostom,
that our Savior did not speak in that place of true power of Jurisdiction,
but only of divine permission, and the other of S. Augustine, and S. Bernard,
that Christ spoke there of true power of Jurisdiction: and likewise, when to
that text, I appeal to Caesar Act. 25. he answers first, that Saint Paul
did appeal to Caesar de facto, but not de iure; and secondly that he did
appeal to him both de facto, and de iure: or when in the same place to another
objection he gives two answers, whereof the one contradicts the other, the
first is, that in the old law the kingdom was above the Priesthood, and the
second, that the Priesthood was above the kingdom.

19 For this is a most usual thing, for the same Author to bring to the same
Canon, text, or objection two contrary answers, when they are grounded upon
two contrary opinions, whereof both are taught, and maintained by learned men.
Wherefore Ioannes Teutonicus the Glosser of this Canon, Hadrianus, may without
any contradiction bring two contrary expositions of this Canon, when they are
grounded upon the doctrine of learned men, whose opinions in that point are one
contrary to the other: As the first gloss of this Canon, Hadrianus, seems
to follow the doctrine of those, who hold, that the Ecclesiastical power can
by the institution of Christ inflict temporal punishments; and the second of
those, who hold the contrary, to wit, that it can only command, impose, or
enjoin temporal penalties, and teach, or declare what a temporal Prince, or
Judge ought to do, and compel them also to do their duties, but not by
inflicting temporal punishments but only spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
Censures: and in like manner Hostiensis, Ioannes Andreas, and Pope Innocent
before cited brought two contrary expositions of the same Canon, Ad abolendam,
which were grounded upon these two contrary opinions touching the Popes power
to deprive Laymen of their temporal honor.

20 But the reason of Mr. Fitzherberts error is, for that he, silly man,
seems to be ignorant, how according to the rules of Logike modall
propositions are contradictorie one to the other: for to make them
contradictorie, the contradiction must be in the modus, and not in the dictum:
as these two propositions are not contradictorie, for that both them may be
together true, It is the opinion of learned men, that our Saviors words to
Pilate, Thou should not, etc. are to be understood of true power of
jurisdiction, for so teaches Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard: and, It is
the opinion of learned men, that they are not to be understood of true power
of Jurisdiction, but only of divine permission, for so Saint Cyrill, and Saint
Chrysostom do affirm: but to make them contradictorie, the contradiction
must be in the modus, as thus; It is the opinion of learned men, that those
words of our Savior are to be understood of true power of Jurisdiction, and,
It is not the opinion of learned men, that they are to be understood of true
power of Jurisdiction, for these two propositions cannot be both true, but if
the one be true, the other must of necessity be false, and contrariwise.
Seeing therefore that the Gloss here upon the Canon Hadrianus did not intend
to bring only those expositions of this Canon, which were certain and out of
controversy, but which were agreeable to the doctrine, and opinions of learned
men, although the first Gloss were contradictorie to the second in the dictum,
yet because they are not contradictorie in the modus, for that both of them are
approved by learned men, the Glosser cannot be truly said to contradict
himself in bringing these two contrary Glosses of the same words, both which
learned Authors do maintain.

21 But thirdly, neither can Mr. Fitzherbert sufficiently prove, that the
former Gloss makes flat against me, and contradicts the second so much as
in the dictum. For albeit the express words of the former Gloss are these,
Here the Church does confiscate the goods of Laymen, and sometimes deposes
them from dignities: Yet these words, confiscate, and depose, may very well be
understood as the same Gloss expounds the word depose, upon the Canon, Alius
15. q. 6. where it is written, that Pope Zachary did depose the King of
France; for after the Gloss had brought arguments pro, and contra, for, and
against the Popes power to depose the Emperor, at the last he answers thus,
He is said to have deposed the King, who consented to them that deposed him,
or, which in sense is all one, as others expound, who taught, or declared, that
he might be deposed: And according to this exposition the later Gloss does
not contradict the former, but is rather an explication thereof. For it is all
one in sense, to say, that the Church does confiscate the goods of Laymen,
and sometimes deposes them from dignities, to wit, by consenting to them who
do depose, and confiscate, or, which is all one, by teaching and declaring,
that they ought to be deposed, and their goods confiscated, which is the
former Gloss, and to say, that the Church does teach, or declare, what ought
to be done by the Secular Prince, or Judge concerning the deposing of Laymen,
and confiscating their goods, which is the later Gloss, and, as you have
seen, all one in sense with the former.

22 Besides, the former of these two glosses here does only teach, that the
Church does confiscate the goods of Laymen, and sometimes deposes them from
dignities, which I never denied, but that the Church does confiscate the goods
of Lay men, and deposes them from dignities, by that spiritual power which
she has received from Christ, and not only from that temporal authority,
wherewith she is endued by the grant, and consent of temporal Princes, this
the former Gloss, which my Adversary untruly says to be flat against me,
does not teach in this place, but rather the flat contrary: seeing that for
proof of the aforesaid assertion the Gloss alleges the Canon, Praeceptum.
32. q. 5. which Canon is a decree of the 12. Council of Toledo in Spain,
which was gathered by the command of King Eringius, who confirmed that Decree,
and whereat not only the Bishops of Spain, but also the King, and the
Officers of the Kings Palace were present; and the King himself in his speech
to the Council did conjure not only the Bishops, but also the Officers of his
Palace to examine, and approve the things, which were there propounded;
whereupon not only the Bishops, but also 15. Noblemen of the Kings Palace do
subscribe their names to the decrees of that Council. See Binnius tom. ^
Council. in Conc. Tolet. 12
And the Gloss it self expounding those words of this Canon, Praeceptum, ipsi
sesuis meritis and a Palatinae dignitatis officio separabunt It is an argument,
says the Gloss, that if any man contemn Excommunication, the Secular Judge,
or his Landlord has power to deprive him of his feude, or farm.

23 Neither from any decree of the Canon law, or from any gloss, or exposition
of Ioannes Teutonicus, who glossed these decrees collected by Gratian, can it
be certainly gathered, that the Church by her spiritual power which she
received from Christ, but only by the grant and authority of temporal
Princes, may inflict temporal punishments, for of her power to inflict
spiritual censures, and also to command, impose, or enjoin temporal
penalties, there is no controversy between my Adversaries and me. Neither
also from any of those four glosses here cited by Mr. Fitzherbert, to wit,
either upon the Canon Attedendum, which Canon as I showed above, is falsely
attributed to Pope Vrbanus the second, and by all probability the whole Canon
Attendendu^, is forged, and by some one or other inserted into that decretall
Epistle, which goes under the name of Pope Vrbanus, or upon the Canon,
Statuimus, or Quisquis, or Licet, de poenis, (which last Canon, Licet, is not
glossed by Ioannes Teutonicus, whose authority I brought upon the Canon,
Hadrianus, who expounded only the Decrees collected by Gratian, and not the
Decretals) can it be forcibly concluded, that the Church, that is, the
spiritual Pastors of the Church may, without the authority and consent of
temporal Princes, inflict temporal punishments: yea, the first Gloss upon
the Canon Licet, de poenis, here cited by my Adversary, does clearly favor my
doctrine. For demanding why Archdeacons do exact of Laymen, a pecuniary
penalty, as it is mentioned in that Canon, he answers, because perhaps they
were under their temporal Jurisdiction, or they have this by custom.

24 Neither from the practice of the Church which Mr. Fitzherbert does so
inculcate can any thing be convinced against this my doctrine; And hereof,
says he Page 168. number 7.
, the practice is, and has always been most manifest in the Church, and
acknowledged by the Canonists, to be grounded on the Canons, (as partly has
appeared already, and shall appear further Infra nu. 12. 13. 14. 15. and seq.
after a while) and therefore I say that those Glosses objected by Widdrington
must either be so understood, that they may agree the one with the other, and
with the Glosses of other Canons, yea with the general opinion and doctrine of
the Canonists, and with the whole course and practice of the Canon Law, or else
they are to be rejected as absurd, erroneous, and false.

25 But although it be true, that for many hundreds of years since that
Christian Princes have indewed the Church with great power of civil
Jurisdiction, the practice of the Church has been to inflict pecuniarie
mulcts, yet it is not true that it was the practice of the primitive Church to
inflict, but only to command, impose, or enjoin temporal penalties, and this
only can be proved by any authentical Canon, as I have showed above by
answering all the Canons which my Adversary has alleged. And although also
since the time of Pope Gregory the 7. who was the first Pope that began to
challenge to himself authority as due to him by the institution of Christ, to
inflict temporal punishments, to dispose of all temporals, and to depose
temporal Princes, diverse Popes, and other learned men have with might, and
maine by favors and threatenings labored to maintain, and advance this
doctrine, and practice, for which cause it is no marvel, as I have elsewhere
observed, Apol. nu. 449.
that their opinion has been the more common, and general in Schools, yet
for that it has been ever contradicted by Christian Princes, and learned
Catholics, for which cause Ioannes Azorius a learned Jesuit expressly says,
Azor. tom. 2. lib. 12. ca. 5. q. 8.
that it has ever been a great controversy betwixt Emperors, and Kings on
the one side, and the Bishops of Rome on the other, whether the Pope in
certain cases has right and authority to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms,
and about this the Schoolmen are at variance, and as yet the controversy,
says Trithemius In Chro. monast. Hirsang. an. 1106.
, is not decided by the Judge, and very many Doctors, as Almaine affirms,
do deny that the Ecclesiastical power can by the institution of Christ
inflict any temporal punishment, as death, exile, privation of goods,
imprisonment, De Dominio nature. ciuit. and Eccles. conclus. 2 and in probatione
illius.
but only spiritual censures: It cannot, I say, be truly called the general
doctrine and practice of the Church, neither are those Glosses and expositions
of those Canonists, who favor this doctrine, sufficient to decide the
controversy, neither can the other Glosses, and expositions, which are
grounded upon the contrary doctrine, and contradict the former glosses, without
gross temeritie be rejected as erroneous, absurd, and false.

26 And truly in my opinion it is greatly to be maruailed, and worthy also the
observation, that albeit for so many hundreds of years both Popes, and other
Clergy men have so earnestly labored to maintain and advance this doctrine
and practice of Pope Gregory the seventh, touching the Popes authority to
depose Princes, and to dispose of temporalls, which nevertheless Sigebert did
not fear to call a nouelty, Sigebert. ad annum 1088.
not to say, an heresy, yet considering the great opposition, which this
doctrine and practice has ever had, by reason whereof it was behoouing to have
the matter made clear, and out of controversy, yet, I say, there cannot be
found any one Canon, constitution, or definition either of Pope, or Council,
general, or Provincial, wherein it is plainly decreed, that the Pope, or
Church, has by the institution of Christ, authority to depose temporal
Princes, to dispose of temporalls, or to inflict temporal punishments; but the
certainty of this doctrine must chiefly be grounded upon the facts of Popes,
which how weak a ground it is to prove a true right, and authority, any man
of judgment may plainly see, and I have also showed elsewhere Apol. nu. 444
and seq.
.

27 Now then, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 168. number. 8.
, seeing that the Glosser acknowledges in his former gloss, that the Church
does by the Canon, ordain the confiscation of Laymens goods, and deprivation
of their dignities (which is also confirmed by diverse other Canons and glosses,
and the practice of the Church) it cannot, as I have said, be imagined, that
he meant to contradict it, by that, which follows either in the same gloss,
or in the other upon the Canon, Delatori.

28 But this has been at large already answered, and first, that albeit the
former gloss does acknowledge, that the Church does by this Canon ordain the
confiscation of Laymens goods, and deprivation of their dignities, which is
also confirmed by the practice of the Church, yet the former gloss does not
acknowledge, that the Church does ordain this by that authority, which she
has received from Christ, and not from the grant, and privileges of Christian
Princes, whereof only we now dispute. Secondly, that those words of the
former gloss, confiscate, and depose, may well be understood in that sense,
wherein the same Glosser expounds the word depose, in the Canon, Alius 15. q.
6. and so, as I showed before, the later gloss does not contradict the former,
but it is rather an explication thereof: and thirdly, that albeit we should
grant, that the later gloss, or exposition is repugnant to the former, yet it
is no absurdity for the same Glosser, or Expositour to bring two contrary
glosses, or expositions, when they are grounded upon the contrary opinions of
learned Authors, which may without any error, or absurdity be followed, as I
declared above by diverse examples.

29 And therefore we must distinguish, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 169. nu. 8.
betwixt the Canon, and the execution thereof, and say, that when he affirms
in the former Gloss, that the Church teaches there what ought to be done,
and again in the later, that the Church teaches what the Secular Judge ought
to do, he speaks only (as the very words import) of the execution of these
two Canons, giving also to understand, that the execution of penal laws does
belong sometimes to the Secular Judge, and not to the Ecclesiastical,
especially in cases touching life and death, or effusion of blood; albeit in
many other cases the Ecclesiastical Judge may not only ordain, but also
execute pecuniary and other temporal penalties, in which respect the Council
of Trent (which my Adversary Widdrington, if he be a Catholic, as he
pretends to be, must needs admit for a lawful Council) decrees, that
Ecclesiastical Judges shall abstain from Censures, when they may by their
own authority proceed against the delinquents by real or personal execution.
So as I will conclude, that these glosses, which Widdrington alleges, either
do make nothing against us, or if they do, they do manifestly contradict as
well themselves, as other Glosses, and many express Canons, and the doctrine
of all learned Canonists, yea the whole course and continual practice of the
Canon law.

30 But first, as no man makes doubt, but that we must distinguish betwixt
Canons, or laws, and the execution thereof, so also no doubt can be made, but
that the Prince, or Lawmakers either spiritual or temporal, who has
authority to make the Canon, or law, has also authority to execute the same,
for that the executioner of the law is a mere Minister, and Officer of the
Prince, who enacted the law: and what he does, he does not by his own
authority, but by the authority committed to him by the Prince: and therefore
whatsoever a Prince either spiritual, or temporal has authority to execute
by his Minister, or Officer, he has also authority to execute by himself.
Wherefore seeing that the Glosser does expound these Canons alike, as it may
appear by this, that in the second Gloss upon the Canon, Hadrianus he
remitteth the Reader to the Canon, Delatori, signifying thereby, that both the
Canon, Hadrianus, which ordains the confiscation of goods, and also the
Canon, Delatori, wherein the effusion of blood by mutilation and death is
ordained, are to be understood in the same sense, if the meaning of the Gloss
upon the Canon, Delatori, was only to teach, that an Ecclesiastical Judge
could not execute that Decree, which ordains the effusion of blood, but it
must be executed by a Secular Judge, his meaning also was in the Canon,
Hadrianus to teach, that an Ecclesiastical Judge cannot also execute that
decree, which ordains the confiscation of goods, which no man of learning can
affirm, for that Ecclesiastical persons are not by the Canons of the Church
forbidden to execute decrees, which ordain the confiscation of goods, but
only those decrees, which ordain the effusion of blood, albeit by the grant,
and privileges of temporal Princes they may have authority to execute the
one, and the other.

31 Whereby secondly it is apparent, that the Gloss affirming, that the Church
in both those Canons does teach what a Secular Judge ought to do, did not
intend to speak only of the execution of those Canons, for that also a
Secular Judge, whose office is to give sentence, and to declare the meaning of
the law in this particular case, or crime, is not properly an Executioner of
the law, because after his sentence, the law may still remain not executed,
but also of the Decrees and Canons themselves, and of the authority, which the
Church has to make such Canons, and to teach, that the Church by her proper
spiritual power, which she has received from Christ, has not authority to
make Decrees, which ordain the inflicting of temporal punishments whatsoever,
whether they be criminal, or only civil, for that the making of such
Decrees belong only to the Civil, and not to the Ecclesiastical power, which
according to the doctrine of very many Doctors, whom the Glosser in the
aforesaid Glosses does follow, is not extended to the inflicting of temporal
punishments, but only of Ecclesiastical Censures, albeit by that civil power
and jurisdiction, which spiritual Pastors have received by the grant of
Secular Princes (which their civil power and jurisdiction may be also called
sacred, Ecclesiastical, and their own power) they have authority to inflict
as well criminal, as civil punishments, notwithstanding the Church has
forbid them to meddle with the effusion of blood. And this temporal and civil
authority and jurisdiction of spiritual Pastors, which the prohibition of
the Church, as I said before, does not take away, the Council of Trent calls
their own authority, although they have received it not from the institution
of Christ, but from the grant of Secular Princes, in that manner as the
temporal goods of Churchmen are called sacred, Ecclesiastical, and their
own proper goods, as I declared a little above out of Gerson.

32 So as I will conclude, that these two Glosses, which I have here alleged
do greatly favor my doctrine, concerning the uncertainty of the Popes power,
to inflict by the institution of Christ temporal punishments, and do no way
contradict the course and practice of the Church, or any Canon thereof, and
that albeit they were repugnant to themselves, as also according to a probable
exposition of the same Glosser, I have showed they are not, yet this were
nothing to the purpose, seeing that they are grounded upon two contrary
opinions taught, and maintained by learned Catholics: although I will not
deny, that they are repugnant to many other Glosses, and to the more common
opinion of the Canonists, who make the Pope a temporal Monarch of the whole
Christian world, and to have dominion and authority in temporalls not only
directly, but also indirectly: And therefore the common doctrine of the
Canonists (who, as Pope Pius the fifth See Nauar. in c. No^ liceat 12. q. 2..
tertio nu. 6
did freely acknowledge, do attribute more authority to the Pope then is fit)
in points concerning the Popes authority, especially when they are therein
contradicted by other learned Catholics, is but a very weak ground to build
any infallible doctrine, or point of faith thereon.

33 Besides that it is to be considered, Page 169. nu. 9. 10
says Mr. Fitzherbert, that it little imports for our question, whether the
Church can execute temporal penalties, seeing it has the power and authority
not only to inflict them, but also to force the Secular Magistrate to execute
them, which shall appear further Infra nu 11 and 15.
after a while, and is not contradicted by the Gloss objected by Widdrington,
except only concerning the imposition of bloody penalties, which indeed the
said Gloss does exclude by an express Canon, as we also do in this
question, affirming only, as I have said before, that the Church may in some
cases both ordain and execute certain corporal, and temporal penalties,
without the effusion of blood by mutilation or death. And this is so manifest
in the Canon law, that truly a man may wonder with what face Widdrington can
seek by some piece of an obscure Gloss to overthrow the clear, and manifest
sense of the law it self, and the evident and ancient practice of the Church,
which he knows in his conscience to be grounded upon the Ecclesiastical
Canons; but hereby we may see, that his intent is no other, but to patch up
his pretended probability with shifts and shows of whatsoever he can wring,
and wrest to his purpose.

34 But truly I cannot but marvel, with what face this man dare so boldly
affirm, that it little imports for our question, whether the Church can
execute temporal penalties, or no, yet granting, as you see he does, that the
Church has power and authority to inflict them (for of the power of the Church
to compel or force by Ecclesiastical Censures the Secular Magistrate we do
not now dispute) seeing that authority to inflict temporal penalties, and to
execute them, are either all one, or, if we will distinguish them by taking
authority to inflict them, for authority to make laws to inflict them, the
former does necessarily infer the later. For what man even of mean learning,
or understanding can be so ignorant, as to imagine, that every Prince either
spiritual, or temporal, who has supreme authority to inflict any penalties,
has not authority also to execute the same. Neither can it be denied, but
that the Pope, and also other Bishops of Germany, who are both spiritual
Pastors, and also temporal Princes, have authority to ordain, inflict, and
execute, not only certain corporal, and temporal penalties, without the
effusion of blood, as is the confiscation of goods, but all corporal and
temporal penalties, even with effusion of blood by mutilation, and death. For
although they are forbidden by express Canons of the Church, not to concur
to the effusion of blood, yet this prohibition does not deprive them of any
jot of their temporal authority, which they did not receive from the Church,
but from the grant of temporal Princes; insomuch that if contrary to the
Canons of the Church they should pronounce the sentence of death, yea and
execute the same upon any malefactor that deserves death according to the
law, they should not offend against justice, for usurping that civil
authority, which they have not, in that manner as another private man, who
has no temporal authority should offend, but against Religion, for not
obeying the just commandment of their supreme spiritual Superior.

35 And this is so manifest in the known principles of Moral Philosophy, of
School Divinity, of the Canon, and Civil law, and in the practice of the
whole Christian world, that no man of any learning can with any face deny the
same. But this is the usual trick of my Adversary to blind his Readers
understanding with the obscurity of general words, not distinguishing the
true state of the question, and then crying out against me, that I deny the
Decrees of General Counsels, the Ecclesiastiall Canuos, and the practice of
the Church, which is a mere fiction of his own brain: For all the Canons of
the holy Church I do embrace with all dutiful respect, but I do not
understand them always in that sense, as he, and others of his opinion do
expound them; and I do willingly grant, that the practice of the Church, since
she has been endewed by Christian Princes with many temporal privileges of
Civil Jurisdiction, has been to inflict, and execute certain temporal
penalties without effusion of blood by death, or mutilation, but that which I
contend is, that it cannot be sufficiently proved by any Canon, or practice of
the Church, that spiritual Pastors do ordain, inflict, or execute such
temporal penalties by their spiritual authority, which they have received
from Christ, but only by their civil and temporal power, which has been
granted them by the free gift, and liberality of temporal Princes. And thus
much concerning these two Glosses of Ioannes Teutonicus, upon the Canon,
Hadrianus, and Delatori, which without any wringing or wresting of their words,
or meaning, I have showed to make clear for my purpose.

36 The second principal exception, which M. Fitzherbert takes against me in
this my second answer to the objection, which I propounded, is for adding
immediately certain words out of Siluester, as favoring my aforesaid answer.
Also Siluesters words, said I, do favor this answer, who writes thus:
Ioannes Andreas following Hostiensis, is of opinion, that a Bishop cannot
impose a pecuniarie penalty upon a Layman, that is not temporally subject
unto him but that he ought to make it to be inflicted by the Secular Judge.

37 Against this Mr. Fitzherbert obiecteth, Page 170. nu. 12. and seq.
that Widdrington has dissembled that, which immediately follows in
Siluester, to the end that his Reader may suppose, that not only Hostiensis,
and Ioannes Andreas, but also Siluester was of that opinion; whereas Siluester
having said, that which Widdrington obiecteth, adds presently, sed hoc non
placet Panormitano, but this doctrine does not please Panormitan, because when
the case is such, that the Judge does challenge jurisdiction over a Layman,
there appears no reason, why he cannot in the foresaid cases impose upon him
a pecuniarie penalty, as it may be seen in cap. Statuimus 16. q. 1. and 27.
q. 4. cap. Quisquis. Thus says Siluester alleging Panormitans words, and the
Canons, by the which he proves, that a Bishop may impose a pecuniarie
penalty upon a Layman, that is not temporally subject unto him; which Canons
are indeed very clear for that point, especially cap. Quisquis 27. q. 4.
Where it is ordained, that a sacrilegious person shall pay thirty pounds of
silver to the Bishop, or Abbot, or any Ecclesiastical Judge, to whom the
knowledge of the cause shall appertain, as it may appear both by the Canon,
and the Gloss. Besides that, Panormitan, Panorm. vbi supra.
(whom Siluester cites) teaches expressly, that when the Bishop proceeds
iuridically and no certain penalty is ordained by the Law, he may impose a
penalty of money, though he cannot do it, when the Law ordains expressly an
other, except it be for a crime, wherein he has power to dispense for then he
may inflict a pecuniarie penalty, though some other be assigned by the Law, as
I have also showed before Supra. nu. 6.
out of the Gloss in cap. Licet, tit. de poenis.

38 This being then Panomitans doctrine approved by Siluester (who follows
him altogether in this question) it appears that Widdrington might have
easily seen, if it had pleased him, that Siluester does not any way favor his
opinion, nor impugn our doctrine concerning the Popes power to dispose of
temporal things in order to spiritual, which is the principal question
controuersed betwixt us. You have heard before, Chap. 11. nu. 3.
that Hostiensis expressly teaches, that the Pope has power to depose Princes,
and Siluester does the like, being also both of them of the number of the
Canonists, who teach, Hostiens. in cap. Quod super his de voto, and voti
redempt. Siluest. in Sum. verbo Papa nu. 1. 11. and 12.
that the Pope has a direct Dominion over temporal things, no less then over
spiritual, and therefore it is evident, that they cannot any way make for my
Adversary Widdrington.

39 But it is untrue, that I either dissembled, or omitted that which
immediately follows in Siluester, to the end that the Reader may suppose,
that not only Hostiensis, and Ioannes Andreas, but also Siluester was of that
opinion; but the reason why I omitted that, which immediately follows in
Siluester, to wit, Sed hoc non placet Panormitano, but this pleases not
Panormitan, was, for that it did nothing import our question to know of what
opinion either Panormitan, or also Siluester himself were concerning that
point; for that which I intended to prove out of Siluesters words was this,
that it is no undoubted point of faith, but only an opinion, according to
Siluester, that Bishops can inflict a pecuniarie penalty upon a Layman, that
is not temporally subject unto them, and the words of Siluester do
sufficiently show, that it is only an opinion among the Canonists: and
therefore that either Panormitan, or Siluester, or any other Canonist be of the
contrary opinion, it is nothing to the purpose. Neither does the Canon,
Statuimus, or Quisquis cited by Panormitan, and Siluester make against my
doctrine, foc they do only show that a spiritual Judge may inflict a
pecuniarie mulct, but that he may inflict it by his spiritual authority, and
consequently upon Laymen that are not temporally subject unto him without the
consent of their temporal Prince, they do not show: and the Canon, Quisquis,
which Mr. Fitzherbert thinks to be so clear in this point, is taken out of
an Epistle of Pope John the eight, wherein he commanded, that the decrees of a
Council called Trecense which was approved by authority of Lewis the
Emperor, should be observed: and the first Gloss upon the Canon Licet, tit.
de poenis, does expressly favor my doctrine, as I have signified before.

40 And albeit both Hostiensis, and Siluester be themselves of opinion, that
the Pope is by the institution of Christ a temporal Monarch of the whole
Christian world, and has direct dominion, not only in spiritualls, but also
in temporalls, and consequently that he may inflict temporal punishments,
dispose of all temporalls, and depose temporal Princes, for that all
Christians both Princes, and subjects are according to their opinion, subject
to him directly in temporalls, and so in this point they make nothing for my
doctrine, yet they make greatly for my doctrine in this, that by their answers
it may be plainly gathered, that they hold it only for an opinion, as at this
present I contend it only to be, and that other Authors do not agree with
them therein, as to the answer of Hostiensis to the Canon, Ad abolendam, I
have showed before, and also by this answer of Siluester you may see more
clearly beneath, in this, I say, it is evident, that they greatly make for my
doctrine.

41 Besides that, it little imports, says Mr. Fitzher. Page 172. nu. 15. 16.
17.
whether the Bishop may according to the Canons impose a temporal penalty
upon such Laymen, as are not his temporal subjects, seeing he may by the
opinion of those three, whom my Adversary Widdrington alleges make it to be
inflicted by the Secular Judge, or Magistrate, in which case it is done by the
Bishops authority, and the Secular Magistrate is but his instrument, and
Minister to execute his will. Furthermore, put the case, that the Bishop could
not impose a pecuniarie penalty upon a Layman, that is not his temporal
subject, will Widdrington conclude thereupon, that therefore the Pope may not
do it? Will he be so absurd to restrain the supreme jurisdiction of the Pope
to the inferior power of a Bishop? as well might he say, that a King can do
no more in like case, then an inferior temporal Magistrate; and that because
the Judge cannot pardon a person condemned, therefore the King cannot do it;
who knows not that the Church has prescribed to her Magistrates certain
limits for the exercise of their authority, and jurisdiction, allowing to some
more, and to some less, which they cannot exceed? Therefore it were absurd to
say, that a Bishop cannot excommunicate, because a Parish Priest cannot do it;
But much more absurd, and ridiculous it is to say, that the Pope (who has
plenitudinem potestatis) cannot dispose of temporal things in some cases,
because a Bishop cannot impose a pecuniarie penalty up- a Lay man, that is not
his temporal subject, as Widdrinton seems to argue, for otherwise his
objection concerning the Bishops power is to no purpose. So as you see upon
what probabilities he grounded his doctrine, being found to be either
fraudulent, or impertinent in every thing that he undertakes to answer or
object as you shall also further see by that, which yet follows for the
confirmation of his pretended answer.

42 But Mr. Fitzherbert seeks still to blind his Readers understanding with a
confuse ambiguitie of equivocal words. For although it little imports,
whether a Bishop may inflict a pecuniarie penalty upon a Layman that is not
his temporal subject, or make it to be inflicted by the Secular Judge by
forcing the Judge thereunto, not only by spiritual, but also by temporal
compulsion, or coercion, seeing that in this case it is done by the Bishops
authority, and the Seculiar Judge is but his instrument, and Minister to
execute his will, yet that a Bishop may only make a pecuniarie penalty to be
inflicted by a Seculiar Judge by forcing him thereunto by Ecclesiastical
Censures, and not by temporal compulsion, this does very much import, and
altogether favor my doctrine. For I do not now contend about the
Ecclesiastical power, as by the institution of Christ it is directive, or,
which is all one, commanding, imposing, or inioyning, for I do not deny, as
I have often said, that spiritual Pastors may by their spiritual authority
command, impose, and inioyne temporal Princes to make temporal laws, as
Saint Ambrose did the Emperor Theodosius, and to inflict temporal punishments
in order to spiritual good, in which case those laws are not made, nor those
temporal penalties are inflicted by the authority of spiritual Pastors, as
though temporal Princes were only their instruments, and Ministers to execute
their wills, as inferior Magistrates are only instruments and Ministers to
execute the will of the Prince, but I do now only contend about the
Ecclesiastical power, as it is coerciue, or punishing, and I utterly deny,
that it is a certain, and undoubted point of faith, that the spiritual
coerciue power of the Church does extend to the inflicting of temporal
punishments, but only of Ecclesiastical Censures.

43 Secondly that fraud and impertinencie, which Mr. Fitzherbert does untruly
attribute to my answers and objections, I have clearly showed to be found in
every one of his Replies. And as touching that absurdity which he now
obiecteth against my answer, it is clear, that the maine question betwixt my
Adversaries and me, is not concerning the power, which either the Pope, or
inferior Bishops have by the grant, consent and authority of temporal
Princes, I do not say, to command, impose, or inioyne, but to inflict
temporal penalties upon Laymen, who are not their temporal subjects, but
whether any spiritual Pastor, whether he be an inferior Bishop, or also the
Pope himself has by the institution of Christ authority to inflict such
temporal penalties. And indeed my purpose is to conclude, that because it is
probable that an inferior Bishop has no such authority by the institution of
Christ and iure diuino, therefore it is also probable, that the Pope iure
diuino, and by the institution of Christ has no such authority: and upon what
probability this my consequence is grounded, and how absurdly Mr. Fitzherbert
condemns it of ridiculous absurdity, you shall forthwith perceive.

Bell. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. ca. 3
44 And first, according to Cardinal Bellarmines grounds, that which the Pope
is in the universal Church, is every Bishop in the particular, which assertion
he brought to prove, that if the Pope be a direct Lord in temporals of the
universal Church, then every Bishop is also a direct Lord in temporals of his
own particular Church, or Diocese, which consequent he affirms to be
manifestly false, and therefore he denies also that the Pope is a direct Lord
in temporals of the universal Church. Now from the same assertion I may as
well conclude, that if the Pope be an indirect Lord in temporals of the
universal Church, and may inflict temporal punishments upon all Christians in
order to spiritual good, then every Bishop is also an indirect Lord in
temporals in his own particular Diocese, and may in order to spiritual good
inflict temporal punishments upon the Christians of his Diocese, because
every Bishop in his particular Diocese is that which the Pope is in the
universal Church: And therefore to argue according to the rules of Logic, a
destructione consequentis ad destructionem antecedentis, from the overthrowing
or denying of the consequent to the denying of the antecedent, If a Bishop in
his own Diocese, cannot according to the institution of Christ inflict a
pecuniarie mulct, or temporal penalty of money upon those Laymen that are not
his temporal subjects, neither can the Pope in the universal Church do the
same.

Victoria in relect. 2. de potest. Eccles. Castro lib. 2. de iusta Haeres.
punit. cap. 24. Vasques. 1. 2. disp. 152. cap. 3. number. 28.
45 Secondly, according to the doctrine of the Divines of Paris, which others
also as Victoria, Castro, Vasquez, (although otherwise vehement maintainers of
the Popes power indirectly in temporals) do in this point follow, it is
evident, that Bishops do not receive their authority and Jurisdiction from the
Pope, but immediately from Christ, by virtue of those words, which were spoken
to all the Apostles, Whatsoever you shall bind, etc. Matthew. 18. And, Whose
sins you shall forgive, etc. John 19. And, Feed my sheep, John 20. Which
words, according to the Exposition of the ancient Fathers, See above cap. 5.
number. 10. Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 12. in fine Edit. Ingolstad. 1586.
which also Cardinal Bellar. did once approve, are understood to be spoken
also to all the Apostles. Seeing therefore that S. Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, and consequently the Pope, and other Bishops, who succeed the
Apostles, as they were ordinary Pastors, and had ordinary spiritual power to
govern the Church, received their power and jurisdiction in the selfsame
form of words, without any limitation or restriction, from hence it clearly
follows, that what Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction soever the Pope
receives over the whole Church, the same power and jurisdiction, if we regard
merely the law of God, and the institution of Christ, other Bishops receive
over those who are subject to their Bishopric A Bishop (says Ledesma 1. 4.
ar. 11.) standing in the law of God has as great power in his Province, as the
Pope in the whole world.
. So that standing in the law of God, and abstracting from the Canons of the
Church, every Bishop may in his own Bishopric absolve from all cases, inflict
all censures, dispense in oaths, and vows, make laws and Canons, no less
then the Pope may in the Universal Church. And therefore it is no absurd
argument to conclude, that because a Bishop cannot by virtue of that spiritual
power, which he has received from Christ, inflict a pecuniarie penalty upon
those, that in spiritualls are subject to his Diocese, therefore neither can
the Pope do the same in the Universal Church.

46 Whereby it is apparent, that the comparison, which M. Fitzherbert here
makes betwixt a King, and an inferior Magistrate, or Judge, a Bishop, and a
Parish Priest, and betwixt the Pope, and other Bishops is idle, and
impertinent; for that no man can make any doubt, but that an inferior
Magistrate, or Judge has all his authority, and jurisdiction from the King,
but Bishops, according to the doctrine of many learned men, have not their
authority and jurisdiction from the Pope, but immediately from Christ, as the
Pope himself has: and all Catholics confess, that Bishops are Peers, and
Princes of the Church, and principal Judges in the external spiritual Court,
whereas none will acknowledge, that Parish Priests are such, and few will
grant, that they have jurisdiction in the external spiritual Court, but only
in the Court of conscience. Therefore although it were absurd to say, that
because every Bishop can excommunicate in his own Diocese, therefore every
Parish Priest can also excommunicate in his Parish, yet as it is not absurd to
say, that because the Pope can excommunicate in the universal Church,
therefore a Bishop, standing in the law of Christ, can also excommunicate in
his own Diocese, so it is not absurd, and much less ridiculous, to say, that
if the Pope can inflict a temporal penalty upon all Christians, every Bishop
also, standing in the law of Christ, can inflict a temporal penalty upon
those that are subject to his Bishopric, no more then it is absurd, or
ridiculous for Cardinal Bellarmine to say, that if the Pope has direct
dominion in temporalls, in the universal Church, every Bishop has also direct
dominion in temporalls in his own particular Bishopric, for that, according
to his doctrine, that which the Pope is in the universal Church, is every
Bishop in his particular Diocese.

47 And as concerning that plenitude, or fullness of the Popes Ecclesiastical
power, which Mr. Fitzherbert with full mouth does so often inculcate, little
understanding, poor man, in what this fullness does consist, there is a great
controversy among Catholics, to what things this fullness of Ecclesiastical
power does extend. Almainus de authore. Eccles. cap. 3.
For there is so great a controversy, says Almaine, concerning the fullness
of Ecclesiastical power, and to what things it does extend, that there are few
things in this matter secure, or certain, insomuch that it were very necessary
in these times (as William Occam in the end of the first part of his Dialogue
observes) that wise men being enforced by oaths, or horrible threatenings to
speak the truth, should declare those things, which belong to the fullness of
Ecclesiastical power. And how far some Authors, perchance for flattery to
get privileges, and benefices, says Almaine, do strain it to the prejudice
of Princes, so that they do quite overthrow the Sovereignty of Princes, you
may see in that his Treatise, where he expounds only the doctrine of Occam,
and how he notwithstandeth the fullness thereof, in other his books, where he
speaks according to his own opinion, will not have it to extend to the
inflicting of temporal punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods, or
imprisonment; and this, says he, In lib. de dominio natu. Ciu. and Eccl.
concl. 12.
is the opinion of most Doctors.

48 And also the Doctors of Paris do make the power, and Jurisdiction of
Bishops, standing merely in the law of Christ, to be as full in intension, as
is the Popes power, that is, abstracting from his Primacie, and the fullness of
his power in extension, for that the Popes power is extended to the whole
Church; and the power of Bishops is limited and restrained to their own
Bishoprikes, albeit the Canons of the Church have limited, and restrained the
fullness of Bishops power also in intension, Bell. l. 5 de Romans Pont. cap. 3.
reserving many cases, and Censures to Papal authority: But standing in the
law of Christ, Card. Bellarmine does very well affirm, that every Bishop is
that in his own Diocese, which the Pope is in the universal Church, which
Mr. Fitzherbert must first prove to be impertinent, absurd, and ridiculous,
and then let him put those imputations upon my answer, and the argument which
he draws from thence.

49 A third principal exception Mr. Fitzherbert takes against that, which in
confirmation of my aforesaid second answer I added in these words. Add
hereunto, that whenever the Pope by a general constitution decrees any
temporal thing (but it pleased my Adversary to leave out that word temporal)
which is prejudicial to the right of another man, who is not subject to him in
temporalls, the same decree, as some not improbably do think does only
extend, unless the contrary be expressed (which last clause also Mr.
Fitzherbert leaves out) to the territories of the Roman Church or the
patrimony of S. Peter, wherein, as Pope Innocent says Cap. per venerabil.
the Pope does exercise the authority of a chief Bishop, and does execute the
power of a Sovereign Prince.

50 Against this answer Mr. Fitzherbert obiecteth in this manner. page 173.
nu. 18. 19.
Thus Widdrington tells us, but who these some men are of whom he speaks or
where they affirm this, he lists not to tell us, neither in his text nor in
his margent lest by the cases, which they propound, and the circumstances of
their doctrine, we might discover his abuse of their testimony: but whosoever
they be, (if there be any such) that give so general a rule as he
mentions, it must be considered, whether they speak of constitutions
touching matters merely temporal, or else of penal laws made against
heresy, or other enormious crimes for the benefit of the whole Church. For no
Catholic man, I am sure, has ever said, or will say, that any general
Constitution of the Pope made for the reformation of faith, or manners, and
punishment of delinquents in spiritual matters, is to be understood to be
restrained to the Popes own temporal patrimony: for seeing that he has no
less spiritual authority throughout all Christendom, then within his own
temporal dominions, it were absurd, and heretical to say, that his general
Decrees touching spiritual matters, such as is the extirpation, and punishment
of heresy, cannot extend to the whole Church, if they inflict a temporal
penalty to the prejudice of some man's temporal state; for so could not
heretics be temporally punished, out of the Popes temporal dominions by
virtue of the Popes decrees, which nevertheless are generally executed, Cap.
vergentis. Tit. 7. de haer^^.
in prejudice not only of the delinquents, but also of their children, and next
heirs. And this, I say, is so universally practiced by the Church, that he
cannot be counted a Canonist, nor yet a Catholic that will deny it to be
lawfully done.

51 But, to omit the egregious fraud, and falsehood of this man, in affirming
me to say, that whenever the Pope decrees any thing, etc. and leaving out
the word [temporall] and also that other clause [vnlesse the contrary be
expressed] which were the chief points, whereon I did ground that my answer,
there is no man of any judgment, who may not clearly perceive, that all those
Catholic Doctors alleged by me heretofore, Apol. nu. 4. and seq and in the
first part of this Treatise.
and among the rest, those plerique Doctores, very many, or most Doctors, whom
Almaine cites, and follows, who affirm, that the Pope by the institution of
Christ has not authority to inflict temporal punishments, but only
Ecclesiastical censures, must consequently hold, that when the Pope by a
general constitution decreeeth any temporal thing, as is the inflicting of
temporal punishments, for what end soever they be inflicted, the said
Decree can bind only those of necessity, that belong to the Popes temporal
Dominions.

52 For seeing that as Suarez, Suarez l. 3. de Leg. c. 6. and cap. 8. nu. 3.
and all other Divines affirm, all laws enacted by the Pope, as they are
merely civil, and temporal, do bind only in the Popes territories, and as
Mr. Fitzherbert himself before Cap. 9. nu. 15.
acknowledged, there can be nothing more clear, then that all laws are
limited according to the power of the Prince that makes them, and that
therefore the obligation of every Princes laws is extended only to his own
subjects, and whatsoever is decreed only by the Popes temporal authority,
and as he is a temporal Prince, is a mere temporal thing, and cannot extend
beyond the Popes temporal dominions; from hence it clearly follows, that
what Doctor soever affirms, that the Pope has no authority by the
institution of Christ to inflict temporal penalties, as death, exile,
privation of goods, imprisonment, and consequently that the inflicting of them
is a mere temporal thing, and that the decrees, which do inflict them,
cannot be made by the Popes spiritual, but only by his temporal authority,
and that therefore they cannot of necessity bind but only those who are
subject to his temporal authority, or as he is a temporal Prince, must also
affirm, that whenever the Pope by any general Constitution decrees the
inflicting of any such temporal penalty, the said Decree does extend only
to the Popes temporal Dominions, and comprehends only those, who are
subject to him, as he is a temporal Prince, and endued with temporal
authority.

53 Wherefore it is neither heretical, nor absurd to say, as this
foule-mouthed ignorant man affirms, that the Popes general Decrees touching
the extirpation, and punishment of heresy cannot extend to the whole Church,
if they inflict a temporal penalty, and that no heretic can be temporally
punished out of the Popes temporal dominions by virtue of the Popes Decrees
without the consent and authority of temporal Princes, for that, according to
the doctrine of very many Doctors, as I said before, the Popes spiritual
authority does not by the institution of Christ extend to the inflicting of
temporal punishments, but only of Eccclesiasticall Censures: and that
therefore it belongs only to temporal Princes to root out heresies, and
punish heretics with temporal punishments, and to the Pope, as he is a
spiritual Pastor, to root out heresies, and punish heretics with
Ecclesiastical, or spiritual Censures. And this I will boldly say, and yet
remain as good a Catholic, yea and a far better, then Mr. Fitzherbert is,
notwithstanding all his big, and bitter words, if he build his Catholic
faith upon such weak, doubtful, and uncertain principles.

54 Whereupon it follows, that every Decree, Canon, or Constitution of the
Pope, which ordains the inflicting of temporal penalties for any crime
whatsouer, if my Adversary will needs have it to be of force out of the Popes
territories, is either an approbation of some former Imperial law, or is of
force by virtue of the consent, and authority of temporal Princes, or is
only a declaring, teaching, or commanding, what the temporal Prince, or Judge
ought to do. Neither does the Canon, Vergentis, of Pope Innocent the third,
which Mr. Fitzherbert cites here in the margent, any way contradict, what I
have said, but it does rather confirm the same; for the words of the Canon are
these, We ordain, that in the territories subject to our temporal
Jurisdiction the goods of heretics be confiscated, and in other territories
we command the same to be done by Secular Potestaes, and Princes, which if
perchance they shall be negligent to perform, we will, and command, that
they be compelled thereunto by Ecclesiastical Censures. So that this Canon
does rather favor, then contradict what I said, seeing that it distinguishes
the Popes territories from other kingdoms, and signifies that the Pope in his
own Dominions has authority by his Decrees to confiscate the goods of
heretics, but in other kingdoms he has no such authority, but only to
command Secular Princes to make such Decrees for the extirpation of heresy,
and also, if they be negligent therein, to compel them by Ecclesiastical
Censures thereunto. Neither can Mr. Fitzherbert prove by any one Canon of
Pope, or Council, or by any general, or particular practice of the Church,
that out of the Popes temporal dominions any heretic is temporally punished
by virtue of the Popes decrees without the consent, and authority of temporal
Princes: whereby the Reader may plainly see, what an ignorant, uncharitable,
and rash headed man is this my Adversary, to tax so easily, and upon such
uncertain grounds learned Catholics of heresy, which among all Christians is
accounted so heinous, and execrable a crime.

53 But his fraud, and ignorance will the more clearly be discovered, if we
observe the difference betwixt the directive, and coerciue power, and the acts
and objects of them both. For the same spiritual action, as heresy,
blasphemy, sacrilege, may be forbidden, both by the spiritual, and temporal
power, yea also for the same spiritual end, seeing that Christian Princes are
bound by the law of Christ to refer all their actions, and the use of their
te^porall authority to Gods honor, and glory, and to the good of their own
souls, and of their subjects, and by their temporal laws to maintain and
advance Christian Religion, and to root out heresy, blasphemy, and such like
spiritual crimes out of their kingdoms, so that the directive, or commanding
temporal power, as I have signified heretofore, Cap. 6. nu. 66. and seq.
may agree with the spiritual in the same acts, objects, and end: but the
principal distinction betwixt the spiritual and temporal power is to be
taken from both the powers, as they are coerciue, or punishing, which always
have distinct acts, and objects: for the acts, and object of the temporal
power as it is coerciue, or punishing, are always the inflicting of temporal
punishments, and of the spiritual, the inflicting of spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical Censures; so that the forbidding of heresy under pain of
incurring Ecclesiastical Censures, for what end soever temporal or
spiritual it be done, can proceed only from Ecclesiastical authority, and
the forbidding of the same heresy under pain of incurring temporal
punishments, as death, loss of goods, or of any other temporal thing for what
end soever it be inflicted, can proceed only from temporal, and civil
authority, because according to Almaine, and those other many Doctors
mentioned by him, who were as good Catholics, as M. Fitzherbert is, and far
more learned then he is ever like to be, the Ecclesiastical power does not
by the institution of Christ extend to the inflicting of civil or temporal
punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods, imprisonment, but only of
Ecclesiastical Censures, and the other punishments, which she uses, do
proceed from the pure positive law, or, to use Gersons words, from the grant
of Princes.

56 Lastly, Mr. Fitzherbert excepteth against that which I brought from the
words of the Gloss, upon the Canon Per venerabilem, to confirm the doctrine
of those, who affirm, that the Pope has not authority to make civil or
temporal laws, or, which is all one, to ordain mere temporal things, out
of his own temporal dominions. And these Authors the Gloss, said I, upon
the same Canon, Per venerabilem, does seem to favor: where it affirms, that
the Pope cannot legitimate any man who is not subject to his temporal
Jurisdiction, to make him succeed in an inheritance as a lawful heir, for
this were to put his sickle into another man's harvest, and to usurp another
man's Jurisdiction, and to deprive some man of his right to succeed, which he
ought not to do; and therefore he cannot legitimate any man for the Secular
Court, unless the Prince shall permit, or give him leave. But if the Pope
cannot legitimate one, who is not legitimate, nor deprive one of his right to
succeed, I see not by what authority he can make a lawful and legitimate
heir, or Prince to be unlawful, and not legitimate, or deprive one of his
inheritance, which he lawfully possesses.

57 But to this Gloss, whose words, as you see, are most plain, and clear,
Mr. Fitzherbert replyeth Page 174. number. 20. to the end.
, that this my instance or example taken from the Gloss, is no less
impertinent then the former, seeing that it concerns only a temporal matter
without relation to any spiritual end. And is it possible, says he, that
Widdrington cannot see the difference betwixt these two cases? seeing that the
legitimation of bastards to a temporal end (that is, to make them capable of a
temporal inheritance) is a mere temporal thing, and therefore requires the
temporal power, and direct dominion of a temporal Prince, whereas the
deposition of Princes in this our case having a spiritual end (to wit, the
extirpation of heresy, and punishment of sin, to the exceeding great good of
souls, and the public benefit of the Church) is not merely temporal in
respect of the spiritual end, and therefore may proceed from the spiritvall
power of him, that has the supreme charge of souls, and the government of
the whole Church, in whom it may suffice for that purpose to have an indirect
dominion over temporal things, to be used and exercised in some cases, when
the necessity of the Church shall require it.

58 Whereupon it also follows, that if it were absolutely necessary for the
good of the Church, that the Pope should legitimate a bastard to make him
capable of succession to a temporal inheritance (as for example, if a kingdom
should otherways fall into the hands or possession of Gods enemies) in such a
case, I say, he might do it by his spiritual power, and the indirect dominion
he has over temporal things, as both Lawyers See Couerra. in 4 Decret. 2.
par.. 8. nu. 16
and Divines teach, and the Gloss alleged by Widdrington, does not deny it,
affirming only, that the Pope has no power to legitimate a bastard out of his
own temporal Dominions to a mere temporal end, which, as I have said, is a
far different case from ours, and not denied by us: So as you see still how
improbably Widdrington argues, and how absurdly he has answered to his own
objection. And this I hope may suffice for the confutation of his second
answer. Let us now hear the third.

59 But in this also Mr. Fitzherbert shows as much fraud and ignorance, as
he has in the former. For first it is evident, that this assertion of the
Gloss, denying the Pope to have authority out of his own temporal
dominions, to make one capable of a temporal inheritance, unless the Prince
give him leave, is general, and without any relation at all either to a
temporal, or spiritual end, and the only exception, limitation, or
restriction, which the Gloss makes, is, unless the Prince permit, or give
him leave so to do: which words being so general do plainly signify, that
the Pope cannot out of his own temporal dominions make one capable, or
incapable of a temporal inheritance, for any cause, crime, or end whatsoever,
unless the Prince permit or give him leave. And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert
affirms, that the Pope may for a spiritual end, to wit, for that the
spiritual good of the Church, and the salvation of souls make one capable, or
incapable of a temporal inheritance, this explication corrupts the text, and
is contrary to the plain words of the Gloss; for if the Pope, out of his
own temporal Dominions may for a spiritual end make one capable of a
temporal inheritance, or deprive one of his right to succeed, without the
Princes leave, or permission, then it clearly follows, that the Pope may
make one capable of a temporal inheritance, and legitimate him for the Secular
Court, and deprive one of his right to succeed without the Princes leave, or
permission, which the Gloss in express words denies.

60 But secondly, is it possible, that this man cannot see, how plainly he
contradicts himself, in granting first, that the legitimation of bastards to
a temporal end, is to make him capable of a temporal inheritance, and that so
it is a mere temporal thing, and therefore requires the temporal power and
direct dominion of a temporal Prince, and afterward in acknowledging that the
legitimation of a bastard to make him capable of succession to a temporal
inheritance, if it were absolutely necessary for the good of the Church, may
be done by the Popes spiritual power, and indirect dominion, which he has
over temporalls, which is plainly repugnant to his former assertion? seeing
that no reference, or relation of the making bastards capable of a temporal
inheritance, to the necessary good of the Church, can make, but that according
to his former grant, it still remains a mere temporal thing, and is to a
temporal end, that is, says he, to make him capable of a temporal
inheritance, and therefore requires the temporal power, and direct dominion
of a temporal Prince, and consequently it cannot be done by the spiritual
power, and indirect dominion, which the Pope has over temporal things.

61 Wherefore this indirect temporal power, authority, dominion, or
jurisdiction, is in my opinion a mere fiction, purposely invented without
sufficient ground by the later Divines, to put a more colorable cloak upon
this pretended temporal authority of the Pope, because they saw the Canonists
doctrine, making the Pope a temporal Monarch of the whole world, to be very
false, absurd, scandalous, and odious both to Princes and subjects; and yet in
effect or substance they differ little, or nothing at all: For whatsoever the
Canonists grant, that the Pope may do in temporalls directly, the Divines
grant he may do indirectly, which does in effect as much as the former
derogate from the Sovereignty of absolute Princes: for it little imports to
the substance of the matter, whether the Pope may depose heretical, or wicked
Princes by a power, or dominion over temporals, which must be called
temporal, or by a power, which must be called spiritual, so that he may
depose them; or whether the Pope be superior to absolute Princes in
temporals, directly, or indirectly, so that they must acknowledge themselves
not to be absolute, but subject to the Pope in temporals. But as I have
signified heretofore, all the difficulty, and ambiguitie of these words,
directly, and indirectly will presently appear, and the whole mist, which the
Divines by this distinction do cast over the eyes of the unlearned, will
forthwith vanish away, if we will but duly consider the difference betwixt the
directive, and coerciue power, and the proper acts, and objects of either of
them.

62 For as in all arts, sciences, faculties, and powers, whatsoever is directly
contained under the formal object of that art, science, faculty, or power, is
directly subject to that art, science, faculty or power, so what thing soever,
whether it be temporal, or spiritual, is directly contained under the formal
object of the directive or coerciue power, is directly subject to that power.
Seeing therefore that the proper acts, and formal objects (by which all powers
are distinguished) of the spiritual directive, or commanding power, are the
commanding of virtue, and the forbidding of vice, from hence it follows, that
all actions whatsoever, whether they be spiritual, or temporal, as they are
virtuous, or vicious actions, and necessary, or hurtful to the spiritual, and
eternal good of souls, are directly subject to the spiritual directive
power. So that the reference, or relation of temporal actions, to the
spiritual good of souls, does nothing hinder, but rather is a cause, that, as
they are virtuous, or vicious actions, they are directly subject to the
spiritual directive power.

63 But if these Divines will further say, that the spiritual directive power,
dominion, or jurisdiction over temporal things, is therefore said to be
indirect, for that it does not command, or forbid temporal things, as they are
temporal, but as in order to spiritual good they become spiritual, that is
virtuous, or vicious actions, no man makes doubt of the matter, or of the
thing it self, it being too too manifest to every man of judgment, that
temporal things are not subject to the spiritual directive power, as they are
temporal things, but as in order to spiritual good they become spiritual,
that is, virtuous, or vicious actions, but the speech is not so proper, and
gives occasion to the unlearned to be confounded, and deluded with a
superfluous ambiguitie, and multiplicitie of words. For what Divine, or
Philosopher can deny, that all those things whatsoever, which do truly
participate the definition, or nature of the formal object of any art,
science, faculty, or power, by what means, or consideration soever they do
participate the same, are directly subject to that art, science, faculty, or
power? And in the same proportionate manner, as these men say, that the Pope
has an indirect temporal directive power, or authority over temporal
things, it may be said, that temporal Princes have an indirect spiritual
directive power over spiritual things: for that as the Pope does forbid
temporal things, not as they are temporal, but as they are spiritual, and
hurtful to the good of souls; so temporal Princes may forbid spiritual
things, as Heresy, Schism, perjury, ministering of Sacraments with a poisoned
matter, whereby danger of death does ensue, not as they are spiritual, but as
they are temporal wrongs, and hurtful to the public peace in the
Commonwealth, which is the formal object of the temporal directive power. So
that this distinction of directly, and indirectly, cannot be well applied to
the spiritual directive power, but that in the like proportionate manner, it
may be also applied to the temporal directive power, dominion, and
Jurisdiction.

64 And as concerning the Ecclesiastical coerciue power, we must discourse in
the same manner: and likewise consider, what are the proper acts, and formal
objects of this power, as it is coerciue, or punishing: for whatsoever does
participate the nature and definition of the acts, and objects of this power is
directly subject thereunto. Now concerning this point, there are two principal
opinions among Catholics; The first opinion, and which now adays is the more
common, for the causes by me heretofore Apol. nu. 449
alleged, is that the inflicting of all punishments whatsoever, being referred
to spiritual good, are the acts and objects of the Ecclesiastical power, as
it is coerciue or punishing. But the Authors of this opinion, albeit they all
agree in this, that whatsoever authority the Church has by the institution of
Christ, call it spiritual, or temporal, is in order to spiritual good, and
is given her by Christ for the eternal salvation of souls, for which end
Christ also himself descended from heaven, and took our flesh upon him, yet
in this they differ: that the Canonists, that commonly follow this opinion,
measuring the nature of the powers by their acts and objects, and granting, as
they do, that Christ has given to his Church authority to inflict both
temporal, and spiritual punishments, do also affirm, that the Church has
by the institution of Christ truly, properly, directly, and formally, both
temporal, and spiritual power. But the Divines commonly perceiving the
absurdity of this doctrine, and that it confounds the acts and objects of the
temporal, and spiritual power, and subiecteth the temporal Sovereignty of
absolute Princes, who by the common doctrine of the ancient Fathers, are
accounted to be supreme in temporalls, and therein subject to none but to God
alone, to the Popes temporal authority, to give the more probable color, as
they think, to this pretended authority of the Church to dispose of all
temporals, and to inflict temporal punishments in order to spiritual good,
and to make it seem less odious to Christian Princes, and subjects, do
differ from the Canonists at lest wise in words, and therefore they affirm,
that the Church by the institution of Christ, has no true, proper, direct, and
formal temporal authority, but only vertuall, or in effect, which they
call, but very improperly in my opinion, indirect, as I have showed before: as
the power of God, and of the Angels to work corporal effects, although it be
truly and formally spiritual, as God, and the Angels are truly and formally
spiritual substances, yet eminently, vertually, and in effect is corporal,
for that by their spiritual power they can work corporal effects. So that
the Canonists, and these Divines do not differ in effect, and these Divines
do in effect no less derogate from the temporal Sovereignty of absolute
Princes, subiecting them in temporals, who are supreme, then the Canonists do.

65 The second principal opinion, is of other Apol. nu. 4 and seq. and above
in the first part of this Treatise.
learned Catholics, both Divines, and Canonists, whom I have heretofore
related, that the acts and objects of the spiritual coerciue power, are only
the inflicting of spiritual punishments, or Ecclesiastical Censures, as
Excommunication, Suspension, Interdict, and not of temporal, or civil
penalties, as death, exile, privation of goods, imprisonment, and consequently
that the inflicting of temporal punishments are neither directly, nor
indirectly, formally, nor vertually subject to the spiritual coerciue power of
the Church, but only to the coerciue temporal power of temporal Princes, for
that no reference, relation, or reduction of the inflicting of temporal
punishments to the glory of GOD, or the salvation of souls, can make temporal
punishments to be Ecclesiastical Censures, or the inflicting of temporal,
and civil punishments to be the inflicting of spiritual, and Ecclesiastical
Censures.

66 And although this opinion be the less common among Catholics, for the
reasons heretofore alleged, especially through the watchfulnes of the contrary
side, since the time that some Popes have challenged to themselves this
temporal authority over Kings, call it direct or indirect, formal, or
vertuall, as you please, and the indiligence (to speak with all reverence) of
Christian Princes in suffering their temporal Sovereignty, to be so greatly
and cunningly depressed, and subjected, yet in my judgment it is more conform
to the true sense and meaning of the holy Scriptures, to the practice of the
primitive Church, to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and to the true
grounds and principles of moral Philosophy, and Divinity: and therefore to
affirm this opinion, which is embraced by so many Doctors, as Almaine
witnesses, and which is grounded upon such plain and pregnant reasons, to be
impious, absurd, improbable, erroneous, yea and heretical, as this foul
mouthed, and rash headed ignorant man does so often brand it, is clearly
repugnant to the rules of Christian prudence, charity, and modesty, and to
the known principles of Schoole-Diuinitie.

67 And according to this opinion, although we should suppose, which is
altogether untrue, though often inculcated by my Adversary, that the
inflicting of temporal punishments, and the disposing of temporal things were
absolutely necessary for the good of the Church, and the salvation of souls,
yet they should not therefore be subject to the spiritual power of the Church,
but only to the temporal authority of Christian Princes, who, as the Prophet
Isay foretold, Isa. c. 49.
were by Gods special providence appointed to be her nourcing Fathers,
Nources, and Protectours. In such cases of necessity, spiritual Pastors must
implore the aid of Christian Princes, and the Brachium Seculare, or temporal
power is bound by her laws and other means to help the spiritual, and both
of them having need one of the other, being so united, linked, and conjoined,
as I have showed before, Part. 2. c. 1.
one with the other among Christians, ought to use all due means to help each
other, yet without breaking the bounds, and limits prescribed by Christ to
either of them.

68 But truly in my opinion the weakness of their cause, and of the grounds
of this their doctrine touching the Popes temporal Monarchy over absolute
Princes, call it direct, or indirect, as you please, may to any man of
judgment sufficiently appear, by their so often declining the true state of
the question, and not standing upon any sure or certain ground, but flying
from one argument to another, as from conuenience to absolute necessity,
sometimes affirming, that the Pope may depose Princes, and dispose of temporal
things when it is convenient for the good of the Church, and the salvation of
souls, other times when it is absolutely necessary thereunto. But, as I have
showed before, Cap. 7. nu. 36 and seq.
this absolute necessity is a mere fiction, and only supposed, but never
proved, and this pretended temporal authority of the Pope, Almain. de
potest. Eccle. q. 1 cap. 9.
as Almaine said, is rather very hurtful, then any way necessary either for
the good of the Pope, or of Christian people. And if by the practice of
depositions, as of Henry the fourth by Pope Gregory the seventh, of Fredrike
the second, by Innocent the fourth, of Philip the the fair by Boniface the
eight, of our King Henry the eight by Paul the third, and Queen Elizabeth by
Pope Pius the fifth, which are the most famous depositions of all, we may
gather, whether this authority be necessary, or hurtful to the Church of
God, all histories make mention what infinite harm, rather then any good at
all came to the Church of God thereby. And this I hope may suffice for the
confirmation of my second answer to the Decree of the Lateran Council, and
for the confutation of my Adversaries Reply. Now let us see the third answer.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein Widdringtons third answer to the Decree of the Lateran Council is
confirmed: and also it is showed how certain it is according to the doctrine
of learned Catholics, that the Church cannot err in Decrees, or precepts of
manners: from whence it is clearly deduced, that from the Decree, or rather
Act of the Lateran Council, it cannot with any color of probability be
proved, that it is a point of faith, that the Pope has authority to depose
temporal Princes, and all M. Fitzherberts arguments to show the contrary, are
most plainly confuted.

1 BEcause my Adversaries did so much rely upon this Decree of the Lateran
Council, that they thought it alone to be sufficient to make their doctrine
certain, and of faith, and therefore feared not to brand the contrary with
the note of heresy, my third answer to their argument grounded upon the
authority of the Lateran Council was, that the Canon, or decree, (for so we
call it yet) of the said Council touching the deposition of temporal
Landlords, Governors, or Lords, was no matter of faith, but of fact only,
wherein as well the Pope, as those Fathers following their own opinions, might
err, and that the Council did not determine, or define, that the future
deposition, not of Princes, as Mr. Fitzherbert translateth it, but of temporal
Landlords, Magistrates, or Lords, should proceed from an undoubted lawful
power, or from the Ecclesiastical power alone without the consent of Princes.
And therefore the opinion of those Fathers, yields no more certainety for the
Popes power to depose Princes, then if they had declared their opinions forth
of the Council; seeing that this only can be gathered from the certain, and
undoubted doctrine of the Catholic Church, that the infalable assistance of
the Holy Ghost is promised by our Savior Christ, not to the facts, or probable
opinions of Popes, or Counsels, but only to their definitions.

2 Against this answer Mr. Fitzherbert takes some idle and frivolous
exceptions: And first, he carpeth at that distinction or Antithesis betwixt rem
facti duntaxat, and rem fidei, a matter of fact only, and a matter of faith,
which he would have me to reform, and to make it according to the usual
manner rem facti, and rem iuris: a matter of fact, and a matter of law, or
right. But here, says he, Page 17. 8. nu. 2.
I must desire Widdrington, first to reform his distinction, or rather
Antithesis, which he makes betwixt rem facti, and rem fidei, a matter of fact,
and a matter of faith, Wherein there is no such opposition, as he seems to
imagine, or would at least have to be conceived, for if by a matter of fact
only, he means a matter that is not speculatiue, but consists only in
action, or practice, then matters of fact, and faith may so well stand
together, that they may be, and often are one, and the self same thing: I
mean, that a matter of fact not only may, but ought also to be believed under
pain of damnation; as it is evident in diverse Articles of our faith,
consisting in the belief of things done, or to be done, as in all the History
of our Saviors Incarnation, life, and death already past, and in his last
Judgment, our Resurrection, and everlasting reward, or punishment, which are
yet to come, and being matters of fact, are nevertheless matters of faith: and
therefore Widdrington may do well, as I have said, to reform his distinction,
and to make it according to the usual manner, to wit, rem facti, and rem
iuris, a matter of fact, and a matter of law, or right, which are indeed
always distinct.

3 But first, is it possible that this man should be so blind, or ignorant, as
not to see, that a matter of faith is always a matter of law, for that it is
commanded to be believed by the law of God, and so how childishly he carpeth
at that distinction, or Antithesis, a matter of fact only, and not a matter of
faith, desiring me to reform that distinction, and to make it according to the
usual manner, to wit, rem facti, and rem iuris, a matter of faith, and a
matter of law, seeing that it is manifest to every Schoole-boy, that a matter
of faith is always a matter of law, as being a thing commanded to be believed
by the law of God. But matters of fact, and of faith, says Mr. Fitzherbert may
well stand together etc. And therefore a matter of fact is not opposite to a
matter of faith, as Widdrington seems to imagine, or would at least have to
be conceived.

4 But in the like manner I may say, that matters of fact, and matters of law
may well stand together, as it is evident in diverse Articles of our faith,
concerning our Saviors Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, etc. which are both
matters of fact, and of law, seeing that they are things appertaining to the
law of God, and therefore a matter of fact is not opposite to a matter of law,
and always distinct, as Mr. Fitzherbert following therein Fa. Lessius, from
whom he took this frivolous exception, not only seems to imagine, but also
expressly affirms. So that these men have need first to reform their own
distinction or Antithesis, which they make betwixt a matter of fact, and a
matter of law, before they undertake to be reformers of other men. But the
plain truth is, that I neither said, nor imagined, as these men untruly
affirm, that I made an opposition, or Antithesis betwixt a matter of faith,
and a matter of fact but betwixt a matter of faith and of fact only, which
word [onely] if they had well considered, they might easily have perceived,
that it does exclude a matter of faith, and that I did not make an opposition
betwixt every matter of fact, and of faith, but betwixt a matter of faith, and
of fact only, that is, of such facts, whic are only grounded upon a probable
opinion, or at the most, not upon any undoubted doctrine of faith, and such
matters of fact, and of faith, can never stand together.

5 For whereas Cardinal Bellarmine, and Fa. Lessius, against whom principally
I wrote that Preface, wherein I answered this Decree of the Lateran Council,
did so much insist upon this Decree, that, as I said before, they would make
the world believe, that it alone were sufficient to make their doctrine to be
of faith, and the contrary flat heretical, my meaning was in this third
answer to show, that no such thing could be proved from this Council, as they
pretended, for that this Decree, for as much as it concerns the future
deposition of temporal Landlords, or Lords, was no matter of faith, but of
fact only, and that the Council did not declare, determine, or define, that
this future deposition of them was therein decreed to proceed from the
spiritual authority of the Church without the consent, license, or authority
of temporal Princes, which my Adversary must first prove, or else they will
speak little to the purpose. Now Mr. Fitzherbert falsely supposing, as you have
seen, that I make an opposition betwixt a matter of fact, and a matter of
faith, as though a matter of fact, and a matter of faith cannot stand together,
which every Schoole-boy knows to be false, you shall see what an idle
discourse he makes throughout this whole Chapter, it being grounded upon this
false supposall.

6 But because Mr. Fitzher. in his ensuing discourse gives me occasion to
enter into a question, which not a little concerns our present controversy, I
think it not amiss, before I go any further to speak something thereof; to
wit, with what kind of certainetie we are to believe, that the Church cannot
err in making Decrees, or precepts of manners, that is, whether, as it is
heretical to hold, that the Church can err in making matters of faith, so
also it is heretical to hold, that she can err in making laws, Decrees, or
precepts belonging to manners. And albeit my meaning is not at this time to set
down, what is my own opinion concerning this matter, because I do not intend
to rely much thereon for the answering of my Adversaries objections, and so
will not give him occasion to fly from the principal controversy to other
by-questions, and of less importance, yet for the better instruction of the
unlearned Reader, who may perchance imagine, that every Popes Breue is
sufficient to make a matter of faith, I will briefly relate, what is the
opinion of learned Catholics, and namely of Melchior Canus in this point.

7 First therefore concerning matters of faith, or things to believed, Melchior
Canus affirms, that a General Council being confirmed by the Popes
authority cannot err in the defining of Catholic doctrine, Canus lib. 1. de
locis cap. 4. concl. 3.
and this conclusion he takes to be so certain, that the contrary he
accounts heretical. But as I observed in an other place, In disp. Theol. cap
10. sec. 2. nu. 13.
to make such definitions to be certain, infallible, and without error, he
requires two conditions, the one is, that the doctrine must be propounded to
the whole Church, and not only to private or particular Churches, or Bishops,
and the other, that it be propounded with an obligation to be believed as of
faith, which also Cardinal Bellarmine confirms. For in Counsels, Bellar.
lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 42.
says he, the greatest part of the Acts do not appertain to faith; for
neither are of faith the disputations that go before, nor the reasons, which
are added, nor those things which are brought to explicate, and illustrate, but
only the bare decrees, and those not all, but those only which are propounded
as of faith. And it is easy, say they, to know when the Council does propound
any thing with an obligation to be believed, as of faith, by the words of the
Council it self. For they always use to say, that they declare the Catholic
faith, or account them for heretics, or which is most common, denounce
anathema, or excommunicate them who shall believe the contrary, but when none
of these things are said, it is not certain says Cardinal Bellarmine, that
it is a point of faith. Whereby may be plainly seen the insolent temeritie of
some, especially this my Adversary, who fear not to call them heretics, that
deny the Popes power to depose Princes, seeing that neither from the Council
of Lateran, nor from any other Council, either General, or Provincial, nor,
which is more, from any one Canon of any particular Pope, they can bring so
much as a colorable show of any such decree, which, according to the aforesaid
rules of Cardinal Bellarmine and Canus, have the conditions required to make a
point of faith.

Canus lib. 5. de loc. cap. 5. q. 5.
8 Now concerning decrees, and precepts belonging to manners, or things
commanded or forbidden to be done, the said Canus having first supposed, and
distinguished, that the question may be either of such things as are necessary
to salvation, as being commanded, or forbidden by the law of God, or Nature,
or of such things that are not so necessary, he sets down this conclusion;
that the Church, cannot err in the doctrine of such manners, as are necessary
to salvation; Therefore if the Church by a firm decree do define that any
thing is to be done, or to be avoided, she cannot err therein, as for
example, in commanding Laymen to receive the Sacrament under one only kind.
From whence he infers this second conclusion, that when the Church in a
matter of moment, and which is very profitable for the reforming of Christian
manners, does make laws to all Christian people, she cannot command any thing
which is contrary to the Gospel, or natural reason, wherefore as a general
Council cannot propound false things to be believed by the people, so it
cannot propound evil things to be done, propound, says he, by a firm and
certain decree, by which all men are bound to believe and do under pain of
eternal damnation.

9 But as concerning the certainty of this doctrine, especially touching things
which are not so necessary to salvation, as not being repugnant to the Gospel,
or natural reason, whether it be heretical to affirm that some custom of
the Church is evil, or some law of the Church is unjust, I dare not, says
Canus, define, or determine. Whereupon he excuses those from heresy, who
should affirm, that the Church does err in the custom of communicating the
people under one kind only: and he answers to the Council of Constance,
which ordains, that those are to be condemned as heretics who affirm the
Church to err therein, that the Council at that time was without a head, and
that Pope Martin does not simply or absolutely approve that article, but he
only defines, that those who shall teach that the Church does err in that
manner of custom are to be condemned as heretics, or as sauouring heresy.
Therefore that which Pope Martin, being President of the Council, durst not
condemn by the name of heresy, neither I, says Canus, dare, nor ought to
impeach of a greater censure. But if in a custom necessary to salvation, which
that seemed to be, whereof there was a controversy in the Council of
Constance, the modesty of Pope Martin was so great, how much more modest ought
we to be in condemning other errors, which are repugnant to the custom of the
Church, which is not necessary to salvation? Thus Canus, which doctrine I would
desire my Adversary, and such other unlearned hoat-spurres, who have heresy,
and heretical so frequent in their mouths, little knowing themselves what
heresy is, diligently to consider.

10 Also the said Canus excuses from heresy those, who disprooue the custom
of the Church, to carry about in solemn procession the B. Sacrament: For
albeit, says he, to reprehend this custom upon this ground, that Christ is
not really, and truly present in the Eucharist, be heresy, yet if thou
regard the error in it self, it sauoureth heresy, it is rashness, and
imprudence, and although it be to be censured for many respects, yet it is not
heresy; seeing that albeit in this custom the Church should not err, yet her
authority would not therefore be endangered in matters of greater moment.
Neither does the Council of Trent simply or absolutely say, anathema to those
that shall reprehend this custom of the Church, but to those that therefore
reprehend it, because they do not admit the real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist, and therefore neither the adoration, and woorship thereof.

11 In like manner he excuses from heresy those, who affirm, that the Church
may err in the canonization of Saints. For it is to be observed, says he,
that some manners, or customs of the Church are delivered to the Church by
Christ, and the Apostles, wherein he that should say the Church to err, does
make Christ, and the Apostles to be Authors of that error: but other manners,
or customs are brought in since the Apostles, wherein although the Church
should err, yet faith would not therefore be endangered: Therefore without
danger of heresy it may be held, that the Church may in some law and custom
err. And he brings a reason wherefore it is not heretical to say, that the
Church may err in the Canonization of Saints, by which he proved a little
before, that in manners, customs, precepts, and laws, which are not common to
the whole Church, but are referred to private men, or Churches, the Church may
err through ignorance, not only in the judgment of things done, but also in
the private precepts and laws themselves. And of this conclusion, says he,
Pope Innocent gave a true and fit reason, in cap. A nobis, desent. Excom. in
these words: The judgment of God is always grounded upon truth, which neither
deceives, nor is deceived, but the judgment of the Church does sometimes
follow opinion, which oftentimes deceives, and is deceived; whereupon it
happens sometimes, that he who is bound before God, is loosed before the
Church, and he that is free before God, is tied by an Ecclesiastical Censure.
Thus Pope Innocent.

12 For from hence, says Canus, it is manifest, which is most worthy the
observation, that decrees of the Church cannot be certain, and firm, which
are not grounded upon certain and firm principles, and foundations. Wherefore
if but one of those things, whereon the judgment of the Church depends, be
uncertain, the decree of the Church cannot be certain, whether the question
be speculatiue, or practical. For the Conclusion according to the maxim of
the Logicians follows the weaker part, and if one of the principles, or
premises be weak, it is necessary, that the conclusion in regard of that
part be weakened. Whereby it is easily understood, that the judgments of the
Church, which proceed from the uncertain testimonies of men, are weak to
make a certain, and undoubted belief; of which sort is that, whereby she
judges any one to be numbered in the Catalogue of Saints: yet it is not lawful
to call in question such decrees without punishment; but it is temerarious, and
irreligious not to give credit to the Church in the canonizing of Saints, which
because he that does, does rashly, and inconsiderately, he shall indeed
deservedly be punished by the Church. Thus Canus.

Canus l. 12. c. 1.
13 Lastly, he excuses from heresy those, who should affirm, that the B.
Virgin is not corporally assumpted into heaven, which although, says he, it
be not contrary to faith, yet because it is repugnant to the common consent of
the Church, it would be taxed of malapert temeritie. And albeit Fa. Suarez
also does affirm, Suarez tom. 2. disp. 21. sec. 2.
that now it is so received an opinion, that it cannot be called in question by
any pious and Catholic man, yet he acknowledges, that it is not of faith,
because it is neither defined by the Church, neither is there any testimony of
Scripture, or sufficient tradition, Sot. in 4. did. 43 q. 2. ar. 1. Caiet.
tom. 2. opu. trac. 2. de Concept. cap. 1.
which may cause infallible faith. But Sotus says only, that it ought to be
believed most piously, but yet it is not put among the articles of faith
necessarily to be believed. And Caietane affirms, that it is not to be
believed of necessity, but probably and piously. For there is two manner of
ways, says he, whereby a thing may be decreed to be believed. For some
things are decreed to be believed in such sort, that he who thinks the
contrary is an heretic: but some things as probably to be believed, as the
common piety of the Church does probably believe concerning the corporal
Assumption of the B. Virgin, and her Sanctification in her mothers womb, Abul.
in cap. 22. Matthew. q. 230.
and other such like. Abulensis also says, that it is not necessary to hold
this, because it is not among the articles of faith, neither also is there any
thing defined by the Church, that it ought to be held, therefore it is lawful
for every man to think as he will. And the reasons which are brought to prove
her Resurrection, are certain persuasions, and do not convince, yet because it
is commonly held, that she is risen, it is more reasonable to hold it; yet if
any one do affirm the contrary, we do not contend. And nevertheless the
aforesaid Authors knew right well, that this doctrine concerning the corporal
Assumption of the B. Virgin was never denied by any Catholic, and was also the
ground and foundation of an Ecclesiastical decree, and custom to celebrate
the Feast of the B. Virgins Assumption.

14 And by this the Reader may easily perceive, what things are required to
make one an heretic, that should deny the decrees of the Church concerning
manners to be infallible: and how rashly, and unchristianly my Adversaries do
charge me with heresy, for denying the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes to be a point of faith, seeing that they cannot bring any one decree
either of Pope, or Council, whereby, according to the conditions before
required by Cardinal Bellarmine and Canus to the infallibility of decrees
either touching faith, or manners, it can with any probable color be proved,
that this doctrine is certain, and of faith, but we must forsooth take their
own interpretations, or rather wrestings of the Canons, and false suppositions
to be sufficient decrees to determine matters of faith. Now to Mr.
Fitzherberts discourse.

15 Secondly, says he, Page 178. nu. 3.
I wish Widdrington to consider, that by this his distinction, and the
argument, which he deduceth from it, he may in like manner impugn the decree
of the Apostles themselves made in their Council at Jerusalem, wherein they
ordained, and defined nothing else but matters of fact (to wit, that the
Christians should abstain from meats offered to Idols, from things strangled,
and blood, and fornication) in all which the Apostles might (according to this
man's doctrine) follow their own private opinions, and err, because their
Decree concerned only matters of fact.

16 But first, this man supposes, that I impugn the Decree of the Lateran
Council, which is very untrue: for I only expound, and declare the sense and
meaning of the Decree, and disprooue the exposition, which my Adversaries make
thereof. Wherefore if we may suppose, that this Decree of the Apostles was
concerning such a matter of fact, which is not grounded upon any doctrine of
faith, but only upon opinions, which are exposed to error, as I contend this
Decree, if we may truly call it so, of the Lateran Council concerning the
future deposition of temporal Landlords, Magistrates, or Lords to be such a
matter of fact, then I say we may in the like proportionate manner, I do not
say, impugn, but expound this decree of the Apostles, as I have, and shall
beneath expound the decree of the Lateran Council, in such sort that from
thence no infallible doctrine of faith can be concluded to prove that, which
some Authors from thence pretend to conclude, to wit, that the Church has
authority to make new laws, which shall have force to bind in conscience.

17 As for example, supposing only for Disputation sake but not affirming,
that the Church has not authority to make new laws and precepts, which shall
have force to bind in conscience, which doctrine some Authors attribute to
Gerson, but only to declare the laws and precepts of GOD, and Nature, and
also to determine those laws and praecepts, which GOD, and Nature have left
undetermined, either concerning the time, place, or manner; as for example, we
are commanded by the law of GOD, and Nature, to honor GOD, and his Saints, to
fast, to receive the Eucharist, to confess our sins, etc. yet the time,
place, and manner are not determined, but left to the determination of the
Church, and so the Church appoints Holy Days, fasting-dayes, the time of
Easter to receive, and confess our sins, and such like: which being supposed
for probable, but not granted, we may, I do not say, impugn, but probably
expound that decree of the Apostles, as some ancient Fathers do expound it, so
that it does not ordain, or command any new thing, but only declare the law
of GOD, and Nature; and that by things strangled, and blood, is understood
only manslaughter, Irenae. l. 3. c. 12 Cypr. l. 3. ad Quirimum c. vl. See
Suarez lib. ^. de Leg. ca. 20.
either by strangling, or by the effusion of blood, as Irenaeus, S. Cyprian,
and others do seem to understand those words, and likewise that meats
offered to Idols are here only forbidden to be eaten either with a
superstitious worship, as though some sacred thing were in those meats in
regard of the Idol, or else with the scandal of others, both which are
against the law of God, and nature, and both which senses may be gathered from
the words of S. Paul 1. Cor. 8. verse. 4. and 7. and 1. Cor. 10. verse. 28. and
29.

18 And in the like proportionate manner I have answered to the Decree of the
Lateran Council, not by impugning, but by expounding the same. For considering
that it is truly a probable doctrine and maintained by very many Doctors, as
Almaine affirms, that the Ecclesiastical power of the Church does not by the
institution of Christ extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as
death, exile, privation of goods, imprisonment, and when she uses these, she
does it by the pure positive law, and privileges of Princes, it is evident,
that we may probably answer, that decree of the Lateran Council, if we may
call it a decree, concerning the future fact of the deposition of temporal
Landlords, or Magistrates, not to proceed from Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
power but from that temporal authority, which was granted to the Council by
the consent of temporal Princes, whose Ambassadors were present at the making
of that act; or else to bind only in the Popes temporal Dominions.

19 Secondly, I answer, that there is a great disparitie betwixt the decree of
the Apostles, and the decree, or act of the Lateran Council for as much as
concerns that future deposition of temporal Landlords. For the decree of
the Apostles is a true and proper law, and decree, and includes an express
commandment to abstain from those things, which are there forbidden: but this
Decree of the Lateran Council, for as much as concerns the aforesaid
deposition, is not a true, and proper law or Decree, neither does it contain
any special commandment, prohibition, grant, or privilege, which every true,
and proper law, or decree ought to contain, as it will clearly appear
according to my Adversaries own grounds, if we consider every part, and
parcel of this Decree, or Canon. For first it is there ordained, that Secular
Potestaes, or Magistrates shall by Ecclesiastical Censure, if need require,
be compelled to take an Oath, that they will do their best endeavor to banish
all heretics from the territories subject to their Jurisdiction: and this no
doubt is a true, and proper decree. Secondly, that if a temporal Landlord,
Magistrate, or Lord shall neglect to purge his territories from heretical
filth, he shall by the Metropolitan, and other Comprouinciall Bishops be
excommunicated; and this also is a true and proper decree, and includes a
precept, and commandment. Tirdly, that if he shall contemn to give
satisfaction within a year, the same shall be signified to the Pope, and this
also is a proper decree, commanding the Metropolitan, and other Comprouinciall
Bishops to signify the same to the Pope: Fourthly it is added, that then the
Pope may denounce his Vassalls absolved from their fealty, and his territories
exposed to be taken by Catholics: and this, which is the maine, and only
point, from whence my Adversaries conclude, that the Pope by his spiritual
power may depose temporal Princes, cannot according to their own grounds be
a true, and proper decree, and contain any commandment, grant or privilege,
unless they will grant the Council to be above the Pope, and that the
Council has power to impose commandments upon the Pope, or to give him any
authority, or privilege, which nevertheless they utterly deny: and therefore
these words, as of themselves it is plain, do only import, and signify the
end, reason, or cause of the former Decree, to wit, wherefore it must be
signified to the Pope, that such a temporal Landlord, has been
excommunicated for a whole year.

20 And by this it is evident first, that seeing that in general Councels
according to the express doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, the greatest part
of the Acts do not appertain to faith, (For neither are of faith the
disputations, which go before, nor the reasons which are added, nor those
things which are brought to explicate, and illustrate, but only the bare
decrees, and those not all, but which are propounded, as of faith,) and that
this is no decree, and though it were, it is not propounded as of faith, as it
is manifest by the rules assigned above by Cardinal Bellarmine, and Canus, to
know when any thing is propounded, as of faith, but it only contains the
cause and reason of the former decree, which reason may be exposed to error
(seeing that it is not greatly to be stood upon, says Canus, Canus l. 6. c. 8.
si Pontificum rations necessariae non sunt, if the reasons of the Popes or
Councels be not necessary,) it is, I say, most evident, that from this Act no
probable argument can be brought to prove, that the doctrine for the Popes
power to depose Princes, is certain and of faith.

21 Secondly, it is also evident, that I do not impugn, or call in question
this Act of the Council but do only expound, and interpret it, and that my
exposition is probable, to wit, that this Act was made not by spiritual
authority, but by temporal, it is manifest, supposing, that is probable, as in
very deed it is, and maintained by very many Doctors, both Divines, and
Lawyers, that the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power by the institution of
Christ, does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, but only
of Ecclesiastical censures, and therefore it cannot without gross ignorance
and manifest absurdity be said, that this my answer and exposition which is
grounded upon the doctrine, not only of so many learned Authors, but also of
my own Adversaries, and who otherwise defend the Popes authority to depose
Princes, is to be accounted improbable or absurd. I now let pass that the
decrees of Popes and Councels which are not referred to all the Church, but
only to particular Bishops, Churches, or persons, and do not concern and
bind all the Church, but only certain persons, may be exposed to error,
Canus lib. 5. cap. 5. q. 4.
as I declared before: For in that case only, says Canus, the Judges are to
be understood to pronounce, or define of faith, when the decree or sentence
belongs to all the faithful, when it binds all: but this Act of the
Lateran Council does only concern temporal Land lords, and their Vassals,
and those not all, but only the Vassals of such Land lords, Magistrates, or
Lords, who remain excommunicated for a whole year, for neglecting to purge
their territories of heretical filth. And thus much concerning the Apostles
decree.

22 And the like also, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 179. nu. 4. 5.
, may be said concerning other decrees of Popes and Councels, the impugners
whereof have been held and condemned by the Church for heretics, as for
example; it was decreed Baron. an. 159 Eusebius. lib. 23. cap. 22. 23. 24, and 25.

Theod. lib. 1. c. 9. Athan. in epist. de Synod. Arimin. Ambros. epist. 83.


by Pope Pius the first, and confirmed by Pope Victor, and after by the
Council of Nice, that the feast of Easter should be celebrated, at the same
time that now it is kept universally throughout Christendom, according to the
tradition left to the Roman Church, by S. Peter, whereas the Churches of Asia
did celebrate the said feast with the Jews, ( to wit, at the time prescribed
in the law of Moses) following therein the tradition, or at least the practice
of S. John the Evangelist. And albeit those decrees ordain only matter of
fact, and practice, yet they which have heretofore contradicted the same, and
adhered to the custom of the Jews were, and are still held by the Church for
heretics, Epiphan. haer. 50 S. Aug haer. 29.
and registered for such by S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, in their Catalogues
of heretics, under the name and title of Tessarescedecatitae, that is to say,
Quartadecimani, who with this distinction of Widdrington, and his arguments,
might far more probably defend their opinion, then he does, or can defend
his. For they might say as well as he, that those Decrees were not matters of
faith, but matters of fact only, wherein both the Pope, and the Councels might
follow their own private opinions, and consequently err, which being added to
that which they said in defense of their heresy, and might truly say, to wit,
that they followed the practice of S. John the Evangelist, and of the Churches
of Asia, Eusebius. vbi supra Beda lib. 3. hist. cap. 23.
(which received the same by tradition from him, and continued it without
interruption for 150. years) this, I say, would give another manner of
probability to their doctrine, then he can any way pretend for his; and yet
nevertheless they are worthily held for heretics, because they did
obstinately refuse to obey those decrees.

23 But this objection is as frivolous as the former; first, for that it
supposes that I oppose a matter of fact, to a matter of faith, and imagine
that the one cannot stand with the other, which is untrue, as I showed before.
Secondly, for that it supposes also that I impugn the decree, or rather Act
and reason of the Lateran Council, which is also untrue, seeing that I do not
impugn it, but only as you have seen, expound it. Thirdly, for that there is
a great disparity betwixt the decree concerning the celebrating of the Feast of
Easter, and this Act of the Lateran Council, concerning the future deposition
of temporal Landlords, or Magistrates, seeing that the former is a true and
proper decree, implying an express precept, and commandment, but this Act is
not a true and proper decree, containing in it any command, grant, or
privilege, as I showed before and therefore we cannot rightly apply those
arguments, which the Divines do bring to prove the Churches infallible
authority to make decrees, and precepts concerning manners, to this Act of the
Lateran Council, which is not grounded upon any doctrine appertaining to faith,
but only upon opinion, which may be exposed to error.

24 Fourthly, the Quartadecimani, Castro lib. 12. contra haer. verbo Pascha.
Bell. lib. 3. de Cultu. Sanct. cap. 12.
as you may see in Alphonsus de Castro, and Cardinal Bellarmine, were not
accounted heretics for celebrating the Feast of Easter, according to the
custom of the Jews, contrary to the decree of the Church, but for that they
thought it necessary to celebrate that Feast, according to the custom of the
Jews, which is indeed heretical. And therefore that is very untrue, which
Mr. Fitzherbert says, that the Quartadecimani were worthily held for
heretics, because they did obstinately refuse to obey those decrees, but
because they refused to obey them upon an heretical ground. Neither is it
heretical, as I have showed before out of Canus, to impugn, or disobey a
decree of the Church, especially concerning facts and manners, which are not
necessary to salvation, unless it be impugned, or disobeyed upon an heretical
ground. But if the decree be grounded only upon an opinion, which is exposed
to error, and not upon an infallible point of faith, it is not heretical to
impugn that decree, and to say, that the Church may err in making that
decree. Wherefore it is one thing to say, that the Church may err in making
such, or such a law, and decree; and another thing to say, that the Church does
err, or has erred in making that law and decree, Canus lib. 5. q. 5 conclu. 2.
albeit Melchior Canus fears not to say, that he does not approve all
Church-lawes, nor commend all punishments, Censures, Excommunications,
Irregularities, Interdicts. I know, says he, that there be some such laws,
which if they want nothing else, yet doubtless they want prudence, and
discretion. For in laws, precepts, decrees, and facts concerning manners,
which are not necessary to salvation, and which are not grounded upon any
doctrine of faith, it is not heretical to hold, that Christ has not promised
to the Church any infallible assistance; and that therefore she may err in
making such decrees, yet I do not deny, but that it were temerarious, and
irreligious for any private man to impugn any decree of a general Council,
and to say, that the Church did err in making that decree.

25 As also it is no false doctrine, much less heretical, to affirm, that
Kings, and temporal Commonwealths may err in making laws and decrees
concerning civil government, for that Christ has not promised them his
infallible assistance therein; yet it were scandalous, and seditious for a
private man to impugn any temporal law established by the Prince, and the
Commonwealth, and to say, that they did err in making that temporal law.
But, as I said before, I do not impugn, but only expound this Decree, or
rather Act of the Lateran Council, according to the probable doctrine of very
many Doctors, who affirm, that the Church by the institution of Christ, has
not power to inflict temporal punishments, but only Ecclesiastical Censures.
But no marvel, that my Adversary discourses here so unlearnedly, seeing that
he has so little insight in these Theological questions, and I accuse rather
his temerity, then his ignorance, that he will take upon him with such
confidence, to be a teacher in these difficult questions, wherein he himself
has never been a Scholar, or scarce understands the true state of the
question. And by this, which has been said, the judicious Reader may easily
perceive, how vain and impertinent are the rest of Mr. Fitzherberts
inferences, and objections in this Chapter, which therefore I might well omit,
but that to give satisfaction to the unlearned Reader, I am in a sort compelled
to set them down.

26 Whereupon, says he, Page. 180. number. 6.
it follows first, that Widdringtons answer to the Canon of the Council of
Lateran, grounded upon a distinction of a matter of fact, and a matter of
faith, is very vain and frivolous, as well because the one does not exclude
the other, as also because by that distinction he may impugn the Decree of
the Apostles themselves, of the Popes, Pius, and Victor, and of the Council of
Nice, and such other touching matters of fact, no less probably, then he
impugneth the Canon of the Council of Lateran.

27 But to this, as you have seen, I have answered before, and have clearly
showed, that I did not impugn, but only expound the decree of the Lateran
Council, and that I did not oppose a matter of faith, to every matter of fact,
but to a matter of fact only, or, which is all one, to such a matter of fact,
which is not grounded upon any doctrine of faith, and such a matter of fact
does exclude a matter of faith: and also that by this distinction I do not any
wise impugn the decree of the Apostles, of Pope Pius, and Victor, of the
Council of Nice, or of any other touching matters of fact.

28 Secondly, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Pa. 180. nu. 7
it appears, that, as the Quartadecimani were woorthily condemned of heresy,
because they obstinately contradicted the authority of those Decrees, so also
those, who do with like obstinacy impugn the other Decree of the Council of
Lateran, do much more deserve to be held for heretics, seeing that they have
much less probability for their opinion, then the other had.

29 But this also has been answered before; for neither were the
quartadecimani condemned of heresy, because they obstinately contradicted the
authority of those decrees, but because they contradicted them upon an
heretical ground: Neither do I impugn the Decree of the Lateran Council,
but do only expound it, according to the probable doctrine of very many learned
Catholics, who since the Council of Lateran have affirmed, that the
Ecclesiastical power, by the institution of Christ, does not extend to the
inflicting of temporal punishments, as death, exile, privation of goods,
imprisonment, but that the Church, when she inflicteth such punishments, does
it by the pure positive law, and privileges of Princes, which learned Doctors
cannot without gross temeritie, and impudency be therefore condemned of
heresy. And if this decree of the Lateran Council be so clear a proof to
make this doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes to be a point of
faith, and the contrary heretical, as these men pretend, I would gladly know,
why Cardinal Bellarmine in his Controversies, Victoria, Corduba, Moliua, or D.
Sanders did not urge it to make their doctrine in this point, certain,
unquestionable, and of faith, and why Marsilius of Padua was not by some one of
those, who write of heresies, accounted an heretic for impugning this
doctrine, and why it was not by Castro, Prateolus, Cardinal Bellarmine, or
some other reckoned among one of his heresies, but it must now, forsooth,
within these few years, without any new definition either of Pope, or Council
be made an heresy, which for a 1600. years before was not by any ancient
Father, or Catholic Divine accounted an heresy.

30 Thirdly, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Pa. 181. nu. ^
whereas Widdrington concludes this his third answer, with this reason, that
the Fathers in the Council of Lateran had no more assurance, and certainty
for this their Decree, then if they had declared their opinion forth of the
Council, because Christ has not promised the infallible assistance of his
holy Spirit unto facts, and probable opinions of Popes, or Counsels, but to
their definitions only, this his conclusion, I say, is most impertinent, not
only because it impugneth the foresaid Decrees of the Apostles, of Pope Pius,
and of the Nicene Council, no less then this other of the Council of
Lateran, but also because he flatly overthrows himself, seeing that this
Decree of the Council of Lateran is a true definition concerning the means to
extirpate heresy; and therefore seeing that our Savior promised the
infallible assistance of his holy Spirit to the definitions of Popes and
Councels ( as Widdrington has here expressly affirmed) it follows, that the
Pope, and Fathers in the Council of Lateran, neither did, nor could err in
their definition, or Decree concerning the deposition of Princes, when it shall
be necessary for the extirpation of heresy.

31 But all this also I have fully satisfied before, and showed a great
disparity betwixt those decrees of the Apostles, of Pope Pius, and of the
Council of Nice, and betwixt the Act of the Lateran Council, concerning the
future deposition of temporal Potestaes, both for that this Act of the Lateran
Council is no true, and proper Decree (according to my Adversaries grounds) as
those were, and also for that no Catholic Author aff^rmeth, that those
Decrees were made by temporal, but only by spiritual authority, but very
many Doctors affirm, that this Act was made by the authority and consent of
temporal Princes, seeing that according to their doctrine the Church by the
institution of Christ, has not authority to inflict temporal punishments,
but that when she uses, or inflicteth them, she does it by the pure positive
law, and privileges of Princes.

32 And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert says, that this Decree of the Lateran
Council, is a true definition concerning the means to extirpate heresi^, if
he mean by the Decree of the Lateran Council, this only Act concerning the
absoluing of Vassalls from their fealty, whereof only we now dispute, and by
a definition he understand a Decree containing some precept, or obligation
either concerning faith, or manners, this is very untrue, for, as I showed
before, this Act, according to his own grounds, contains no precept, bond,
or obligation, unless he will grant, that the Council has authority to
command or bind the Pope, and therefore it is not properly a true Decree, but
only the reason, cause, and end of the former Decree: and although it were a
true decree, and in that sense a definition, yet for that it was enacted, not
by spitituall, but by temporal authority, it is evident, that no infallible
assistance of the holy Ghost was promised by our Savior Christ to the making
thereof. But if by this Decree of the Lateran Council he understand the whole
act, which contains diverse particular decrees concerning the rooting out of
heresy by spiritual means (for to root out heresy by temporal means, and
inflicting temporal punishments, as I have often said, does not belong to
spiritual, but to temporal authority) then I willingly grant, that this
Decree is a true definition, taking a definition, as he does, for a Decree,
but, besides that this is nothing against me, he must withal remember, that,
according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, not all definitions or
decrees do appertain to faith, but those Decrees only, which are propounded
as of faith: Now if Mr. Fitzherbert will but call to mind the rules, which I
have alleged before out of Cardinal Bellarmine, to know, when any Decree is
propounded as of faith, he will evidently see, that this Act of the Lateran
Council concerning the absoluing of vassalls from their fealty, is no such
Decree, and will therefore be hereafter shamed to urge any longer the Council
of Lateran, for the confirming of his new Catholke, or rather particular faith,
and private spirit.

33 And if Widdrington say, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Pa. 191. nu. 9
that Decrees concerning matters of fact are not definitions, he shows
himself very absurd. For it cannot be denied, but that Popes and Counsels
ordaining Decrees concerning matters of fact, do as well define what is to be
done, or practiced, as they define what is to be believed and taught, when they
make Decrees concerning matters of faith; and the one is no less necessary for
the good government of the Church, then the other; and therefore their Decrees
of both sorts are definitions, the one of a thing to be believed, and the other
of a thing to be done; for otherwise we must say, that the Apostles after all
their consultation in their Council at Jerusalem defined nothing, which were
absurd.

34 But because I will not contend of words, I do not say, Act. 15.
that Decrees concerning matters of fact, and manners, which are true, and
proper Decrees, are not definitions, or that such Decrees, or definitions are
not necessary for the good government of the Church, but that, which I say,
is, that this Act of the Lateran Council concerning the deposition, not of
Princes, as this man supposes, but of Landlords, Potestaes, or Lords, is not,
according to my Adversaries grounds, a true and proper Decree, or definition,
including any precept, bond, or obligation, which all true, and proper decrees
do include: and I also say, that, according to the express doctrine of
Cardinal Bellarmine, not all the Decrees, or definitions of general Counsels
do appertain to faith, but those only which are propounded as of faith; and
that to know, when any Decree is propounded as of faith, he assigns these
rules, to wit, If the Council do excommunicate those, or account them for
heretics, who shall believe the contrary, or if it declare by a firm decree,
that what is defined, or decreed ought to be received as a doctrine of the
Catholic faith, and to be firmly believed by all the faithful, or the
contrary to be heretical, or repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and that when
none of these things be affirmed, it is not certain, that it is a point of
faith: Now that there is no such thing decreed, defined, or affirmed in this
manner in the Lateran Council, touching the absoluing of vassals from their
fealty, it is too too apparent.

35 Wherein also, says M. Fitzherbert, Page 182. nu. 10. 11.
it is to be considered, that the error which may be incident to a definition,
or Decree concerning matters of fact, cannot fall upon the Decree, or
definition it self (for so should the error redound to the holy Ghost, whose
assistance our Savior has promised to the definitions of Counsels, and
Popes, as Widdrington himself See before u. 1.
grants) but it must fall upon the execution of the Decree, as if some Prince
should be deposed upon wrong information, or without due circumstances required
in the Decree. But the question is not here of error in matters of fact of
this kind (I mean in the execution of Decrees) and therefore if Widdrington
speak of such facts, when he says, that Christ has not promised the
assistance of his spirit to facts, but to definitions, he changes the
question, and fights with his own shadow, affirming that, which we deny
not, who speak only of the verity, justice, and equity of the Decree it
self, from the which we exclude all error, and injustice, acknowledging the
assistance of the holy Ghost in the making thereof, in which respect all
Catholic Doctors that have ever written, have uniformly taught hitherto,
that the Church being guided by the holy Ghost cannot err in her general
Decrees made for the whole Church, touching either faith, or manners (as I will
declare See Cha. 16. nu. 11. 12.
further hereafter.) Whereupon I conclude that Widdrington admitting, as he
does the assistance of the holy Ghost in the definitions of Counsels, and
Popes, and yet impugning the verity, or justice of the Decree, ascribes
error or injustice to the holy Ghost.

36 But first, whether a General Council can err or no in her definitions,
or decrees, which are made by her spiritual authority concerning matters of
fact, or manners (for that the Pope cannot err even in his definitions
concerning faith, if he define without a General Council I never intended to
affirm) it is altogether impertinent to the present Act of the Lateran
Council concerning the absoluing of vassals from their fealty, seeing that
this Act, as I contend, was not made by her spiritual authority, but by the
authority, license, and consent of temporal Princes, to the making of which
Decrees no Catholic Author affirms, that Christ has promised his infalible
assistance, or that the Church is guided therein by the holy Ghost.

37 Secondly, albeit at this present I do not say, that the Church, or a
General Council can err in her general Decrees concerning matters of fact
and manners, yet I say, as I said before, that Melchior Canus a man of such
learning and piety, that Mr. Fitzherbert dare not, as I think, accuse him of
heresy, does confidently say, that without danger of heresy it may be held,
that the Church in some such law, or custom may err, and that he dare not
affirm it to be heretical, to say that some such law, or custom of the
Church is unjust; and also that in manners not common to the whole Church, but
which are referred to private persons, or Churches, the Church may err through
ignorance, not only in her judgment of things done, but also in her private
precepts, and laws; and generally he says, that if any one of those things,
whereon the judgment of the Church does depend, be uncertain, the decree of
the Church cannot be firm, and certain, whether the question be speculatiue,
or practical, of which sort, says he, is that decree, by which she does
canonize or judge holy men to be numbered in the Catalogue of Saints. By all
which it is evident, that from the Act, or Decree, if we will needs call it
so, of the Lateran Council concerning the absoluing of vassalls from their
fealty, stretch it as far as may be, no colorable, much less conuincing
argument can be brought to make the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes, to be a point of faith, and the contrary to be heretical.

38 Thirdly, when I affirmed, that from the undoubted doctrine of the Catholic
Church this only can be gathered, that Christ has promised the infalliable
assistance of the holy Ghost, not to facts, or probable opinions of Popes, and
Counsels, but to definitions only, by facts I understand such acts, as are
not grounded upon any doctrine of faith, and by definitions, I meant those
Decrees, which are propounded as of faith: or, which without any doubt, or
controversy are deduced evidently from such infallible definitions, or
principles of faith, of which sort, this Act, or Decree of the Lateran Council
is not, as it is evident for those many reasons before alleged.

39 And whereas Widdrington adds, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 133. nu. 12.
Supra. nu. 1.
an other circumstance, to wit, that the Council did not determine by this
Decree, that the future deposition of Princes should proceed from an undoubted
lawful authority, or from the Ecclesiastical power only without the consent
of Princes, he is no less impertinent then in the former: for what need was
there to determine that the Pope had an undoubted lawful authority to depose
Princes, seeing that the same was not then any way called in question, but
admitted for a known truth, as it is evident, for that the whole Council
determined the practice of it, Naucler. go^erat. 41. ad ann. 12.
which they would not have done, if they had doubted of the lawfulness of the
Popes authority in that behalf.

But first, Mr. Fitzherbert does egregiously abuse both me, and his Reader, in
adding both here, and above the word [Princes] as though I had acknowledged
that Act of the Lateran Council to concern the future deposition of Princes,
whereas I ever affirmed, that it did only concern inferior Magistrates,
Potestaes, Landlords, and Lords, and not Sovereign Princes; and therefore I
said only [that future deposition] and my Adversary adds of himself the
word [Princes.]

40 Secondly, whether it was needful, or no, for the Council to declare,
whether that Act concerning the future deposition of temporal Landlords,
Magistrates, or Lords, or rather the denouncing of them ipso facto deposed, was
made by spiritual, or temporal authority, it is nothing material to our
question; this being sufficient for me, that seeing that very many Catholic
Doctors do affirm, that the Ecclesiastical power by the institution of Christ
does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as is the absoluing
of Vassals from their temporal fealty, and the Council did not declare, by
what authority that Act was made, any Catholic man may probably, and without
any note of temeritie, much less of heresy, affirm, that it was made not by
any undoubted lawful Ecclesiastical authority, but only by the authority,
license, and consent of absolute Princes. But although it were not absolutely
necessary, that the Council should have declared, whether that future
deposition was to proceed from Ecclesiastical, or temporal authority, yet to
make it a point of faith, (which all men are bound to believe) that the
aforesaid deposition was to proceed from Ecclesiastical authority, and not
temporal, it was necessary that the Council should have declared the same,
especially supposing, that it is truly probable, that the Ecclesiastical
power does not extend to the inflicting of temporal punishments. As also if
the Pope being now both a spiritual Pastor, and also a temporal Prince,
should make a law, whereof there may be made a probable doubt, whether it was
made by virtue of his spiritual, or of his temporal authority, it is
necessary, to make this point certain, and out of controversy, that he
declare, by what authority, temporal, or spiritual that law was enacted.

41 Thirdly, it is very untrue, that the Popes power to depose Princes was not
then any way called in question, but admitted for a known truth, for that from
the very first broaching thereof, there always has been a great
controversy, says Fa. Azor, betwixt Emperors and Kings on the one side,
Azor. tom. 2. li. 11. ca. 5. q. 8
and the Bishops of Rome on the other, whether in certain causes the Pope has
a right, and power to deprive Kings of their kingdom. And the evident reason,
which Mr. Fitzherbert brings hereof, to wit, for that the whole Council
determined the practice of it, is the maine question which is now betwixt us,
and so he brings for an evident reason, that which is the controversy, and
to be proved, which is an evident petitio principij, and condemned as vicious
by all Logicians. Neither does Nauclerus, whom my Adversary cites in the
margent, as though he would make his Reader believe, that Nauclerus affirms,
that the whole Council decreed the practice thereof, affirm any such thing.
For Nauclerus words are only these: There were many things truly then
consulted of, yet nothing could be plainly decreed, for that they of Pisa, and
Genua made war one against the other by Sea, and those on this side the Alps
by land. Yet some Constitutions are reported to be published, whereof one is,
that whenever the Princes of the world shall offend one the other, the
correcting belongs to the Bishop of Rome. Where you see first, that Nauclerus
expressly says, that albeit many things were consulted, yet nothing at all
could be plainly decreed. Secondly, that it was only a report, that some
constitutions were published. Thirdly, he does not say, that these
Constitutions were of the whole Council, or only of Pope Innocent and recited
in the Council as Matthew Paris said. Fourthly, that this report was untrue,
it is also plain, seeing that there is no such Constitution, as he
mentions, to be found in the Lateran Council. And lastly, albeit there were
such a Constitution, it is nothing to the purpose, seeing that it only says,
that when Princes are at variance, it belongs to the Pope to correct them, to
wit, by Ecclesiastical Censures, which is not the question, but that it
belongs to the Pope to correct Princes, by deposing them, and by inflicting
temporal punishments, which is the maine controversy, and whereof the
practice, as Mr. Fitzherbert says, citing Nauclerus, in the margent, was
decreed by the whole Council, Nauclerus speaks not any one word at all.

42 Also, Pope Innocent the third, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 183. u. 13.
Naucler. geuerat. 42 ann. 1246. Matthew. Paris. in Henrico. 3. See Adolp. Schulc.
pro Card. Bell. ca. 12 and 14 where he confuteth the answers of Widdrington to
these examples.
under whom the Council of Lateran was held, had not past three or four
years before deprived the Emperor Otho of his right to the Empire by a
sentence of Excommunication, and deposition; by virtue whereof Frederike the
second (whose Ambassadors were present at the Lateran Council) was made
Emperor, who also was afterward deposed by Innocentius the fourth in the
General Council held at Lions: as likewise Leo the Emperor was before
deprived of his rents, and revenues in Italy for heresy by Pope Gregory the
second. Also Childerike King of France, and Henry the fourth Emperor of that
name had been deposed from their states, and dignities by the authority of
the Sea Apostolic before the Council of Lateran. Therefore the said Council
had reason to think it altogether needelesse to determine any thing concerning
the lawfulness of a matter already admitted, and practiced.

43 But truly any learned man would be ashamed to argue so unlearnedly, that
because some Popes before the Council of Lateran deposed Christian Princes,
wherein nevertheless they were greatly contradicted by Princes and subjects,
therefore the Popes authority to depose is undoubtedly lawful, or because a
matter is already practiced, and admitted by many, though contradicted, and
not admitted by others there needs no determination to make the lawfulness
thereof certain, and manifest. It is true, that diverse Popes since the time of
Gregory the 7. who was the first, that contrary to the custom of his
Ancestors challenged to himself authority to depose the Emperor, Onuphrius
lib. 4 de varia creat. Romans Pont.
says Onuphrius, have put in practice this their pretended authority, but it
was ever contradicted both by Christian Princes and subjects. And in particular
concerning those examples, which Mr. Fitzherbert here brings, it is evident,
that many Catholic Authors, whom I related elsewhere, Apolog. number. 404. and
seq.
do deny, that Pope Zachary did depose Childerike, in any other manner, then
by consenting to the Peers of France, who deposed him, and by declaring that
he might be lawfully deposed by the Peers of France, and his subjects absolved
from their oath of allegiance. That of P. Gregory the second, or the third, for
my Adversaries do not agree which of them it was, Onuphrius vbi supra. Otho
Frsingensis lib. 6 cap. 35. Sigebert. ad annum 1088. Godfridus viterb. par. 17.
Trithem. in Chron. monast. Hirsang. ad adnum 1106.
Onuphrius calls a fable. Pope Gregory the 7. did indeed depose Henry the
fourth Emperor, but how greatly he was contradicted therein, all Histories
make mention, and how it was accounted a great novelty, it is manifest by Otho
Frisingensis, Sigebert, Godfridus, Trithemius, and Onuphrius; and also by the
Epistle of Hermanus Bishop of Metz to Pope Gregory Vide epistol. Greg. 7. ad
Herman. lib. 8. Epist. 21.
concerning this point.

44 Also Pope Innocent the third did depose Otho, as before he deposed Philip,
and hereof he wrote a Decretall Epistle, or Breue to the Duke of Zaringia,
which is registered in the Canon Law, in Cap. Venerabilem de elect. and electi
potestate, which decree or decretall Epistle Albericus a famous Lawyer In
Dictionar. in verbo electio. Abbas Vrsperg. ad annum 1198
affirms, to be made by Pope Innocent against the liberty and rights of the
Empire: And Abbas Vrspergensis not only reprehendeth that decree, as
containing in it against Philip many absurd things, and some falsehoods, but he
also taxes the Princes and Barons of perjury, who, says he, being taught by
diabolical art, did not regard to break their oaths, nor violate their
faith, now forsaking Philip, and adhering to Otho, and contrariwise. And how
this deposition of Otho was contradicted by him, Naucler. gener. 41. ad annum
1212.
Nauclerus, whom my Adversary cites, does plainly testify, who writes that
Otho speaking to the Princes of Germany, affirms, that it belongs to their
right, and not the Popes, to create and depose the Emperor. But to see in what
manner Otho was made Emperor, to the infinite wrong of Frederick the second
being then a child, and without fault, and who in his cradle was by almost all
the Princes of Germany in the time of his father Henry the sixth Emperor
chosen to be their King, and to whom they made their oath of allegiance, and
for what cause this Otho after he was made Emperor was deposed by the Pope,
it would make even a stony heart to bleed; and truly my Adversaries in urging
these examples, do in my judgment show great want of discretion, Naucler.
generat. 41. ad ann. 1193. Matthew. Paris in Ioanne Rege an. 1210.
in giving thereby occasion to rip up many odious matters, and which for
reverence to the Sea Apostolic, it were much better they were buried with
perpetual silence, and oblivion. See Nauclerus, and Matthew Paris cited here
by my Adversary.

45 Also Pope Innocentius the fourth, in the presence of the Council of Lions,
but without the approbation of the whole Council did depose Frederick the
second, but how greatly he was contradict therein, both by the Emperor
himself, and also by the Princes of Germany, and others, it is manifest. The
Pope, says Abbas Stadensis, Abbas Stad. ad annum. 1245.
did upon S. James his day renew in the said Council of Lions, the sentence of
Excommunication against the Emperor, and by his own authority (therefore not
of the Council) did depose him from his Imperial dignity, and this deposition
he published throughout all the Church, commanding, under pain of
Excommunication, that none should hereafter name him Emperor, which sentence
flying throughout the world, certain of the Princes with many others did
gainesay, affirming, that it does not belong to the Pope to create, or depose
the Emperor, but to crown him, that is chosen by the Princes. And Nauclerus,
Naucler. generat. 42. ad ann. 1242. and seq.
to whom Mr. Fitzherbert in the margent remitteth his Reader, affirms, that
the Emperor Frederick in a letter to the King of France, contended to prove,
that the Popes sentence denounced against him was in law, and right inualid,
and among other reasons of the Emperor he alleges this, that although the
Bishop of Rome has full power in spiritualls, that he may absolve and bind
all sinners, yet it was never read, that by the grant of the law of God, or
man, he has power to transfer the Empire at his pleasure, or to judge
temporally of Kings, and Princes in depriving them of their kingdoms. And also
what contradiction Pope Innocent found by that practice, Trithemius relates,
affirming, Trithem. in Chron. Monast. Hirsang. ad ann. 1244.
that Frederick after his deposition came into Italy, and did afflict the
Pope, and the people subject to him with so great evils, that he was weary of
his life, and wished that he had never thought of that deposition. Judge now,
good Reader, what Mr. Fitzherbert dare not avouch, affirming so boldly, and
shamefully, that the authority of the Pope to depose Princes was not then
doubted of, or any way called in question, but admitted for a known truth, and
with what security thou may repose thy soul, and whole estate upon the
learning, and conscience of this man, who with such gross fraud and ignorance
seekth to delude thee. But to these examples I have heretofore, partly in my
Apology, and partly in this Treatise sufficiently answered.

46 And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert in the margent, remitteth his Reader to D.
Schulckenius, for the confutation of my answers to these examples, if the
Reader will be pleased, after he has read over this my Treatise, wherein I
confute this Doctor, but only to confer my answers with his Replies, he
will easily perceive, how egregiously he shuffleth, and that he has much ado
to excuse Cardinal Bellarmine from manifest improbability, and brings no one
argument, which proves any one of my answers to be improbable: and if he
desire to see this Doctors Replies more particularly answered, I remit him
likewise for this present to Master John Barclay, to whom as yet no answer
has been made, in his book against Cardinal Bellarmines answer to his
father, but especially to the Bishop of Rochester, who although a Protestant,
yet out of Catholic Authors, and Catholic grounds, has very clearly, and
particularly confuted all these examples, and what Cardinal Bellarmine, and D.
Schulckenius, if they be two sundry men, have brought to confirm the same.

47 Besides that, says M. Fitzherbert Page 184. nu. 14.
neither the Church nor yet Secular Princes do use to declare in their laws
from what authority the execution thereof shall proceed, but it suffices,
that their authority to decree, ordain, and execute their Laws is
sufficiently known, and acknowledged by their subjects; whereby it appears,
that Widdrington does very idly require, that the Council of Lateran should
have declared, that the future deposition of Princes should proceed from an
undoubted lawful authority, being a matter, which they held to be without
all doubt, or Controversy.

48 But as for Secular Princes it is not needful for them to declare, by what
authority they make temporal laws, and ordain, or inflict temporal
punishments, for that no Catholic ever made doubt, but that they had full
authority to do the same: but seeing that it has ever been a Controversy
among Catholics, and very many Doctors do affirm, that the Ecclesiastical
power by the institution of Christ does not extend to the inflicting of
temporal punishments, whenever the Church does inflict such punishments
without declaring by what authority she does the same, we may probably
answer, according to the grounds of these Doctors, that she does it not by
her spiritual authority, which can inflict no such punishments, but by the
authority, license, and consent of temporal Princes: and therefore that we
must certainly believe, that the Council of Lateran did ordain the future
deposition, not of temporal Princes, as this man faineth, but of inferior
Landlords, Magistrates, or Lords, by her undoubted Ecclesiastical, or
spiritual authority, it was necessary, that the Council should have
declared the same, seeing that both Catholic Princes, and subjects have ever
made a great doubt, and controversy concerning this point; neither could the
Fathers of that Council be ignorant hereof, who both saw, and felt what
great contradiction, and opposition both Philip, and Otho, Page 184. nu. 15.
and the Princes of Germany, and their favorers made against this pretended
authority of the Pope to depose the Emperor, and to dispose of temporal
matters belonging to the Empire.

49 And as for the consent of Princes, says Mr. Fitzherbert, which Widdrington
also requires to Decrees concerning temporal matters, I have already
answered him touching that point, and showed, See Chap. 11. nu. 7. 8. 9 and s.
and see also my answer to the same.
as well by the example of the Apostles themselves, as by the practice of the
primitive Church, when there were no Christian Emperors, or Princes, that
their consent is needelesse to the validity of Ecclesiastical Decrees; and
that if the same were needful, all Christian Princes should stand bound to
obey the Decrees of the Council, because being enacted by their general
consent in a general Parliament of all Christendom, it cannot be repealed
without another general Council of like authority: So as thou see, good
Reader, that Widdringtons third answer is in every thing defective, and no
less improbable then the former. Nevertheless he presumes so much upon the
probability thereof, that he undertakes to answer also a Reply, which he
imagines, we will make to his last argument, (he should rather have said last
answer) whereof I will examine the particulars in the next chap.

50 And I also in those places, cited here by my Adversary, have fully
confuted his answers, and have clearly showed, that by no example of the
Apostles, nor any one practice of the primitive Church, when there were no
Christian Emperors, or Princes, it can be convinced, that the Apostles by
their ordinary power (for of their extraordinary, and miraculous power I do
not now dispute) or any Pope, or Council in the primitive Church did inflict
temporal punishments. And whether a temporal law made in a general
assembly, or Parliament of all Christian Princes, or confirmed by the general
consent of them all, cannot be repealed, but by such another general
Assembly, or by the general consent of them all, I have sufficiently declared
above Cap. 8. nu. 26. and seq.
out of the doctrine of Fa. Suarez, when I treated of the law of Nations. Two
things only may for this present be added thereunto. The first is, that no
humane law, either Ecclesiastical or Civil does bind, unless it be
approved by the acceptance of the people, as the common opinion of Divines,
and Lawyers does affirm: See Disput. Theol. c. 6. sec. 3. nu. 25.
and that many Decrees of this Lateran Council, and namely this Decree, which
is now in question, that every temporal Officer, Landlord, or Lord, when they
come first to their Office, or Lands must take an Oath to root out heretics
from the territories subject to their Jurisdiction, was never observed, or put
in execution in this kingdom, and in many other Kingdoms, and Nations it is
manifest, for ought we can gather by the relation of Histories.

51 The second is, that there is great difference to be observed, betwixt
temporal kingdoms, and the spiritual kingdom, or Church of Christ, and
consequently betwixt the general assemblies, or Parliaments of them both: for
that all Christians do make one true, proper, and total mystical body, or
Commonwealth, which is the Catholic Church, and spiritual kingdom of
Christ, really united in spiritualls, and subject to one supreme visible head,
or spiritual Superior thereof: but all Christians do not make one true, and
total Civil body, or Commonwealth, really united in temporalls, and subject
to one supreme visible head, or temporal Prince thereof: but they do make
diverse entire temporal kingdoms, or Commonwealths; so that throughout all
the whole world there is but one true entire Catholic Church, or mystical
body of Christ, but there are many true entire temporal kingdoms, and
commonwealths. From whence the judicious Reader may easily gather the reason,
why a Decree made by a General Council, or spiritual Parliament can not be
repealed, but by another general Council of like authority, and why a Bishop
for example of Spain, as he is a part of the general Council, which is a
true formal body representing the whole Catholic Church, has power, and
jurisdiction over the Christians of another temporal kingdom, for example of
France, and contrariwise, but a temporal or Civil law made by the consent of
all Christian Princes, may be repealed by every Prince, for as much as
concerns his own kingdom, by whose only authority that law had force to
bind in his kingdom, which in temporalls is subject to no other Prince, but
himself alone; and therefore as that law had not force to bind in his
kingdom from the authority of any other Prince, so the authority, and
consent of no other Prince is necessary for the repealing, and abrogating of
the same. So as thou see, good Reader, that my third answer is no way
defective, but in every thing sound, and sufficient, and that Master
Fitzherbert in the impugning thereof, has very grossly bewrayed his egregious
fraud, and ignorance.

CHAP. XIIII.
Wherein three Instances, grounded upon three examples of Popes decrees and
sentences brought by Widdrington to confute three arguments of Fa. Lessius
whereby he labored in vain to demonstrate that the foundations of the
decrees and sentences of Popes and Counsels must be certain and of faith,
are proved to be sound and sufficient, and the first example brought by
Widdrington is confirmed, and M. Fitzherberts exceptions against the same are
confuted, and he himself in setting down Widdringtons instances and applying
them to the decree of the Lateran Council is convinced of manifest fraud and
falsehood.

1. AFter I had given the aforesaid third answer to that Act of the Lateran
Council, as you have seen before, I insinuated another difficulty In the
aforesaid Preface nu. 51.
concerning that Act in these words. I omit now, that those words [ that from
that time the Pope may denounce, or declare his Vassalls absolved from his
fealtie] do contain in them some difficulty: for if we will regard the
force, or propriety of the words, they seem only to signify, that it
belongs to the Pope not truly to absolve Vassalls from their fealty, but
only to declare them already absolved, which is not the question, which we
have now in hand. But this difficulty Mr. Fitzherbert passes over with
silence, and skippeth to examine three instances, which I did not only
imagine, or suppose, as he says, would be made against my last answer, but
which Fa. Lessius in those express words by me related in a book of his
called Disputatio Apologetica pro potestate Summi Pontificis (which went here
up and down for a while in hugger mugger, and whereof by chance I had then a
view, but now it cannot be seen but by very special and secret friends, which
is a manifest token of a great diffidence in his cause) did bring to
demonstrate, and clearly convince, that it is a manifest point of faith, that
the Pope has power and authority to depose temporal Princes, and to absolve
subjects from their temporal allegiance.

2 And because Mr. Fitzherbert does over much pare and curtoll those three
instances, which I brought to confront and paralele with the three arguments,
or objections urged by Fa. Lessius, I think it not amiss first of all to
relate them word by word, as there they are set down by me. Wherefore the
first argument or objection of Fa. Lesus is this.

1. Argument of Fa Lessius.
That doctrine does appertain to faith, which Popes, Councels and Doctors do
either propound, or suppose as a certain, and undoubted ground or foundation
of their Decrees and sentences; but this doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes, and to absolve subjects from their allegiance, is either propounded,
or supposed by Popes, Councels, and Doctors, as a foundation of many Canons,
and judicial sentences, therefore this doctrine does appertain to faith.

2. Argument.
3 His second argument is this: If a General Council should expressly define,
that the Church has this authority, no Catholic could make any doubt, but
that this matter should appertain to faith, but seeing that it does suppose it
as a sure, and certain foundation of her Decrees and Sentences, she is
thought no less to affirm the same, therefore it ought to be accounted no
less certain.

3. Argument.
4 His third argument is this: It is a point of Faith that the Church cannot
err in doctrine, and precepts of manners, by teaching generally any thing to
be lawful, which is unlawful, or unlawful which is lawful, or also by
commanding any thing which is, per se, of it self unlawful: for such an
error is no less pernicious to the faithful, then is an error in faith. But
if the Pope should not have that authority to deprive temporal Princes of
their dominions, the Church should err in doctrine of manners, and that in
matters of very great moment: For she teaches, that after a Prince is deposed
by the Popes authority, all his subjects are absolved from his obedience, and
that his dominions may be taken by another, as it is manifest by the
Counsels: Also, that after a Prince is publicly excommunicated, his subjects
are absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, in so much that they are not bound
to obey him until he he reconciled, yea and she does forbid them to obey him,
if the Censure be denounced. All which shall be false, and not only false, but
also pernicious, for that the subjects shall thereby be incited to rebellions
and periuries, yea and against their will be compelled thereunto: Therefore the
Church does err in doctrine of manners, and commands rebellions, and
periuries, and by her Censures does compel men thereunto, but to affirm this
is heretical, therefore that also from whence this follows, is heretical,
to wit, that the Church has not authority to absolve subjects from the bond of
their oath, and from their obedience.

5 Thus argues Fa. Lessius, to which his arguments I did not answer in form,
but only propounded three other instances, or arguments to confront them with
his, whereby the learned Reader might clearly see the weakness, and
insufficiency of his objections, which my arguments I grounded in like manner
upon the dispensations, decrees, and judicial sentences of certain Popes in
these words. Praefatio Apol. nu. 56. and seq.


6 And first of all, is not the due administration of Sacraments a matter of
great moment, and chiefly belonging to the Popes office, and is not an error
concerning it to be accounted very pernicious? But the Pope has oftentimes
given leave to a Priest, who was no Bishop, to minister the Sacrament of
Confirmation, As it appears by S. Gregory lib. 3. epist. 26. and it is
related in the Canon, peruenit, did. 95. and many Abbots at this day have the
same faculty. Council. Flor. circa finem in Decreto Eugen.
whereas it is a great controversy among Divines, whether the Pope can give
leave to such a Priest to administer this Sacrament. Seeing therefore that to
the Sacraments of the new Law, as the Council of Florence declares, are
required three things, the matter, the form, and the Minister, of which if any
one be wanting, it is not a true, and perfect Sacrament; and that it is a very
great sacrilege, that the due, and lawful matter, and form of a Sacrament
should be seriously applied by an unlawful Minister, if the Pope, in whom
only, according to these Divines, the whole Ecclesiastiall power, and authority
to define infallibly matters of faith does chiefly reside, cannot grant
authority to a Priest, who is no Bishop, to administer this Sacrament, as very
learned Divines Adrianus Papa in 4. in q. de confess. ar. 3. Durand. in 4.
did. 7. q. 3. and 4 Bonauent. ibid. Alphon. de Cast. in l. de haer. verbo
confirmatio. Petrus Soto lec. 2. de confirm. and others.
without any note of heresy, or error do hold, is it not a very great error
to grant such licenses, whereby there is danger, that most heinous sacriledges,
to wit, the inualid administrations of Sacraments, should be committed?

7 Moreover, Pope Sixtus the fourth did in honor of the immaculate conception
of the blessed Virgin Mary make a Decree It is to be seen in the 4. tome of the
Councels, after the life of Pope Sixtus.
for celebrating the Feast of her Conception, to the end that all faithful
Christians should give thanks, and praise to almighty God for her wonderful
conception, which he also calls immaculate, In the second decree.
of the immaculate Virgin; and notwithstanding it is uncertain, and disputed
by Divines on both sides, whether the B. Virgin was conceived in original
sin, or by the special providence of God preserved from the same: Is it not
therefore from hence manifest, that the doctrine which is propounded, or
supposed as a foundation of an Apostolical constitution, and decree, and which
belongs to the religious service of God, is not so certain, and undoubted a
truth, but that without danger of deadly sin it may be impugned.

8 Lastly, some Popes have oftentimes dispensed with Princes, who have made a
solemn vow of chastity in approved Religions, to contract matrimony, See
Azor. tom. 1. li. 12. c. 7. q. 1.
as it is recorded by Historiographers of Constantia, daughter to Roger King of
Sicilie, of Casimirus King of Poland, and of Ramirus King of Aragon, and of
Nicholas Justinian a noble Venetian; but if the Pope has no authority to
dispense in the solemn vow of religious chastity whereof there is a great
controversy among Catholic Doctors, For S. Thomas. and all his followers,
whom Zanchez a Jesuit relates, lib. 8 de Matrimon. disp. 8. do deny that the
Pope has such, a power, and Zanchez also says that it is probable.
doubtless such dispensations would cause very many heinous sins, and do
also great wrong to other Princes, who by such dispensations should be unjustly
deprived of their just title to reign, and to succeed in their inheritance.
These be the examples whereon I grounded my three arguments or instances to
confront them with the former three of Fa. Lessius in these words.

1. Instance of Widdrington.
9 May we not therefore according to our adversaries principles argue in this
manner: That doctrine does appertain to faith, which the Pope (in whom only
according to these Doctors, all authority to define infallibly matters of
faith does reside For they grant that the Pope alone without a Counsel has
this insallibility, and the Council without the Pope has it not.
) does either propound, or suppose as a certain, and undoubted ground, or
foundation of his Decrees and sentences (this is the Mayor proposition of Fa.
Lessius first argument) But this doctrine, that the B. Virgin was not conceived
in original sin, that the Pope can dispense in the solemn vow of chastity,
and give leave to a Priest, who is no Bishop, to Minister the Sacrament of
Confirmation, is propounded or supposed by Popes as a ground, or foundation of
many their decrees, dispensations, and judicial sentences, therefore that
doctrine does appertain to faith; This is the substance of my first instance,
but in form made like to Fa Lessius his first argument.

2. Instance.
10 Secondly, if the Pope should expressly define that the Church has such a
power, (to wit, to dispense in the solemn vow of chastity, to give leave to
an inferior Priest to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, and to define
that the blessed Virgin was not conceived in original sin) no Catholic (of
those especially who hold that the Pope defining without a General Council
cannot err) can make any doubt, but that this matter should appertain to
faith, but seeing that Popes do suppose it as a sure and certain foundation
of their Decrees, and sentences, they are thought no less to affirm the same,
therefore it ought to be accounted no less certain.

3. Instance.
11 Thirdly, it is a point of faith, as our Adversaries suppose, that the Pope
cannot err in doctrine, and precepts of manners, by teaching generally any
thing to be lawful, which is unlawful, or to be unlawful, which is lawful,
or also by commanding any thing, which, per se, of it self is unlawful: For
such an error is no less pernicious to the faithful, then an error in
faith: But if the Pope should not have that authority to dispense in the
solemn vow of chastity, or to give leave to an inferior Priest to administer
the Sacrament of Confirmation, the Pope should err in doctrine, and precepts
of manners, and that, in matters of very great moment: For he teaches, that
the Sacrament of Confirmation ministered by an inferior Priest, who is no
Bishop, is a true Sacrament. Also, that if a Prince by the Popes dispensation
do marry a professed Nun, that marriage to be lawful and valid, and that
their children are lawfully begotten, and ought to succeed in the Kingdom: and
notwithstanding that the next of the blood Royal should for want of the
lawful issue of this Prince pretend a right to the Crown, yet the Pope may
without doubt, according to our Adversaries doctrine, command, and also by
Censures compel the Subjects to acknowledge the issue begotten by that
marriage, wherein the Pope did dispense, to be their true, undoubted and
rightful Prince: All which shall be false, and not only false, but also
pernicious, for that the Subjects shall be incited thereby to do injuries, and
against their wills be compelled thereunto, and Princes shall obtain free
liberty and license from the Pope to commit incests and sacriledges: Therefore
the Church does err in doctrine of manners, and counsaileth sacrilege, and
commands injustice, and by Censures compels thereunto: But to affirm this
it is heritical, therefore that also from whence follows, is heretical, to
wit, that the Pope has not authority to dispense in the solemn vow of
chastity, and to give leave to an inferior Priest, who is no Bishop, to
minister the Sacrament of Confirmation.

12 Thus I argued in my Apologeticall Preface, and then I concluded thus: Let
my Adversaries solue these difficulties, and I will forthwith by their own
solutions, untie the aforesaid knots, which they imagine cannot in any wise be
solued, or loosed. Whereby it is apparent, that I did not oppose, or apply any
one of these three instances either to the decree of the Lateran Council, or
to any other Canon of Pope, or Council, which are usually brought by my
Adversaries to prove, that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes
is a point of faith: but as Fa. Lessius did not apply in particular those his
three arguments, either to the Canon of the Lateran Council, or to any other
Canon, or judicial sentence of the Pope or Council, but left them to be
applied by others to this or that Canon, except only his second agument, which
he seems to apply to the Lateran Council, so I thought it sufficient for
that time, to propound only three other like instances in general, and not to
compare or parellel any of them to any decree, Canon, or judicial sentence of
Pope, or Council in particular, whereby my Adversaries contend to make
manifest, that this their doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is
certain, and of faith, but left the application of them to this, or that Canon
in particular, until such time that they themselves would either apply those
three arguments to some particular Canon of Pope, or Council, or answer in
form to the three instances, which I brought to confront with theirs.

13 Now Mr. Fitzherbert neither answers in form to those three instances of
mine, which I grounded upon those three examples of Popes, nor so much as
sets them down to be seen by his Reader, but cauilleth only, as you shall
see, at those three examples, whereon my three instances were grounded, and
pretends to show a great disparitie between those three examples, and the
Decree of the Lateran Council, and also he would seem to have played the man,
and to have quite overthrown my three instances, whereas he has not so much
as touched, or mentioned them at all. Thus therefore he begins this
Chapter: Page 185. nu. 1
My Adversary Widdrington having hitherto showed great weakness in himself,
and his cause by his answers to our arguments, Widdr. vbi supra nu. 52.
pretends to confute a Reply, which he supposes we will make to his last
answer, dividing the said Reply into three points, whereof the first is, that
the foundations, and grounds of the Ecclesiastical Canons, and Decrees of
Popes and Counsels do belong to faith, whereupon Widdrington says we
infer, that seeing the Fathers in the Council of Lateran grounded their
Decree upon this doctrine, that the Pope has power to depose Princes,
therefore the said doctrine must needs be certain, and a matter of faith.

Ibid. nu. 53.
14 The second point is, that seeing no Catholic man would doubt, but that all
Christians were bound to believe, as a matter of faith, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes, if a general Council should expressly define it,
therefore we say, that forasmuch as the Council of Lateran does suppose the
same as a sure foundation of their foresaid Canon, and Decree, all Christians
are no less bound to believe it, then if they had expressly determined, or
defined it.

Ibid. nu. 54.
15 The third point is, that it being a matter of faith, that the Church cannot
err in general precepts, or Decrees concerning manners, it follows, that
the Council of Lateran, having ordained the deposition of Princes, neither
has erred, nor could err in it, especially seeing that the error would be
most grievous, and pernicious to all Christians; for thereupon would follow
tumults, seditions, and wars, by reason of the reuolts, and rebellions of
subjects against their Princes, and the breach of their Oaths of fidelity,
which were no less then perjury, if the Pope had not authority to discharge
subjects of their allegiance, and fidelity to their Princes. Thus in effect
though somewhat more amply does Widdrington argue for us.

16 But first, whether I, or my Adversary have showed great weakness in our
selves, and in our cause, neither he, nor I, but the judicious Reader must be
the Judge, for with the same facility I may retort his own words back upon
himself. Secondly, I did not only suppose, that they would make those three
arguments, but I related them word by word, as I found them in Fa. Lessius,
which nevertheless Mr. Fitzherbert has very lamely recited, especially the
first, and last argument, leaving out many principal, and very important words,
as you may see, if you will compare them together. Thirdly, I did not say, that
hereupon they did infer, as this man untruly says I did, that seeing the
Fathers in the Council of Lateran grounded their Decree upon this doctrine,
that the Pope has power to depose Princes, therefore this doctrine must be
certain, and of faith. For albeit Fa. Lessius may seem to apply his second
argument to the Decree of the Lateran Council, which nevertheless he may also
apply to the Decree of the Council of Lions, yet his other arguments,
especially his first, are so general, that they may be applied to many other
Decrees, Canons, dispensations, and judicial sentences of Popes, or Counsels:
and if Fa. Lessius had particularly applied them to the Lateran Council, I
might without more ado have easily answered them by denying, as there I did,
that the Council did suppose as a foundation of that Decree, or Act concerning
the absoluing of Vassals from their fealty, this doctrine, that the Pope has
power to depose absolute Princes, but only inferior Magistrates, Landlords,
or Lords by the authority and consent of absolute Princes.

17 Now for the answer, and confutation, says Page 186. nu. 4. 5.
Mr. Fitzherbert, of these three arguments Widdrington produces three
instances to prove, that the Pope does sometimes exercise his power with danger
of pernicious, and most grievous error, when nevertheless it is uncertain,
whether he have such power, or no. His first instance is, that the Pope has
often given lilence to a Priest to minister, and confer the Sacrament of
Confirmation, notwithstanding that diverse great Doctors do deny that the
Pope can give such license, or commission; whereupon he concludes, that it is
not certain, Durand. Bonauent. Adrian, and alij.
whether the Pope has the power, which he exercieth in giving such licenses,
and adds further, An non, says he; grauissimus error est etc? Is it not a
most grievous error to grant such licenses, whereby there is danger to commit
most grievous sacriledges, to wit, the inualide administration of Sacraments?
So he, showing evidently, how vnreuerent an opinion he has of the licenses,
dispensations, and other actions of Popes, seeing that he thinks, or
insinuates at least, that they have most grievously, and perniciously erred
therein many times, and yet one of the Popes, that did dispense in the case
here mentioned (to wit, in the administration of the Sacrament of Confirmation)
was the famous S. Gregory the great, who granted that license to some Priests
in Sardinia, by reason of the great want of Bishops in that Island.

18 But first, although the first instance, which I brought, be partly grounded
upon this practice of Popes to give authority to Priests to confer the
Sacrament of Confirmation, yet this is not my first instance, but my first
instance is this, That doctrine does appertain to faith, which is propounded,
or supposed by Popes as a sure, and certain foundation of their Decrees, and
sentences, (for so says Fa. Lessius) But this doctrine that the B. Virgin was
not conceived in original sin, that the Pope can dispense in the solemn vow
of chastity, and give leave to a Priest to minister the Sacrament of
Confirmation is propounded or supposed by Popes as a ground, and foundation of
many their Decrees, dispensations, and judicial sentences. Therefore, etc.

19 Now I expected, that Mr. Fitzherbert would have answered this my instance
in form, which if he had done, I would also by his answer have satisfied Fa.
Lessius his first argument, but he neither answers, nor propounds my first
instance, but cunningly flies to the Council of Lateran, affirming that there
is a great disparitie betwixt the decree of the Lateran Council, and the
licenses, which some Popes give to Priests to minister the Sacrament of
Confirmation, whereas Fa. Lessius did not apply his first argument particularly
to the Council of Lateran, but spoke generally of the grounds, and foundations
of all Decrees, and sentences of Counsels, or Popes, affirming that doctrine
to appertain to faith, which Popes, Counsels, and Doctors do propound, or
suppose, as a sure foundation of their decrees and sentences, etc. which
assertion may be applied not only to the decree of the Lateran Counell, but
also to the decree, and sentence of Pope Innocent the fourth, in the presence
of the Council of Lions, and it does also prove, that the ground, and
foundation of every sentence, whereby any Emperor, or King has been deposed
by the Pope, does consequently belong to faith, which because it is repugnant
to the common doctrine of all Divines, Mr. Fitzherbert would only apply to the
decree of the Lateran Council, and thereupon he did fraudulently, as you have
seen, both conceal my first instance, and also change, and curtoll the first
argument of Fa. Lessius, which does plainly show, that he has a great
diffidence in his cause, and that his meaning is not to deal sincerely in the
examining of this dangerous and difficult controversy.

20 Secondly, whereas Mr. Fitzherbert accuses me of irreuerence to the Sea
Apostolic, seeing that I think, or insinuate at least, as he says, that
Popes have most grievously, and perniciously erred many times in their
licenses, dispensations, and other actions, he shows evidently therein rather
his want of Christian charity, then any solid learning, wisdom, or
discretion; seeing that I never said, or insinuated, that Popes have most
grievously erred many times in their licenses, dispensations, and other
actions, but I only related the opinions of learned, and virtuous Catholics,
and who were also much devoted to the Sea Apostolic, and one of them also a
Pope: from whose doctrine it clearly follows, that if to err in the due
administration of the Sacraments be a most grievous, and pernicious error,
both in regard of the irreuerence done to the Sacrament, and also the wrong
done to the person who is defrauded of the benefit thereof, then those Popes,
who have given authority to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, whereby
the administration thereof is inualid, and repugnant to the institution of
Christ, have most grievously, and perniciously erred.

21 But if Mr. Fitzherbert will needs have us to approve all the licenses,
dispensations, decrees, and other actions of Popes, unless we must have an
irreuerent opinion of the Sea Apostolic, what will he say of Melchior Canus,
a learned, and religious man, and much devoted to the Pope, who boldly says,
that he does not approve all Church-lawes, Canus lib. 5. de locis cap. 5. q.
vlt concl.
nor commend all punishments, Censures, Excommunications, Suspensions,
Irregularities, interdicts; and a little beneath he affirms, Cap. 5. propo
finem.
that those who rashly, and without election do defend every sentence, or
judgment of the Pope concerning every thing, do weaken, not strengthen, do
overthrow, not establish the authority of the Sea Apostolic? What will he say
of Siluester, a man also no less addicted to the advancing of the Popes
temporal authority, who affirming that the Pope has no authority to
dispense in the solemn vow of religious chastity, and some obiecting, that
they have seen the Pope so to have dispensed de facto, answers boldly,
Siluist. in Sum. verbo votum 4. q. 5. in fine. See Aluarus pelag. lib. 2. de
Planctu Eccles. ar. 5 in fine. See Bell lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 12.
that he also has seen the Pope done greater things with the scandal all
Christianity. And to omit Aluarus Pelagius, and others, who tax freely the
facts of many Popes, what will he say of Cardinal Bellarmine, who affirms,
that Pope Nicolas, and Pope Celestine have in their Decrees, or Decretall
Epistles expressly taught false doctrine concerning the Sacraments of Baptism,
and Matrimony. But this is a usual trick of my Adversaries, when they are
pressed with any argument, to fly to railing and disgraceful speeches, and
which with the same facility, and upon the like grounds may be retorted back
upon themselves.

22 But to answer Widdringtons argument, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 187. nu.
6.
grounded upon this instance, or example, whereas he labors to prove
thereby, that the foundation, or ground of the Decree of the Council of
Lateran concerning the deposition of Princes may be uncertain, because the
ground of some Popes dispensations in the administration of a Sacrament is
uncertain, he argues most absurdly. For there is such an evident disparity,
betwixt the particular facts, or dispensations of Popes touching particular
persons, Countries, or Churches, and the general Decrees of Popes, and
General Counsels made for the direction, and government of the whole Church,
that a man may wonder how he could forget himself so far, as by an instance
of a supposed possibility of error in a particular fact of some Pope, to
impugn a general Decree of a Pope, together with a general Council.

23 What a great distrust Mr. Fitzherbert has of his cause, the Reader may
easily perceive by this, that he seldom propounds any one argument, or
answer of mine, but he uses therein some notable fraud, or falsehood. And
first he would here make his Reader believe, that he has fully answered my
first instance, or argument, which was grounded not only upon this fact of
Popes giving license to Priests to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, but
also upon the two other examples before propounded, whereas he has not, as you
have seen, so much as related my first Instance.

24 Secondly, besides that not only my first Instance, or argument, but also
the other two Instances, which I brought to comfort them with Fa. Lessius his
three arguments, were grounded upon the licenses, which some Popes have given
to inferior Priests to confer the Sacrament of Confirmation, it is very
untrue, that I by any of my three instances labored to prove, as this man
affirms, that the Decree of the Lateran Council concerning the deposition of
Princes might be uncertain; seeing that I always contended, that the Decree
of the Lateran Council did not concern the deposition of Princes, but only
of inferior Magistrates, and Landlords, and also that it was not made by
Ecclesiastical, or spiritual authority, but only by the consent, and
authority of temporal Princes. So that Mr. Fitzherbert to show that I argue
most absurdly from the particular facts, and dispensations of Popes to the
general Decrees of Popes, and general Counsels, betwixt which I do not
deny, but that there is an evident disparitie, shows himself to be very
false and fraudulent. For that which I contended by my first instance to
prove, was that the Mayor proposition of Fa. Lessius first argument is not
generally true, and consequently that his argument could not be good, That
doctrine, says he, does appertain to faith which Popes, Councels, and Doctors
do either propound, or suppose as a certain foundation of their decrees, and
sentences, which proposition being general may be applied not only to the
decree of the Lateran Council, but also to all other particular decrees, and
sentences of Popes, or Counsels, which the three aforesaid examples by me
propounded, touching the particular sentences, dispensations, licenses, and
decrees of Popes, do evidently convince to be a very false proposition, and
consequently his argument grounded thereon to be very insufficient.

25 And therefore to show the weakness of Fa. Lessius his first argument, I
did oppose to it an other like instance; for if that doctrine does appertain to
faith, which Popes, and Doctors do propound, or suppose, as a certain
foundation of their decrees, and sentences, which is the Mayor proposition of
Fa. Lessius his first argument, then this doctrine that the B. Virgin was not
conceived in original sin, that the Pope can dispense in the solemn vow of
chastity, and give license to inferior Priests to minister the Sacrament of
confirmation must also appertain to faith, seeing that it is propounded and
supposed by Popes and Doctors, as a certain foundation of many Canons,
Decrees, and judicial sentences of Popes. Now by the answer, which my
Adversaries will make to this instance, I will also satisfy Fa. Lessius his
first argument. For all the force of that argument does consist in the true
sense, and meaning of that Mayor proposition, for absolutely, and in those
general words, as it is spoken by him, without any limitation, it is, as I
said, very untrue: but it must be limited both to those decrees, constitutions,
judicial sentences, grants, and privileges, which are certainly known to
proceed from Ecclesiastical and not Civil authority, and also to such
Decrees, which are propounded as of Faith, or do ordain things clearly, and
evidently deduced from some undoubted doctrine of Faith, as I showed above out
of Card. Bellarmine, and Canus.

26 For although it be certain, and a point of faith, that the Church of
Christ, as it includes only Churchmen, or Cleargy-men, has a full
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual power in general, and that the foundation of
true and proper Ecclesiastical Laws, Decrees, or Canons is true
Ecclesiastical power also in general, yet in particular to what things the
fullness of Ecclesiastical power does extend, there is such a great
controversy among Doctors, that in this point few things are sure or
certain, as I showed before out of Almaine, as whether the Church has power
to give license to inferior Priests to confer the Sacrament of Confirmation,
to dispense in the solemn vow of Chastity, to dissolve the bond of Matrimony
which is not consummate, and many such like, and to come near our matter, to
dispose of temporalls, to inflict temporal punishments, and to depose
temporal Princes for any cause, crime, or end whatsoever. So that the
foundation of such Decrees, Canons, constitutions, licenses, dispensations and
sentences, cannot be certain, and a point of faith, so long as it remains
questionable, and controuersed among Catholics: For it is manifest, and most
worthy to be noted, as Canus said, Canus lib 5. de loc cap. 5. q. vlt. concl. 3.
that those decrees of the Church can not be certain and firm, which are not
grounded upon certain, and firm principles, and foundations. Wherefore if but
one of those things, whereon the judgment of the Church depends, be
uncertain, the decree of the Church cannot be uncertain, etc. And by this Fa.
Lessius his first argument is plainly solued. For his Minor proposition is
absolutely false, and also his Mayor is not true, if it be understood of
Decrees, Canons, Page 88. nu. 7.
and sentences, which are not certainly known to proceed from spiritual
authority.

27 But perhaps Widdrington will say, says Mr. Fitzherbert, that he does not
argue against the Decree it self, but against the reason, whereupon it was
grounded, saying that it may be uncertain, and subject to error, no less then
the reason which moved some Popes to give license to a Priest to administer
the Sacrament of Confirmation; But if he say this, he is very absurd; for he
argues in effect no otherwise then thus: Gal. 2. Acts 15.
Because S. Peter had no sufficient ground for his dissimulation at Antioch (
which S. Paul reprehended in him) therefore the Apostles had no sufficient
reason, or ground for their Decree in the Council at Jerusalem, which no man
that has his right wits will say, for that the Apostles had the infallible
assistance of the holy Ghost in making their Decree, which S. Peter had not
either in his particular fact, or in the foundation, whereupon he grounded it.

28 But first it is manifest, as you have seen before, that I never argued
either against the Decree of the Lateran Council, or against the reason of
that Decree, but I only impugned the exposition, which my Adversaries make of
that Decree, and the reason whereby they pretend to prove from that Decree,
that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is certain, and of
faith; considering that it is uncertain, whether that Decree was made by true
Ecclesiastical, or civil authority, and also for that it is not a true, and
proper Decree, containing in it any precept or obligation, and though it were,
it is not propounded as of faith, nor grounded upon any clear and undoubted
doctrine of faith, which nevertheless, according to the doctrine of Cardinal
Bellarmine and Canus, are necessary to make any Decree of a general Council
to appertain to faith. And secondly here in this place I did only argue
against the first argument brought by Fa. Lessius, who in his Mayor proposition
speaks generally of all decrees, and sentences of Popes and Councels. That
doctrine, says he, does appertain to faith, which Popes, Councels, and
Doctors do either propound or suppose as a certain foundation of their
decrees and sentences, etc. And against this argument I did oppose, as you have
seen, another like instance grounded upon three examples of decrees,
dispensations, and judicial sentences of diverse Popes, which instance of mine
Mr. Fitzherbert concealeth, and by the word foundation I did not only
understand the reason, which moved those Popes to make such decrees, and to
grant such dispensations, and licenses, as for example, that S. Gregory, as my
Adversary says, granted license to some Priests in Sardinia, to administer
the Sacrament of confirmation, by reason of the great want of Bishops in that
Island, but by the word [foundation] I understood the authority it self, which
those Popes pretended to have to make such decrees, and to grant such licenses
and dispensations, and the reasons and foundations, whereon that pretended
authority of theirs was grounded, which authority of theirs I showed to be
uncertain, and consequently not to belong to faith, and therefore the first
argument of Fa. Lessius to be defective.

29 And although there be an evident disparitie betwixt the Decrees of Popes,
and the Decrees of general Councels, yet it is apparent, that according to my
Adversaries principles, who affirm, that all the infallibility of the Decrees
of General Councels does wholly depend upon the Pope, we may, according to
their grounds, proportionally argue of the infallibility of the Decrees of
Popes, and of General Councels, and that if the Pope may err in his private
judgment, particular facts, and decrees concerning manners, which are referred
to particular persons, Bishops, or Churches, a General Council also may err
in the like; and if to make a Decree of a General Council to belong to faith,
it be necessary, according to their doctrine, that it be a true, and proper
Decree, and must also be propounded as of faith, or necessarily grounded upon
some undoubted doctrine of faith, the like also they must say of the Decrees of
Popes. From whence it clearly follows, that, according to their own
principles, no forcible argument can be drawn, either from the judicial
sentence of Pope Gregory the seventh against Henry the fourth Emperor, or of
Pope Innocent the third, against Philip, and Otho, or of Pope Innocent the
fourth, in the Council of Lions, against Frederick the second, or from any
other deposition of whatsoever King, or Emperor, or also from the Decree of
the Lateran Council, although we should suppose, as we do not, that it does
concern the deposition of temporal Princes, and was made by true
Ecclesiastical authority, without any necessity that Christian Princes should
approve, and confirm the same, yet, I say, no forcible argument can be
drawn from thence, to prove that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes, is an undoubted doctrine of faith; seeing that the former sentences,
and depositions do only concern particular persons, and this Act of the
Lateran Council is not, according to their own grounds, a true and proper
Decree, and none of them are propounded as of faith, as any man of judgment,
out of those rules, which Card. Bellarmine and Canus have brought to know when
any Decree is propounded as of faith, may very easily perceive.

30 Besides that Widdrington infers absurdly, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page
188. nu. 8. 9.
that because the reason, which moved some Popes to grant that license was
uncertain, or seemed erroneous to some learned men, therefore it was
uncertain also in it self, or to the Popes that gave the license, as who
would say, that because the reason of Pope Pius his Decree, concerning the
observation of the Feast of Easter seemed uncertain to the Churches of Asia,
therefore it was uncertain in it self, or to Pope Pius, who made the Decree:
whereas the reason, or gound of the said Decree ( to wit, the tradition of the
Roman Church) was not only certain to Pope Pius, and his Successor Victor,
Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 24. and 25
( who excommunicated the Churches of Asia for resisting it) but also to the
first Council of Nice, which afterward decreed the same, yea to the whole
Church, which follows the Decrees of the said Pope, and Nicen Council,
accounting them for heretics that do contradict them, as I have showed before
See Chap. 13 nu. 4. and 7. And see also the answer thereunto chap. 13. nu. 22.
and seq.
.

31 The like also may be said of the rebaptization of such as are baptized by
heretics, which was condemned by the Sea Apostolic upon an assured ground,
albeit the same seemed uncertain, and erroneous to Saint Cyprian, and to a
Synod of Bishops with him, who were of contrary opinion. So as it is evident,
that many things may seem uncertain to some learned men, and yet be most
certain to the Sea Apostolic, and therefore Widdrington argues very
ridiculously, if he infer (as he seems to do) that the reason which
moved some Popes to give license to Priests to administer the Sacrament of
Confirmation is uncertain, or erroneous, because it seems so to some learned
men.

32 But besides that I made no such inference, as this man faigneth, and the
Reader may plainly see by the examples, and instances which I have entirely
set down, and Mr. Fitzherbert has fraudulently concealed, it is evident, that
he here insinuates, giving credit therein to Fa. Lessius, a most dangerous,
and pernicious doctrine, to wit, that all Catholics are bound to follow in
matters, which are in controversy among learned men, the Popes private spirit,
faith, and knowledge, as though the Church of God were to be guided and
governed, in matters which are questionable among learned Catholics, by the
private faith, spirit, or knowledge of any man, yea of the Pope himself, or
that Christ had promised his infallible assistance to the Popes private
knowledge, or judgment.

33 And first whereas Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that although the reason which
moved some Popes to grant license to inferior Priests to administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation seemed uncertain to some learned men, yet it was not
therefore uncertain in it self, or to the Popes that gave the license, he
speaks very improperly: For albeit truth and falsehood are taken from the
thing it self (according to that known maxim of Aristotle, ex eo quod res
est vel non est propositio dicitur vera vel falsa) and so may be said to be
in the thing it self, yet certainty, as certain is opposed to doubtful,
uncertain, fallible, probable, erroneous, is not properly in the thing it
self, but in the understanding, and knowledge of men. For if we take
certainty, as it is in the thing it self, which is rather to be called
necessity, there is nothing that is past, which is not certain, or rather
necessarily true; So that all the power, and authority, which Christ has
given to S. Peter, and consequently to the Pope, as he is Saint Peter's
Successor, is most certain in it self, that is, most true, and necessary,
yet all the power in particular, which Christ has given to Saint Peter, and
the Pope, is not certain quoad nos, that is, to the understanding and
knowledge of the faithful, nor of the Popes themselves.

34 Secondly, whereas Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that albeit the reason, which
moved some Popes to grant that license to Priests, seemed erroneous to some
learned men, yet it was not therefore uncertain to the Popes that gave it; and
again, It is evident, says he, that many things may seem uncertain to some
learned men, and yet be most certain, (he does not say, may seem to be most
certain) to the Sea Apostolic; insinuating thereby, that those Popes, who
gave such licenses, did not only think, or persuade themselves, that they did
certainly know, but also that they did in very deed certainly know, (which
is a far different thing) that they had authority given them from Christ to
do the same: I would gladly learn of Fa. Lessius, from whom Mr. Fitzherbert
has taken this assertion, by what means those Popes came to such a certain
knowledge of things revealed by Christ our Savior, whereof other men, and
perhaps far more learned then those Popes were in all sorts of learning both
divine, and humane, were so ignorant, uncertain, and doubtful. For my own
part I do not know by what way any man, whatsoever he be, can have a
certain knowledge, which is truly certain, and not only imagined, or
thought to be certain, of things supernatural, and revealed by GOD, but by
divine revelation: and this must be either a private revelation, whereby God
reuealeth himself to the private soul, or spirit of a man, as he did in the
old Law to the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and in the New to the Apostles, and to
diverse other holy men; or else it must be a public revelation, known, and
approved so to be by the public declaration, or acceptance of the Church;
for the public definitions of Popes, without the approbation of a general
Council, or general acceptance of the Church, do still remain uncertain,
seeing that it is as yet uncertain, and disputable among learned Catholics,
whether the Pope has authority to define certainly, and infallibly that
this, or that thing which is in controversy among famous, and learned
Catholic Divines, has been revealed by God, or no.

35 If therefore when Mr. Fitzherbert, taxing me most ignorantly of ridiculous
absurdity, does so confidently affirm it to be evident, that many things
may seem uncertain to some learned men, and yet be most certain to the Sea
Apostolic, his meaning be, that the Sea Apostolic has this certain
knowledge by public revelation, or by some necessary consequence, which is
evidently deduced from public revelation, I cannot possibly see how this can
be true; for that public revelations, and those things, which are evidently
deduced from public revelations, are not proper only to the Pope, but are
common also to other learned men; and therefore also other learned men, who are
as skillful, and perchance far more skillful in the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, and of public revelations, traditions, definitions, declarations,
and of the general consent, and acceptance of the Church, then those Popes are
may have as certain a knowledge of things supernatural, and revealed by
public revelation, as those Popes either have, or morally can have.

36 But if he mean, that the Sea Apostolic has that certainty of
knowledge, touching things revealed, by private revelations, or secret
instincts, and inspirations, any learned man may plainly see, that this is
spoken without sufficient ground: seeing that Christ our Savior has not
promised an infallibility of truth, to the private knowledge of any Pope, or
of the Prelates of the Church assembled together in a General Council, but
only to their Decrees, and those not all, but to such only, which are
propounded as of faith: Neither also is it certain, that Christ has promised
an infallibility of truth so much as to the Popes public definitions, and
decrees, which are propounded as of faith, if he define without a General
Council, and much less to his private knowledge, and judgment; as it is
manifest by the decrees of Pope Nicholas the first, and of Pope Celestine the
third, whereof the first declared, De cons. did. 4 can. A quodam Iudaeo.
that Baptism given in the name of Christ without expressing the three persons
of the Trinity is valid, and of force, and the second, Quondam in cap.
Laudabilem de conuers. coniugat.
that Marriage is so dissolved by heresy, that the party, whose consort is
fallen into heresy, may lawfully marry another, which doctrine is now
condemned in the Council of Trent: and also by Pope John the 22. who publicly
taught, See Adrian. Papa in q. 2. de Confirm. circa finem, Castro. lib. 3.
contra haeres. verbo Beatitudo haer. 62. Bell. l. 4. de To. Pont. c. 14
and if he had not been prevented by death was resolved to define, that the
souls of the Blessed should not see God before the Resurrection: and by Pope
Boniface the eight, who in a letter to Philip le Bell King of France affirmed,
See Nicol. Vignerius ad an. 1300. and Joan. Tilius ad ann. 1302.
that he accounted them for heretics, who did not believe, that the said King
of France was not subject to him in spiritualls and temporalls: And as for
these private revelations, they may also be common to other virtuous and holy
men as well as to Popes, and with the same facility, and upon the same grounds
we may attribute private revelations, and certainty of private knowledge as
well to the one as to the other.

37 And albeit it were so that many things are certain to the private
understanding, and knowledge of some Popes, which are uncertain, and seem
erroneous to other learned men, will my Adversaries therefore affirm, that
those learned men are bound to follow the Popes private judgment, and to
believe him upon his bare word, if he say that he is certain his judgment,
and knowledge to be true, until he make manifest to them the certainty
thereof, and upon what grounds he is so certainly persuaded his judgment to
be certainly true. This were doubtless a most pernicious doctrine, and the
opening of a wide gappe to errors and heresies. For then should the Doctors
of Paris, See Pope Adr. in the place above cited.
who caused Pope John to recall his error, have believed him, when he
commanded his doctrine, or rather error to be held by all men, and induced
the University of Paris that none should there take any degree in Divinity,
unless he first should swear to defend and always maintain this error.
Then should the Kingdom of France have believed Pope Boniface the eight, when
he affirmed, that he accounted them for heretics, who did not believe that
the King of France was not subject to him in spiritualls, and temporalls: and
the like may be said of Pope Nicolas, and Pope Celestine.

38 Wherefore the plain truth is, that as well Popes may sometimes err and
be deceived, albeit they are certainly persuaded their doctrine to be true,
if other learned men after mature deliberation think it to be false, as other
learned men may err and be deceived, albeit they think certainly their
doctrine to be true, if the Pope after mature deliberation think it to be
false: and whether of them do really err, when there are such controversies,
we cannot certainly know, but by the future event. For if the doctrine which
the Pope thinks, and teaches to be certain, be afterward confirmed by any
public definition of some Orthodoxall general Council, or be approved by the
general consent, or acceptance of the Church, it is an evident sign, that the
judgment of the Pope, and not of those learned men was really true; for which
cause we now see, and say, that Pope Pius, and Victor did not err in their
judgments concerning the celebration of the Feast of Easter, and that the
Churches of Asia did err therein; and that S. Cyprian, and the other Bishops
of Afrike, did err in their judgments, concerning the rebaptization of such
as were baptized by heretics, and that Pope Stephen and Cornelius, who
contradicted S. Cyprian, did not err. And contrariwise for the same cause we
say, that Pope Nicholas, Pope Celestine, and Pope John, to omit now Pope
Boniface, did really err in their judgments, and the other learned men, who
were of contrary opinion, did not err, for that the doctrine of these is now
approved by a public declaration, or general consent, and acceptance of the
Church. But so long as the question betwixt the Pope, and other learned
Catholics, shall still remain afoot, and not be decided, no man is bound to
think the Popes judgment to be certain, neither can he compel any man to
believe the same, albeit the Pope be inwardly persuaded that his judgment is
true, or certain, yet he ought not to be publicly contradicted by any man
but with great submission, reverence, and respect.

39 But if the Pope, when there is a controversy betwixt him, and other
learned men, should denounce censures against all those, who shall preach, or
teach contrary to his doctrine, then we must doubtless be very careful not
to oppose publicly against him without urgent necessity, by reason of scandal
in seeming to contemn Ecclesiastical censures, but in such a case we must
have in mind that golden document of devout and learned Gerson; The second
truth is, says he, that the Popes sentence binds all men not to dogmatike,
or teach publicly the contrary, Gerson in tract. de Examinat. doctrine.. 2.
veritas.
except those that do find a manifest error against faith, and do perceive,
that if they should not oppose themselves, great scandal to faith would arise
by their silence: And if then there should be prosecuting of Censures, and
punishments against them, let them be assured, that blessed are they that
suffer persecution for justice. And thus much concerning this point, whereby
the Reader may see whether I or my Adversary deserve the note of ridiculous
absurdity.

40 But much more ridiculous, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 189. nu. 10. 11.
is Widdringtons inference, that the ground and reason of a general Decree,
made by a Pope and general Council is uncertain, and subject to error,
because some learned men are of opinion that some Popes had no sufficient
reason to do some particular acts, or grant licenses, or dispensations to some
particular persons, which is a far different case from the other, and
therefore, I say, his infe^ence thereupon is so ridiculous, that a Scholar may
be ashamed to make it; for albeit we should grant, that those Popes erred both
in granting those licenses, and in their grounds, yet it would not follow, that
therefore the Pope together with the whole Lateran Council might err in the
ground of their Decree, except we may infer quidlibet ex quolibet. And yet,
forsooth, this is one of his probable answers. Therefore if he will argue
against the Decree of the Council of Lateran by instances and examples, let
him not produce the particular facts of some Popes concerning some particular
Countries, or persons, but some decree of a Pope, or general Council made for
the direction and government of the whole Church (as this of the Lateran
Council was) and then let him prove also that the ground of the said decree
was uncertain, and then I will grant that he says somewhat to the purpose.

41 But strange and intolerable is the false and fraudulent dealing of this
man. For I neither made, nor intended to make in any one of my three instances
any such inference, as he, to tax me of ridiculous absurdity untruly says I
have; neither did I apply any one of my instances, or examples to the decree of
the Lateran Council, neither in any one of them is the Council of Lateran so
much as named, and therefore to cloak his fraud more cunningly, he thought
best to conceal my instances, lest the Reader might by his own writings, and
looking over my instances, forth with discover his fraud and falsehood.
Wherefore that inference, which I intended covertly to make by my first
instance, was only this; that because the ground and foundation upon which
certain Popes did by their decrees, and sentences ordain the Feast of the
blessed Virgins conception, give leave to Priests to administer the Sacrament
of Confirmation, and dispense in the solemn vow of Chastity, was uncertain,
and consequently could not appertain to faith, therefore the Mayor proposition
of Fa. Lessius his first argument was not sound, but defective, to wit, That
doctrine does appertain to faith, which Popes, Councels, and Doctors do
propound or suppose as a certain foundation of their decrees and sentences,
which proposition is general, and may be understood not only of the decree of
the Lateran Council, but of all other Decrees and Sentences, either general
or particular of Popes or Councels, as of the Decree touching the Feast of the
blessed Virgins conception, of the judicial sentences of Pope Gregory the
seventh against Henry the fourth in a Council held at Rome, and of Pope
Innocentius the fourth, against Frederike the second in the Council of Lions,
and of all other Decrees of Popes touching particular licenses and
dispensations, whereof two are mentioned in my first instance, and do
evidently show the Mayor proposition of Fa. Lessus his first argument to be
very unsound.

42 But if my Adversary will have that Mayor proposition of Fa. Lessius his
first argument, which he produced without any restriction, or limitation to be
restrained, and limited only to the decrees of Popes, and general Councels,
which are made for the direction and government of the whole Church, and do
not only concern particular facts, licenses, dispensations, and judicial
sentences concerning some particular Countries, or persons, besides that I have
declared above in what sense that proposition is true, to wit, that such
decrees must be made by true Ecclesiastical and not civil authority, and also
that they must be such decrees, and sentences, wherein it is certain and of
faith, that the Church cannot err, I have also here produced a decree of Pope
Sixtus the fourth, concerning the Feast of the blessed Virgins conception,
which was made for the direction and government of the whole Church, and yet
the ground and foundation of that decree was uncertain, as I proved above,
and will more clearly confirm beneath, and evidently show, how Mr.
Fitzherbert to answer this decree is forced to forsake the doctrine of the
most learned Divines of his own Society. And also I might add hereunto the
decrees of Popes touching the canonization of Saints, the ground and foundation
whereof does not appertain to faith, seeing that as I showed before out of
Canus, that it is not heretical to affirm, that the Church may err in the
canonization of Saints, and yet these decrees are made for the direction and
government of the whole Church. But as concerning the decree, or rather Act of
the Lateran Council, touching the deposition of temporal Landlords, or
Magistrates, it is evident, that I made no inference, or any mention at all
thereof in any one of my three Instances, or examples, as this man most
shamefully affirms.

43 Yet if he will needs have me to apply this doctrine touching the
uncertainty of the grounds, and foundations of Popes decrees and sentences to
the decrees of general Councels, and in particular to the often named Act of
the Lateran Council, I do confidently affirm, that whenever it is
uncertain, and disputable among learned Catholics, whether a general
Council has authority to make this or that decree by her spiritual power,
without the consent and authority of temporal Princes, as to inflict temporal
punishments, and to dispose of temporals, wherein temporal Princes only are
supreme, and the Council makes such a decree, concerning the inflicting of
temporal punishments, or the disposing of temporals, without declaring that
she does make that decree by her spiritual authority, then, I say, it is
lawful for any man without any note of heresy, error, or temerity to expound
the decree of that Council, according to the probable opinion of those learned
men, and to affirm, that the Council made that decree not by spiritual
power, but by the consent and authority of temporal Princes. And this is our
case concerning the decree, or rather Act of the Lateran Council: Neither is
this to impugn the decree of the Council, but only to expound it according
to the probable doctrine of Catholics. And if Mr. Fitzherbert will say, that
this inference is ridiculous, absurd, improbable, and not to the purpose, and
that hereby we may infer quidlibet ex quolibet, he shows himself, as the
plain truth is, to have small skill in Theological learning.

44 In the mean time says he, Page 190 nu. 12. ad finem.
Widdrington, is to understand further concerning this point, that whereas he
demands, whether it is not a most grievous error to grant such licenses,
whereupon most grievous Sacriledges may follow, to wit, the inualid
administration of Sacraments? I answer, that the Church both does, and may
minister Sacraments in cases of necessity upon a propable opinion, without any
danger of formal sacrilege, or sin; as when a child is baptized in one of
his feet, or hands before he be fully borne into the world, or when the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction is given to one of whom it is not certain
whether he be fully dead. In these cases, I say, and diverse other such, the
Church does administer Sacraments with some danger of inualiditie (and yet
without danger of formal Sacrilege) in respect of the great hope of benefit,
which may follow to the souls of those to whom they are administered: and I
verily think that there was never any Catholic so impious hitherto, as to
condemn the same as sacrilegious, either in the most famous, and holy Father
S. Gregory the Pope, or in any other of his successors: for albeit some learned
men have indeed denied that they had authority to give such license, yet they
were not so inconsiderate, as either to condemn them of most grievous, or
sacrilegious error, or to deny, that the other opinion was probable, seeing
that it had been practiced so long since by S. Gregory, and approved not
only by so many most famous, and learned Doctors, but also by the Council of
Florence, which treating of the Sacrament of Confirmation, and having said,
that the Bishop is the Ordinary Minister thereof, adds afterward, Legitur
tamen, etc. yet it is read, that a simple Priest has administered it by the
dispensation of the Sea Apostolic with Chrisme, or holy Oil made by a Bishop.

45 So says the Council, giving to understand, that although a Bishop is the
ordinary Minister of the Sacrament of Confirmation, yet a Priest may be the
extraordinary Minister of it by dispensation of the Sea Apostolic. And this I
hope may suffice to free as well S. Gregory, as other Popes his Successors
from all error, and much more all danger of sacrilege in this point. Besides
that, the grant of such licenses being mere matters of fact, and concerning
only particular persons, and Countries could not any way prejudice our cause,
albeit they were erroneous, or sacrilegious, seeing that (as I have
sufficiently signified before) the question betwixt him, and us for the present
is only about a general Decree of a General Council, ordained for the
special good, and benefit of the whole Church, wherein we do indeed
acknowledge the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, though not in every
particular fact of a Pope. Thus much for his first Instance.

45 But still this man discovers either his gross ignorance, or his
accustomed fraud. For first whereas I spoke only of error, of material
sacrilege, and of inualid administration of the Sacrament of Confirmation,
this man replieth of sin, of formal sacrilege, and of unlawful
administration of Sacraments. For although it be certain, that a man may
lawfully, and without sin, or formal sacrilege, minister Sacraments in
cases of necessity, upon a probable opinion, yet it is not certain, that in
such cases the Sacrament is ministered with effect, and without error, or
material sacrilege; for truth, falsehood, and error have their denomination
from the effect, or thing it self, and probable ignorance and error do make
the act lawful, though not valid and with effect.

46 Secondly, there is a great disparity betwixt the examples, which Mr.
Fitzherbert here brings concerning the lawfulness of ministering Sacraments
upon a probable opinion, and the example which I brought concerning the
licenses granted by some Popes to inferior Priests, to administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation. For the common doctrine and practice among
Catholics is, that it is not lawful to minister upon a probable opinion those
Sacraments mentioned by my Adversary, but in case of necessity, and when the
necessity is past, because it was uncertain, or doubtful, whether they were
valid, and had effect or no, to reiterate them again, upon condition,
according to that doctrine which is certain, and without all controversy,
doubt, or danger: But neither do Popes give license to inferior Priests to
minister the Sacrament of Confirmation only in time of necessity, neither is
it the common practice among Catholics to reiterate again, after the
necessity is past, the Sacrament of Confirmation ministered by those Priests,
of whom there is a great controversy among learned Catholics, whether the
Pope has authority to give them any such license or no.

47 Neither does the Council of Florence See Estius in 4. sent. did. 7.. 22.
who answers this authority of the Council of Florence. Castro vbi supra.
either approve, or disprooue this practice, but only relates, that some
Popes have given such licenses, as the words before rehearsed by my Adversary
do plainly show. And although S. Gregory did grant, or, as Alphonsus de
Castro does expound him, did for avoiding of scandal, only permit, which
before he had forbidden, as a thing contrary to the ancient custom of the
Roman Church, that certain Priests in Sardinia might confer the Sacrament
of Confirmation, when Bishops were wanting, or, Adrianus vbi supra.
as Pope Adrian does interpret S. Gregory, he did not give leave to Priests
to confer the Sacrament of Confirmation, but only to anoint the forehead of
the person baptized with Chrisme, in that manner as Pope Siluester is said to
have ordained, that the Priest should anoint with Chrisme the person baptized
in the crown of the head, which he ordained, Hugo lib. 2. de Sacram. part. 7.
cap. 3.
as Hugo de S. Victore affirms, least the person baptized should depart this
life without Confirmation, according to al which expositions there is no
Catholic, as I verily think, so impious, or inconsiderate, that will condemn
S. Gregory of any sin, or formal sacrilege; yet other Popes have given that
license to inferior Priests, who are no Bishops to confer the Sacrament of
Confirmation, without any such necessity, as to diverse Abbots, and namely to
the Abbot of Monte Cassino, where there is no such want, but rather over great
plenty of Bishops, being so many thereabout, and having so small revenues to
maintain their Episcopal dignity: Neither is it the custom, or practice of
those Countries to confirm again those persons, who are confirmed by those
Abbots, although it may very conveniently be done. And therefore albeit there
be no danger, or prejudice to souls, to minister the Sacrament of Baptism, of
Extreme unction, of Penance, or of holy Orders, in time of necessity upon a
probable opinion, for that the practice, and custom is in such a case to
minister them again when the necessity is past; yet it is a very dangerous,
and pernicious error to minister either the Sacrament of Confirmation, or any
other Sacrament only upon a probable opinion, if it may be ministered without
any such probable doubt or danger, or when the necessity is past, not to
reiterate upon condition the Sacrament again: So that although it be no
dangerous, or pernicious error to minister that Sacrament as doubtful, which
is indeed among learned Catholics accounted doubtful, yet it is most a
dangerous and pernicious error, to minister that Sacrament as certainly to
have effect, which nevertheless is by famous, and learned Catholics upon
probable grounds accounted doubtful.

48 Thirdly, the Reader may plainly perceive the fraudulent dealing of this
man, who wholly dissembleth in what manner I applied this example to all the
three arguments brought by Fa. Lessius, and not only to his first argument, as
he would make his Reader believe, and therefore he altogether concealeth the
three instances which I brought to confront with Fa. Lessius his three
arguments. For this assertion touching the inualid administration of
Sacraments, which by way of an interrogation, as you have seen, I brought in
my first example, to wit, that to err in the inualid administration of
Sacraments is a very pernicious error, I did not affirm absolutely, but only
ad hominem, with reference to the like assertion, which Fa. Lessius brought in
his third argument, to which third argument, and not to his first, as my
Adversary would seem to make his Reader believe, I afterward applied this
assertion.

49 For whereas Fa. Lessius in the Mayor proposition of his third argument
affirmed, as you have seen, that it is a point of faith, that the Church
cannot err in doctrine, and precepts of manners by teaching generally
something to be lawful which is unlawful, or also by commanding something of
it self unlawful, for that such an error is no less pernicious to the
faithful then an error in faith: from which proposition he did infer, that
it is therefore a point of faith that the Pope has power to depose Princes,
for that otherwise the Church should teach a most pernicious error and
subjects should be incited to rebellions and periuries: I in my third instance,
which my Adversary has wholly concealed, made, as you have seen, the like
argument, and from the same Mayor proposition of Fa. Lessius his argument, I
likewise inferred, that it is also a point of faith, that the Pope has power
to give leave to Priests to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, and to
dispense in the solemn vow of chastity, and so likewise it may be inferred,
that the B. Virgin was not conceived in original sin, for that otherwise the
Pope, in whom according to my Adversaries doctrine, all the infallibility of
the Church does consist, should teach most pernicious errors, and the faithful
should be incited to sacriledges, and injuries.

50 And if Mr. Fitzherbert to answer my third instance will affirm, that from
the foresaid Mayor proposition of Fa. Lessius his third argument it cannot be
well inferred, that the aforesaid doctrines mentioned in my third instance must
be of faith, because it is no pernicious or sinful error, it being grounded
upon a probable opinion of learned Catholics, which excuses from all sin,
to teach such doctrines, and to incite to such sacriledges and injuries, seeing
that to err in this case is no sin, neither are the sacriledges and injuries
grounded upon so probable an error formal, or sinful sacriledges, and
injuries; if I say, he will answer thus: besides that he takes error,
sacriledges and injuries otherwise then error, rebellions, and periuries are
taken by Fa. Lessius, who, as it is evident, takes them not only as they are
sins to the conscience of man, but also as they are so, a part rei, and are
commonly called material, not formal, or sinful errors, rebellions, and
periuries, the same also may be answered to Fa. Lessius his argument, to wit,
that it cannot be well inferred from that Mayor proposition, that the doctrine
for the Popes power to depose Princes must be of faith, because it is no
pernicious and sinful error in his opinion to teach those doctrines by him
mentioned and to incite men to such rebellions and periuries, which according
to his opinion are not formal, and sinful rebellions, and periuries.

51 Whereupon it is evident, that in the same manner as my Adversaries will
answer my third instance, I will answer Fa. Lessius his third argument; and
that if from Fa. Lessius his argument it may be well inferred, that the
doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes is certain and of faith, it may
also by my instance be well inferred, that the doctrines for the Popes power to
give authority to Priests to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, and to
dispense in the solemn vow of chastity, and also for the preservation of the
B. Virgin from original sin, are certain and of faith, which how absurd it
is to affirm, it is too too apparent. But more of this third argument beneath.

52 Lastly, to that which Mr. Fitzherbert says in the end of this Chapter,
that the grant of such licenses being mere matters of fact, and concerning
only particular persons, and Countries, could not any way prejudice his cause,
albeit they were erroneous, and sacriledgious, seeing that the question, says
he, betwixt me and them for the present is only about a general decree of a
general Council, ordained for the special good and benefit of the whole
Church, wherein Widdrington acknowledges the infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost, though not in every particular fact of a Pope, I answer first, albeit I
will not condemn those Popes of any pernicious error that in time of
necessity grant such licenses upon a probable opinion, yet I cannot see, but
that to grant such licenses either as certain, when they are doubtful, or to
grant them without necessity only upon a probable opinion, is a very
dangerous and pernicious error, seeing that they concern the valid, and
effectual administration of a Sacrament, which all men know to be a matter of
great moment.

53 And albeit the grant of such licenses be mere matters of fact, and
concern only particular persons, and Countries, yet from thence it may be
clearly gathered, that those Popes who granted them, did generally teach, that
the Sacrament of Confirmation ministered by those Priests is a true, valid, and
substantial Sacrament, which, if it be not so, is a very great and pernicious
error in doctrine of manners; and also that the instances drawn from thence,
do quite overthrow all Fa. Lessius his three arguments, and namely the first,
whereof the Mayor proposition, as you have seen is general and without
limitation, and may be applied to all decrees and sentences whatsoever of Popes
or Counsels, whether they are general Decrees, or concern only particular
persons or Countries. Neither is it true, as this man very shamefully
affirms, that the question betwixt me, and them for the present is only
about a general decree of a general Council ordained for the special good,
and benefit of the whole Church: for the question betwixt them and me for the
present is only about the first argument of Fa. Lessius, and my first instance
made against the same, and especially about the truth of his Mayor proposition,
which, as you have seen, speaks of the ground, and foundation generally of
all Decrees and sentences both of Popes, and Counsels, That doctrine, says
he, does appertain to faith, which Popes, Counsels, and Doctors do
propound, or suppose as a certain foundation of their Decrees, and sentences.
So that my Adversary very untruly affirms, that the question betwixt me and
them for the present is only about a general Decree of a general Council.
And this may suffice for the confirmation of my first instance, and the
confutation of all that, which Mr. Fitzherbert would seem to have made against
the same, whereas he has not, as you have seen, so much as set it down at
all. Now you shall see, how fraudulently and ignorantly he has in the next
Chapter objected against my other two instances.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein Widdringtons second example, and his instances grounded thereon, are
confirmed, and M. Fitzherbert in impugning the same is convinced of manifest
fraud, and ignorance, in taxing therein of fondness the learned Divines of
his own Society. Also the third example of Widdrington, and his instances,
grounded thereon, are proved to be sound and sufficient, and M. Fitzherberts
fraud in relating of the said instances, and applying them to the Lateran
Council, is plainly discovered.

1 MY Adversary in this Chapter shows also the like fraud, and ignorance,
as he did in the former. Thus therefore he begins. Widdringtons second
instance is, Widdr. vbi supra nu. 57.
that Pope Sixtus the fourth made a Decree concerning the celebration of the B.
Virgins Conception, notwithstanding that it is uncertain, and disputed amongst
the Divines without any blot of heresy, error, or mortal sin, whether the
blessed Virgin cantracted original sin in her Conception, or was preserved
from it by a peculiar providence of God, Ibidem.
and therefore says he, it is manifest, that the Doctrine, which is either
proposed, or supposed by the Pope, as the foundation of his Apostolical
Decree, and Constitution (concerning even the religious worship of God) is not
so certain and undoubtedly true, but that it may be impugned without danger of
grievous sin. So he: whereupon he infers, that the ground of the Canon of
the Lateran Council may also be uncertain, or impugned without note of
heresy, or sin.

2 But first it is very untrue that this was my second instance, which I
brought to confront with Fa. Lessius his second argument, although it be true,
that it was my second example, whereon both my first and second instance were
grounded. For whereas Fa. Lessius to prove that the Popes power to depose
Princes does belong to faith, argues thus in his second argument; If a
general Council should expressly define, that the Church has power to depose
Princes, no Catholic can make doubt, but that it should belong to faith, but
seeing that she supposes it as a certain foundation of her Decrees and
sentences she is thought no less to affirm the same, therefore it ought to
be accounted no less certain: To this argument I opposed an other instance
not much unlike to it, which was this: If the Pope should expressly define, that
he has authority to give license to inferior Priests to administer the
Sacrament of Confirmation, and to dispense in the solemn vow of Chastity, or
that the B. Virgin was not conceived in original sin, none of those
Catholics that hold as Fa. Lessius does, that the Pope cannot err in his
definitions although he define without a general Council, can make any
doubt, but that the aforesaid things should appertain to faith, but seeing
that diverse Popes do suppose the same, as a certain foundation of their
Decrees and sentences, they are thought no less to affirm the same, therefore
they ought to be accounted no less certain. This was my second instance: and
therefore Mr. Fitzherbert in affirming my second example to be my second
instance discovers no less his fraud, then he does both his fraud and
ignorance in impugning the same.

3 Secondly, it is also very untrue, that I from this example inferred, as this
man shamefully affirms, that the ground of the Canon of the Lateran Council
may also be uncertain and impugned without note of heresy, or sin, seeing
that it is evident, as you have seen before, that I neither impugned, but
only expounded the Canon, or rather Act of the Lateran Council, neither did I
apply any one of those three examples to the Canon of the Lateran Council, or
in any one of my three instances made any mention of the Lateran Council at
all. But as Fa. Lessius referred his second argument to the foundations not
only of the Decrees of deposition, as he supposes this decree of the Lateran
Council to be, but also of the sentences of general Counsels, as in his
opinion was that denounced against Frederike the second, by Pope Innocent the
fourth, in the presence of the Council of Lions, so also I referred my second
Instance, to the foundations of Popes D crees and sentences, upon whom all the
infallibility of the Church, according to his doctrine, does depend. And the
same answer, which my Adversaries shall give to my second instance, will
forthwith satisfy Fa. Lessius his second argument.

4 For all the difficulty thereof, as also of his former argument, consists
in this, whether every doctrine which Popes, and Counsels suppose as a ground
and foundation of their Decrees, and sentences, is always to be accounted a
certain, and infallible ground, and not subject to error, or it may sometimes
be only a probable ground, and not always an infallible point of faith: and
my second Instance does sufficiently convince, that it is not always a
certain, and infallible ground, whereby Fa. Lessius his argument is quite
overthrown. Besides that, the ground and foundation only of those Decrees of
Popes, or general Counsels can be certain and infallible, which are made by
spiritual, and not temporal authority, as I have said before, so that this
argument of Fa. Lessius can little concern the decree or Act of the Lateran
Council, touching the deposition not of temporal Princes, but only of
inferior Magistrates, and Lords, seeing that it was made by the consent and
authority of temporal Princes, to whom only, according to the probable
doctrine of very many Doctors, the inflicting of temporal punishments, as of
death, exile, privation of goods, imprisonment, does belong.

3 Now let us see what Mr. Fitzherbert can say against this second example,
which he would make his Reader believe to be my second Instance. But
Widdringtons instance, says he Page 194. nu. 2. and seq.
, is as little to the purpose as the former, for albeit he alleges not here
a particular fact, but a general decree of a Pope directed to the whole
Church, yet he abuses his Reader in seeking to persuade him, that the
foundation of that decree, was the opinion or particular persuasion of Pope
Sixtus, Tom. 4. Council. post vitam Sixti 4.. cum prae exelsa.
that the blessed Virgin was not conceived in original sin, whereas no such
thing can be gathered by the decree, but only that his desire was by the
concession of Indulgences, to stir up the people to the deuote celebration of
the Feast, and thereby to give thanks, and praise to Almighty God for the
benefit, which all Cristian men have received by her Conception; to which end
it imported nothing at all how she was conceived; I mean, whether she were
sanctified in the first instant of her conception, as very many do hold, or
shortly after, as others teach, and therefore the decree of Pope Sixtus is
observed as well by those that affirm her to have been conceived in original
sin, as by those that deny it, because nothing is ordained in the decree in
favor, Ibid.. Grave nimis.
or prejudice of either opinion.

4 This may appear as well by a latter Decree of his, whereby he ordained
that both the opinions might be held, and taught without note of heresy
(because, says he, the question is not determined, and decided by the Church)
as also by the express words of this Decree, wherein he signifies that
considering the ineffable dignity, and worthiness of the most blessed Virgin,
it is convenient and necessary that all faithful Christians give praise and
thanks to God for her meruellous conception, Note that word marvelous.
to the end that by her merits, and intercession they may be made more capable
of Gods grace. Thus says Pope Sixtus in his Decree, and then adds, Hac
igitur consideratione inducti, etc. Therefore being moved with this
consideration, we determine and decree, etc. So he. And his determination and
Decree was no other, but that all such as did with due devotion assist at the
divine office and service, appointed for the celebration of that Feast, should
gain all those Indulgences, which had been granted before to such as
celebrated the Feast of Corpus Christi.

5 This then being the whole substance and effect as well of the Decree as of
the motive thereof expressed therein, it is evident that Pope Sixtus had no
other meaning in all this, then to move all Christians to the devout
celebration of the feast of the conception of the blessed Virgin, no less then
of her Nativity, and other Feasts, without any prejudice to the different
opinions that either then were, or after might be held concerning the manner of
her conception; in which respect the said Feast is celebrated by all Christians
no less then her other Feasts, which is as much as Pope Sixtus desired and
intended; whereby it appears, that his Decree is indifferent to both
opinions, being observed by the maintainers of both, and that therefore it is
not grounded upon either of both.

6 And now to apply this to our purpose, whereas Widdrington pretends by this
Instance to prove, that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes is
as uncertain, as the doctrine that the B. Virgin was conceived without
original sin, which is impugned by very learned men, it is to be considered,
that there is such disparitie in the cases, and such weakness in his
Instance, that he proves nothing at all against us. For the Decree of Pope
Sixtus had so little dependence on the doctrine of her immaculate Conception,
that he might have made it (yea it would have been very lawful, just, and
convenient) though he had held the contrary opinion; whereby it is manifest,
that his opinion concerning the immaculate purity of her Conception was not
the ground of his Decree ( as Widdrington does very fondly suppose it to be)
whereas in our question touching the Canon of the Lateran Council the case is
far different, seeing that the said Canon has such dependence on the
doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes (which is necessarily supposed
and included in it) that if the Pope have no such power, the Canon is utterly
void, being altogether unjust, unlawful, and erroneous; Whereupon it evidently
follows, that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes, is the
foundation of the Canon.

7 So as you see, that to impugn this undoubted ground of the Canon, he is
feign to suppose, and urge a false ground of Pope Sixtus his decree, and
consequently fails wholly in the proof of that which he pretends; and
therefore to make his Instance good, and the cases like, he should have
proved, that the doctrine of the Popes power to institute Feasts is
uncertain, and imagined by learned Catholics without danger of sin, for
Pope Sixtus his Decree touching the celebration of the Feast supposes the
truth of that doctrine, as in like sort the Canon of the Lateran Council
concerning the deposition of Princes supposes that the doctrine of the Popes
power to despose Princes is certain, and true; and therefore I conclude, that
his second Instance, wherein he supposes a false ground, is as improbable, and
impertinent as the former.

8 Thus you see, that the whole substance of this Discourse, which Mr.
Fitzherbert here has made against my second example, which he truly
affirms to be my second Instance, consists in this, that he denies the
ground and foundation of Pope Sixtus his Decree to be his opinion, and
persuasion, that the blessed Virgin was not conceived in original sin, and
affirms that I do very fondly suppose the same; wherein I know not whether
to tax him of manifest fraud, or palpable ignorance: for to shift off my
instance, and to censure it, according to his usual manner, as fond,
improbable, and impertinent, he is feign to forsake the common doctrine of the
learned Divines of his own Society, as of Salmeron, Salmeron ad Romans 15.
tom. 13. disp. 22. Suarez tom 2. in 3. part. disp. 3. sec. 5. Vasquez tom. 2.
in 3. part. disp. 117. cap. 5.
Suarez, and Vasquez, who do constantly hold, that the immaculate, pure, and
holy conception of the blessed Virgin was the ground and foundation of Pope
Sixtus his Decree, and to tax very rashly, and arrogantly, their doctrine as
fond, improbable, and impertinent, and very fraudulently, or unlearnedly to
take hold, for a color of his fraud, or ignorance, of certain answers of
their Adversaries, which were seen, propounded, and confuted by them. Which to
make most plain and manifest, I think it not amiss to set down verbatim,
what Suarez (with whom Vasquez, and Salmeron, do agree in this point) writes
of this matter.

9 But at the last (says Suarez to prove from the authority of the Church,
that the blessed Virgin was preserved from original sin, and sanctified in the
first instant of her conception) the Church of Rome two hundred years since
generally receiving the celebration of this Feast, gives special indulgences
to the worshippers thereof: Whereupon she seems in some sort to have
canonized the conception of the blessed Virgin. But perchance it will be said,
that this conception is not celebrated, for that it is holy, but because it
has been a great benefit of God, and a beginning of greater. But this by no
means is to be approved; because (as it is manifest by the understanding of
the faithful) the Church does not celebrate this Feast only for giving
thanks in respect of God, but also in honor of the Virgin: but the Virgin
should not be worthy of honor for her conception, unless therein she had
been holy. Moreover S. Thomas, Bernard, and Ildefonsus do think, that it is
sufficiently proved, that the blessed Virgin at the time of her Nativity was
holy, for that the Church does celebrate her Nativity, therefore the same
judgment would they make of her Conception, if they should see the Feast to be
celebrated. Lastly, Galatinus lib. 7. cap. 5. says, that the Feast of her
Conception is in some Martyrologies expressly set down for the most great
purity, and sanctity thereof; and this will be made more evident by that which
shall be said.

10 But some others say, that the Feast of the Conception was not celebrated,
but of the Sanctification, at what time soever it was done, or truly (if the
Feast of her conception be celebrated) it is not therefore because she was
sanctified in the first instant, but because she was sanctified perchance that
day. But this also is against the meaning of the Church, which ever intended to
celebrate some special privilege and immunity of the Virgin upon this
feastiuall day, whereof are manifest signs: First, because Saint Bernard in
the aforesaid 147. Epistle did understand in this sense the meaning of the
Churches, which began to celebrate this Feast: For if they should celebrate
only the sanctification, there were no cause why he should reprehend them.
Besides, the Council of Basil does plainly say, that it is an ancient custom
of the Church to celebrate this Feast in honor of the Conception of the
immaclate Virgin, or of the immaculate Conception of the Virgin, for the Latin
words may bear both senses.

11 Thirdly, in a certain Roman office of this Feast, which is confirmed by
the authority of Pope Sixtus the fourth this oftentimes is expressly said, and
the intention of this Feast is declared. And after the same manner Pope Sixtus
the fourth does speak in the Extrauagant, Cum praeexcelsa, and in the
Extrauagant, Grave nimis, de reliquijs and venerat. Sanctorum, calling her
Conception pure, and immaculate, and granting Indulgences to those who do
piously believe, and celebrate the same. And so also the Council of Trent
understood these Decrees sess. 5. where she confirms them. Whereupon the same
Pope Sixtus the fourth says, that those do not sin, who think that the B.
Virgin was conceived without sin, and for that cause do celebrate her Feast.
Therefore without doubt this is the intention and reason of this festiuitie.
Add, that in the same manner one may say, that when the Church does celebrate
the Nativity of the Virgin, it is not for that she was holy in her Nativity,
but because she was sanctified within that day, but this is plainly false and
absurd, as it is manifest by that which has been said, therefore the same is
for the present. And the reason is general, because the Church does properly
worship and celebrate the mysteries, and privileges of the holy Conception,
and Nativity. Thus Fa. Suarez.

12 So as you see how Fa. Suarez not only says, but also proves, that the
end, reason, ground, and foundation of Pope Sixtus his decree touching the
celebration of the Feast of the B. Virgins Conception, was for that the Pope
supposed, that she was sanctified in the first instant of her Conception. And
the same reasons Fa. Vasquez also brings. Only he urges another reason
taken from the words of the Decree of Pope Sixtus, and related above by my
Adversary, to wit, that the Pope in that Decree exhorts the faithful to
give praise and thanks to God for the wonderful, or marvelous Conception of
the immaculate Virgin, but he could not call it a wonderful, or marvelous
Conception, unless the B. Virgin were contrary to the accustomed manner
conceived in grace and sanctity, for no other wonderful, or admirable thing
could her Conception have, seeing that for as much as appertains to nature,
she was conceived after the manner of other men, and women.

13 Judge now, good Reader, whether this rash-headed ignorant man may not be
ashamed to condemn so rashly the most famous, and learned men of his own
Society, as he condemns me, of fondness, improbabilitie, and
impertinencie, for affirming so resolutely, that without all doubt the end,
reason, ground and foundation of Pope Sixtus his Decree for celebrating the
Feast of the B. Virgins Conception was for that the Pope supposed her to be
conceived in grace, and sanctity, and that all Christian people by celebrating
her Feast should give praise and thanks to God for her holy and wonderful
Conception, and contrary to the ordinary manner that other men are conceived,
to the end that they thus celebrating her holy and marvelous Conception may by
her merits, and intercession be made more capable of Gods grace. But perchance
Mr. Fitzherbert has not read these Authors, and then his ignorance and
rashness is the more blame worthy in taking upon him to be a teacher, and
Censurer of others in these points of Schoole-Diuinitie, wherein he shows
himself to be so ignorant; and if he have read them, then his fraud is the
more culpable to delude his Reader so shamefully in bringing arguments against
their doctrine, to tax it of fondness, improbabilitie, and impertinencie, and
in dissembling in what manner they have most clearly confuted the same. And
therefore thou need not much marvel to hear these words so frequent in
this man's mouth, that my arguments, and answers are absurd, improbable,
impertinent, foolish, ridiculous, malicious, erroneous, yea and heretical, and
then most commonly when they are most sound and sufficient, and his Replies
most weak and fraudulent, considering with what a bold face the silly ignorant
man does unlearnedly and arrogantly condemn in me and my doctrine, of fondnes,
improbabilitie, and impertinencie, the most famous Divines of his own Society.

14 And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert still harpeth upon the same string, to wit,
that the undoubted ground and foundation of the Decree of the Lateran Council
is, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and that the Canon supposes
this doctrine to be certain, this is the maine point about which we contend,
for I have ever denied, and he has no way sufficiently proved, but supposed,
that this decree, or rather Act of the Lateran Council does concern the
deposition of temporal Princes, but only of inferior Magistrates,
Landlords, or Lords, by the consent and authority of temporal Princes, from
whom that Act had force to bind. And although the Popes power to institute
Feasts be a remote ground and foundation of the decree of Pope Sixtus, yet the
immediate ground and foundation of that Decree was the purity and sanctity of
the B. Virgins Conception, in honor whereof he did institute that Feast, as I
have showed before. And albeit I do not deny that the Pope has authority to
institute Feasts in the honor of Saints, and of sacred mysteries, yet I deny
that the end, reason, ground and foundation for which such Feasts are
instituted, is always certain and infallible, and that those mysteries are
therefore infallibly sacred, as in this Feast of the B. Virgins Conception it
is apparent by the testimonies of most famous, and learned Divines. And lastly,
although I do not deny, that the Pope has authority to canonize Saints, or
to declare them to be holy and blessed men, yet Melchior Canus fears not to
say, that it is not heretical to affirm, that the Pope may err therein, and
the reason thereof he gives, as I declared before, because the ground,
whereon the Popes judgment and declaration in such canonizations does rely, to
wit, the testimonies of men, is fallible, and exposed to error. And thus much
concerning my second Instance, now to the third.

15 Widdringtons third Instance, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 197. nu. 8. ad
finem.
being of the nature and quality of the first, is so sufficiently answered
already, that I need not to stand long upon it: he says that the Popes have
often dispensed with Princes, which had made a solemn vow of chastity, whereof
he alleges some examples, and because very learned Doctors do deny that
the Pope has authority to dispense in solemn vows, Widdrington infers as
before, that the doctrine whereupon those dispensations were grounded, is not
so certain, but that it may be impugned without sin, and consequently, that
the like follows also, concerning the doctrine of the Popes power to depose
Princes, which is the foundation of the Canon of the Lateran Council. Thus
argues Widdrington in substance.

16 But in all this he is as idle as in the rest, and shoots his bolts at
random, and clean wide of the mark, impugning a general Canon of an
Oecumenicall Council, by some particular facts of Popes concerning particular
men, which facts both he, and we grant may be subject to error: whereas not
only we, but he himself also acknowledges the infallible assistance of the
holy Ghost in the definitions, and decrees of general Counsels, as I have
amply declared before Chap. 13. nu. 1. 8. 9. 10. and 11
. And therefore to make a good Instance in this case, and fit for the matter in
hand, he should produce some Decree of a general Council, or at least of
some Pope ordaining the practice of such dispensations, and show us withal,
that notwithstanding the said Decree, some Catholic Doctors do deny the
Popes authority to dispense in vows, but this he neither does, nor can do;
for if ever any such Decree had been made, the Catholic Doctors whom he
names, would not have doubted of the Popes authority in that behalf, as they
have done, because neither the doctrine it self, nor the practice thereof was
ever decreed by any Pope, or General Council; whereby it appears evidently,
that this his third Instance is suitable to the two former, and as improbable,
and absurd as the rest of his arguments, and answers.

17 But still my Adversary persisteth in his accustomed fraud, not to say
falsehood. For neither is this the third Instance, which I brought to confront
with Fa. Lessius his third argument, as you have seen before, although it be
indeed my third example, whereon all my three Instances were partly grounded,
neither did I by this example either impugn the Decree of the Lateran
Council, or infer from thence, as this man untruly affirms, that the
Decree of the Lateran Council might be impugned without sin: For neither did
I impugn, but only expound the Decree, or rather Act of the Lateran Council,
neither did I in any one of my three Instances, or also examples make mention
at all of the Lateran Council, nor also did I ever acknowledge, that the
doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes, was the ground and foundation of
the Decree of the Lateran Council. But for this cause I produced this example
of Popes dispensations in the solemn vow of chastity, to show, that the
ground and foundation, especially of Popes sentences of deposition, as was that
sentence of Gregory the 7. against Henry the 4. in a Council held at Rome,
and of Innocent the 4. against Frederick the second in the Council of Lions,
and other such sentences, which concern particular men, does not appertain to
faith, by virtue of this proposition, whereon both the first and second
argument of Fa. Lessius was principally grounded, That doctrine does appertain
to faith, which Popes, and Councels suppose as a certain foundation of their
decrees and sentences; for it is evident, that there is no more reason why the
ground and foundation of Popes particular sentences of depositions or
punishments should appertain to faith, then of his particular grants of
dispensations and privileges, whereby it appears evidently, that this was a
fit example to confute Fa. Lessius his first and second argument, which there I
took in hand in my first and second Instance to confute.

18 Besides, I brought this example in my third Instance, against Fa. Lessius
his third argument, whereby he labored to prove, that it is a point of faith
that the Pope has power to depose Princes, for that otherwise the Church and
Pope should err in doctrine and precepts of manners by teaching generally
something to be lawful, which is unlawful, or contrariwise, and also by
commanding something of it self unlawful seeing that she teaches, that a
Prince being deposed, yea, and excommunicated by the sentence of the Pope, his
subjects are absolved from his obedience, yea, and are bound not to obey him,
until he be reconciled, if the Censure be denounced, whereby subjects are
incited by the Pope to rebellions and periuries. Against this argument, I
brought my third Instance, which my Adversary fraudulently concealeth, and
which was grounded not only upon this third example of Popes licenses given to
Priests to Minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, and might likewise be
grounded upon the second of Pope Sixtus his decree for the celebrating of the
blessed Virgins Conception.

19 For if Fa. Lessius his third argument be good, it may likewise be proved,
as you may see by my third Instance, that it is a point of faith that the Pope
has power to dispense in the solemn vow of Chastity, to give license to
Priests to minister the Sacrament of Confirmation, and also that the blessed
Virgins Conception was pure, holy, and immaculate, seeing that from these
dispensations, licenses, and decree of Pope Sixtus, it evidently follows,
that the Pope teaches generally that the marriage of professed religious
persons is a true Sacrament, and the children begotten and borne by them are
legitimate, and if the Parents be Kings, their children ought to be preferred
in the Kindome before all others, who may pretend otherwise a right thereto,
and the Sacrament of Confirmation, ministered by an inferior Priest, with the
Popes license is a true and valid Sacrament, and also that the honor and
worship which is given to the blessed Virgins conception is a true and
religious honor; all which would according to Fa. Lessius his third argument,
be false and pernicious, (because the faithful should thereby be incited to
commit injuries, and sacriledges, yea, and against their wills by Censures be
compelled thereunto) if the Pope has no such power to dispense in the solemn
vow of chastity, nor to give license to Priests to minister the Sacrament of
Confirmation, and that the blessed Virgin was not in her Conception pure, holy,
and immaculate. But my Adversary to obscure the whole difficulty, and to blind
the Readers understanding thought it best, not to set down fully, but in that
lame manner, as you have seen Fa. Lessius his three arguments, and wholly to
conceal the three Instances I made against them, whereby he might with a
less show of falsity boldly affirm, that the three examples were my three
Instances, and that they were brought by me of purpose to impugn the decree of
the Lateran Council, both which how untrue they are, and also of what little
force are all Fa. Lessius his three arguments, against which only I brought my
three Instances, you have seen before.

20 For all the difficulty of Fa. Lessius his third argument, consists in the
understanding of that Mayor proposition, It is a point of faith, that the
Church cannot err in doctrine, and precepts of manners, by teaching generally
something to be lawful, which is unlawful, or unlawful, which is lawful, or
also by commanding something of it self unlawful. For if by doctrine of
manners, and teaching generally, he mean a definitive teaching, or a
propounding any thing, as of faith, with an obligation to bind all the
faithful to believe that doctrine. I grant that it is a point of faith that
the Church, or a general Council cannot err in such doctrine, or teaching,
(for whether the Pope can err or no in such teaching, it is not a point of
faith, but as yet a controversy betwixt the Roman and French Divines) but then
I utterly deny that any general Council (yea, or any Pope) has ever defined,
or taught generally, that the Pope by virtue of his Ecclesiastical power has
authority to depose temporal Princes, to absolve subjects from their temporal
allegiance, or to inflict temporal punishments. But if by doctrine, and
teaching he mean opinatiue and probable doctrine and teaching, besides that it
cannot be convinced that the Lateran Council, or any other general Council
taught generally in this sense, that the Pope by virtue of his spiritual power
has authority to depose temporal Princes, his Mayor proposition is very
untrue, and therefore from thence it does not follow, that the doctrine of the
Popes power to depose Princes, is certain, and of faith.

21 Likewise, if by commanding something of it self evil, Fa. Lessius
understand a general commandment, propounded to the whole Church, or all the
faithful, I grant also that a general Council cannot err in imposing such
general commandments, although this be not so clear a point of faith as the
former, as I have showed before out of the doctrine of learned Canus; but then
I deny, that any general Council has ever given any such general
commandment concerning all subjects, not to obey their temporal Prince, being
deposed by the Pope, or to rebel, and plot conspiracies against him: But if by
commanding, he understand particular decrees and commandments, propounded to
particular persons, Bishops, Churches, or Kingdoms against any particular
Emperors, Kings, or temporal Princes then I say, that according to the
doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, and Canus, the Church, and much more, the
Pope may err; and of this sort are the depositions, judicial sentences, and
commandments of Pope Gregory the seventh, in a Council held at Rome against
Henry the fourth Emperor, of Pope Innocent the fourth, in the presence of the
Council of Lions against Frederike the second Emperor, and all other
particular depositions of whatsoever Emperors, Kings, or temporal Princes:
and in these commandments the Popes were ever resisted, and contradicted both
by Princes themselves, and also by learned and virtuous Catholic subjects, as
it appears evidently, not only by the first depositions of Emperors, and
Princes, but also by the two last, of our late Queen Elizabeth, and the last
King of France, who were obeyed in civil matters by their Catholic subjects,
and acknowledged by them to be their true and rightful Sovereigns,
notwithstanding the Popes particular declaration, sentence, and commandment to
the contrary, as I have showed at large concerning our late Queen, in the
first part, and of the King of France, the late troubles and civil wars in
France, which are yet both fresh in most men's memories, and recorded also by
Histories, are sufficient testimonies.

22 Thus thou see, good Reader, that neither by this third example of Popes
dispensations in vows, whereon not only my third Instance, but also the two
former were grounded, all which Mr. Fitzherbert has fraudulently concealed,
did I impugn the Decree of the Lateran Council, as the silly man to make some
show of confuting them as absurd, improbable, impertinent, fond, and
ridiculous, does most untruly affirm; neither did I in any one of my
examples, or Instances make any mention at all of the said Decree: seeing that
I had before sufficiently answered to this Decree, not by impugning, but only
by expounding it, and by clearly conuincing, that according to the probable
doctrine of very many learned Catholics, who are of opinion, that the Church
cannot by her spiritual power inflict temporal punishments, it must,
according to Mr. Fitzherberts own principles, who acknowledges, that all
laws, and decrees whatsoever are to be restrained and limited according to the
power of the Lawmakers, etc. be understood of the deposing, not of temporal
Princes, who are not subject to the authority of the Church, forasmuch as
concerns mere temporal matters, as is the inflicting of temporal
punishments, for what cause, crime, or end whatsoever they be inflicted, but
only of inferior Magistrates, Landlords, or Lords by the consent, and
authority of absolute Princes; but that which I intended by my three examples,
and instances was to show the weakness, and insufficiency of Fa. Lessius his
three arguments, as I have sufficiently declared before.

23 But if I should press M. Fitzherbert a little further, and grant him for
Disputation sake, which he is not able to prove, to wit, that the decree, or
rather Act of the Lateran Council is to be understood of the deposition of
temporal Princes, yet the silly man would have much ado to prove, as also I
have signified before, that, according to the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine,
and Canus, Cap. 13. nu. 7. and seq.
which I have related above, it is such a Decree, that from thence it can be
sufficiently gathered, that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes,
is an undoubted point of faith: seeing that, according to their grounds, only
those Decrees and precepts touching faith, or manners are infallible, and of
faith, which are general, and universal, and belong to the whole Church, and
all the faithful, and consequently as well Clearkes, as Laymen. For only in
this case, says Canus, the Councels, Canus l. 5. de locis c. 5. q. 4.
or Fathers are to be understood to pronounce of faith, when the sentence, or
Decree belongs to all Christians, when it binds all. Therefore the doctrine
of Popes and Counsels, says he, if it be propounded to the whole Church, if
it be also propounded with an obligation to be believed, then does their
sentence, or Decree concern a point of faith. And concerning Decrees, and
precepts of manners Canus teaches the same. When the Church, says he, in a
matter of weight, and which is very profitable for the reforming of Christian
manners, does make laws to all the people, she cannot command any thing, which
is contrary to the Gospel, or natural reason; but in manners not common to
the whole Church, but which are referred to private men, or Churches, she may
err through ignorance, not only in her judgment of things done, but also in
her private precepts and laws. Bellar. l. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 3. and 5.
And Cardinal Bellarmine also affirms, that those Decrees, or precepts
concerning faith or manners, wherein the Pope, in whom he puts all the
infallibility of the Church, cannot err, must be general, and be
propounded, and belong to all the faithful.

24 Now this Act of the Lateran Council, forasmuch as it concerns the
absoluing of Vassals from their fealty, besides that it is not properly a
Decree, according to my Adversaries grounds, as I signified before, containing
in it any precept or obligation, unless they will grant the Council to be
above the Pope, nor also propounded as of faith, according to the rules of
Cardinal Bellarmine and Canus before related, and therefore it cannot,
according to their doctrine appertain to faith, it is not also a general
Decree, and which appertains to the whole Church, and all the faithful; for
it does not concern Clergy men, who according to my Adversaries false,
scandalous, and seditious doctrine are not subject to temporal Princes, nor
do owe to them any temporal allegiance, but only the temporal Vassals of
temporal Lords, and those not all, but of such a Lord only, who for a year
remains excommunicated for neglecting to purge his territories of heresy.
For those words of the Council, vt ex tunc ipse, etc. that from that time the
Pope may denounce his Vassals absolved from their fealty, can only bind,
either the Pope to make that denunciation, or that temporal Lord, not to exact
of his Vassals temporal fealty, or the Vassalls not to give to that temporal
Lord temporal fealty, and so it cannot bind Clergy men, who do not owe any
temporal fidelity, or obedience to temporal Lords, according to my Adversaries
false doctrine, nor also all Vassals, but only those of that temporal Lord;
whereupon the decree is not general, and belonging to all the faithful, which
nevertheless is necessary, that any decree, or precept concerning faith or
manners do appertain to faith.

25 And if perchance my Adversary will say, that it binds all Christians to
believe, that such a temporal Lord is rightly deposed, and his temporal
Vassals absolved from his obedience; Besides that, this cannot be gathered
from the words of this Decree, it being not propounded as of faith, which
condition nevertheless is necessary to make any Decree to appertain to
faith, as I have showed before; the same may be said of all particular Decrees,
precepts, sentences, depositions, dispensations, privileges and licenses,
which are made or granted by the Pope, or Council; and then all those three
instances and examples, which I brought against Fa. Lessius his arguments are
of force; for in like manner it may be said, that albeit those licenses and
dispensations do concern particular facts, and particular persons, yet they
bind all Christians to believe, that such Priests, for example, do truly and
really confer the Sacrament of Confirmation, and that such dispensations are
valide and have effect, which how absurd this is it is manifest, and my
Adversary here acknowledges as much. And this I hope may suffice to show the
weakness, of Fa. Lessius his three arguments, and the sufficiency of my three
Instances, which I opposed against them, and the fraud and ignorance of Mr.
Fitzherbert in setting down, and confuting the same.

CHAP. XVI.
Wherein another argument, or rather answer of Widdrington is confirmed, and
M. Fitzherbert in laboring to prove that Widdrington by his own grant is
fallen into heresy or error, is convinced of palbable ignorance; and lastly,
the Conclusion of all Widdringtons discourse in his Preface, to his
Apologeticall Answer is confirmed, and what M. Fitzherhert excepteth against
the same, and also his brief Recapitulation of all his Discourse in this his
Treatise, are confuted.

1 AFter I had set down my three Instances, which I brought to confront with
the three arguments brought by Fa. Lessius, desiring him to satisfy my
Instances, and promising by his own answers, to satisfy his objections, I
added another answer, or if you will call it, an argument, or instance in
these words. Finally, are not the reasons by which Counsels are induced, or
moved to define any thing, as it were some grounds, which are propounded, or
supposed by them as foundations of their definitions and decrees? and
nevertheless no Divine, as I suppose, will affirm, that those reasons are to
be received by Catholics, with the same certainty as the definitions
themselves. In Counsels, says Cardinal Bellarmine, Bellar. l. 2. de Conc.
cap. 12.
the greatest part of the Acts do not appertain to faith. For neither the
Disputations, which go before, nor the reasons, which are added, nor those
things which are brought to explicate and illustrate, are of faith, See also
Canus l. 6. de locis. c. 8.
but only the bare Decrees, and those not all, but those only which are
propounded as of faith.

2 These were my words in that Apologeticall Preface, which albeit they are so
clear, and manifest, that no man of any learning can take any just exception
against them, especially seeing that I did not apply them in particular to any
Decree, or Act of Pope or Council, yet Mr. Fitzherbert out of the
profoundnesse, forsooth, of his Divinity will prove them to be absurd and
impertinent, for so he is pleased to style the argument of this Chapter,
Widdringtons absurdity, says he, by an other impertinent argument is further
discovered. But let us see how well he discovers this. There remains now,
says Mr. Fitzherbert, one argument only to be examined, which Widdrington
adds to his three Instances for the conclusion of the whole, reasoning thus
in effect; that because the reasons, which move Counsels to define, and
determine any thing, are, as it were, the foundations of their Decrees, and yet
not so certain as the Decrees themselves (which he confirms by the opinion
and doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, Vbi supra.
and Canus) therefore the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes (
whereupon the Canon of the Lateran Council was grounded) is not so certain
but that it may be erroneous, and impugned without offense.

3 But so shameful, and insupportable is the corrupt dealing of this unlearned
and fraudulent man, that in very truth I am half ashamed to discover and lay
open the same. For first it is too too manifest, that I made no such argument
in this place, as this man faigneth, either concerning the Decree of the
Lateran Council, or concerning the Popes power to depose Princes, whereof here
I made no mention at all. Neither also did I argue in this ridiculous manner,
that because the reasons, which move Counsels to define or determine any
thing, are not so certain as the decrees themselves, therefore they may be
impugned without offense: As who should say, that because there is not promised
to Popes such an infallibility, but that they may err in their private
opinions, judgments, dispensations, licenses, Censures, and Decrees, therefore
they do err in the same, and such their opinions, dispensations etc. may be
impugned, and denied without offense. If Mr. Fitzherbert had said without note
of heresy, he had said something to the purpose, and spoken agreeably to the
grounds, which I maintain, for what thing soever is not of faith, may be
impugned, and denied without note of heresy, but to say, without offense, this
is too too shameful and palpable a falsehood.

4 As for example, although Melchior Canus before related does affirm, that it
is not heretical to hold, that the Church may err in the canonization of
Saints, for the reason, which I there alleged out of him, and consequently,
that he is not to be accounted an heretic, or an impugner of the Catholic
faith, that should therefore say, that the Church has or does err in the
canonization of such a Saint, yet he affirms, that whosoever should say, that
therefore the Church does err in the canonization of such a Saint, is a rash,
and irreligious man, and deserves therefore to be punished by the Church: So
likewise although it be certain, that temporal Princes, and commonwealths
may err in making temporal laws through ignorance, inconsideration, or some
intemperate affection, and that therefore he is not to be reputed an heretic,
who should rashly and without sufficient ground affirm that they have and do
err in making such temporal laws, yet it is also certain, that what subject
soever should rashly affirm, that his temporal Prince has erred in making
such, or such a law, and that such or such laws are unjust, is worthily
accounted an impious, scandalous, and turbulent person, and deserves therefore
to be punished by the State. So as you see how many gross falsehoods this man
has imposed upon me in so few lines.

5 Wherefore all the argument I made here was, as you have seen, only this:
The reasons, ends, and motives, for which Counsels are moved, or induced to
make definitions and decrees, are not always so certain and infallible, as
the definitions or Decrees themselves, but such reasons, ends, and motives are
propounded by the Councels as some grounds and foundations of their
definitions, and decrees, therefore the grounds and foundations of
Ecclesiastical definitions and decrees are not so certain, and infallible as
the definitions and decrees themselves. Now what absurdity, or impertinency,
trow you, can be found in this my argument? For I neither applied it to the
Lateran Council, or to any other Decree of Pope, or Council, or to the
doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes; neither did I say, that because
the reasons of Ecclesiastical definitions, and decrees are sometimes uncertain
and fallible, therefore they may be denied without offense: but all this is
forged by my Adversary, that so he might have some color to charge me with
absurdity and impertinency: for so exorbitant is the bitterness of his zeal,
not to use a more bitter word, that he will not have me to say scarce any one
thing throughout all my writings, without some note either of heresy, error,
temerity, fraud, malice, irreuerence, ignorance, falsehood, impertinency,
fondnes, or ridiculous absurdity, from which imputations I have nevertheless
cleared all my assertions, and evidently showed, that they are far more
agreeable to his arguments, and answers. And if my Adversary had not been
blinded with some intemperate passion, he might plainly have seen, that to no
other end, and purpose I brought that argument, but to show, that the
proposition, whereon Fa. Lessius grounded his two first arguments, whereof I
did treat immediately before, to wit, that the grounds, and foundations of
Ecclesiastical decrees and sentences must be certain, infallible, and of
faith, is not so generally true, but that it is needful for Fa. Lessius to
make a more clear explication thereof.

6 And albeit this be sufficient to justify this my argument, and to free it
from all imputation of absurdity, and impertinencie, yet for the better
satisfaction of the Reader I will examine more particularly what he excepteth
against the same. Wherefore after he had so falsely and fraudulently, as you
have seen, set down the aforesaid argument, applying it to the Popes power to
depose Princes, and to the decree of the Lateran Council, and also affirming
me to say, that because the reasons of Eccesiasticall Canons be sometimes
uncertain, therefore they may be denied without offense, all which three
things are forged by himself, and not spoken by me, and therefore to color
his fraud the better he thought it best, not to set down my argument
verbatim, as there he found it, he writes thus. Page 200. nu. 2.
Whereunto I answer, that by this argument Widdrington impugneth none so much
as himself, granting that the Decrees of Counsels may be certain, though the
reasons, whereupon they are grounded, be uncertain.

7 But as I do not grant, that all the reasons of Ecclesiastical Decrees are
uncertain, and not of faith, for some, no doubt, are certain and of faith, so
also I do not grant, that all Decrees of Counsels are certain and of faith,
for some no doubt are not of faith, seeing that all Decrees of Counsels, Bell.
lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 12.
says Cardinal Bellarmine, do not belong to faith, but those only which are
propounded as of faith; but of this I have above treated more at large. So that
if all decrees of Counsels are not certain, infallible, and of faith, no
marvel that the reasons, grounds, and foundations of such Decrees, as they
are reasons, grounds, and foundations thereof, may be uncertain, fallible, and
not of faith. I said, as they are, reasons, grounds, and foundations thereof,
for if otherwise they be decisions, definitions, or conclusions of some other
general Council, in this respect they may be certain, infallible, and of
faith. And this does evidently impugn the two first arguments of Fa. Lessius,
and the often named proposition, whereupon they are grounded, but how by this
argument I impugn none so much as my self (as this man says, but does not
prove) or any way impugn my self I cannot comprehend.

8 Whereupon it follows, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 200. nu. 2.
that the Decree of the Lateran Council, ordaining the deposition of Princes
may be certain, and just, albeit the reasons, or doctrine which was the
foundation of it were not certain; and so Princes may be lawfully deposed by
the Pope, in such case, as the Lateran Council has ordained, though the said
Council might be moved thereto by an uncertain, or erroneous reason, so that
albeit Widdrington should prove, that the ground of the Canon in question were
uncertain, or erroneous, yet he should prove nothing against the Canon it
self.

9 But fie Mr. Fitzherbert, that you should show your self to be so grossly
ignorant, and then especially when you tax your Adversary of absurdity, and
impertinencie, and to impugn him even by his own argument. Are not you
ashamed to argue so childishly ex puris particularibus, from pure particular
propositions against the known principles and rules of Logike? Some Decrees of
Counsels may be certain, though the reasons and doctrine, whereupon they are
grounded be uncertain, therefore the Decree of the Lateran Council ordaining
the deposition of Princes may be certain, though the reasons, doctrine, and
foundations thereof, be uncertain: As who should say; Some men may be very
skillful in Divinity, although they never studied it, to wit, by supernatural
infusion, and divine revelation, as Adam, Solomon, and our Savior Christ
according to his humanity; therefore M. Fitzherbert may be very skillful in
Divinity, although he never studied the same.

10 But secondly, it is not true, that the Council of Lateran ordained the
deposition of Princes, but only of inferior Magistrates, Landlords, or Lords
by the consent and authority of temporal Princes: and therefore that Decree, or
rather Act being not made by true Ecclesiastical authority does not
appertain to the present question concerning the certainty, and infallibility
of Ecclesiastical Decrees, which are made by the spiritual Pastors of the
Church, as they have spiritual and not temporal authority. Thirdly, my
Adversary standing in his own principles will have much ado to prove, as I
said before, that those words of the Council, vt extunc ipse etc. That then
the Pope may denounce the vassalls absolved from their fealty; do contain a
proper decree, or precept concerning faith or manners, but the end, reason, and
cause of the former decree, wherein it is ordained, that the Pope shall be
certified, if the temporal landlord, or Lord, being excommunicated shall
contemn to give satisfaction within a year, to the end that the Pope may
denounce etc. unless he will have the Council to make laws, decrees, and
Canons to bind the Pope: And that although it were a proper decree concerning
manners, yet that is such a general decree, and belonging to all the
faithful, as according to Cardinal Bellarmine, and Canus is required to make
Ecclesiastical decrees to be infallible and of faith. So that the more my
Adversary strives to prove out of the aforesaid words of the Lateran
Council, that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose Princes is a point of
faith, the more he bewraieth his own ignorance, and the weakness of his
cause, and the uncertainty of his new broached Catholic faith.

11 And truly it cannot be denied, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 200. nu. 3.
but that great difference is to be made (as Widdrington says well out of
Cardinal Bellarmine) betwixt the certainty of the Decrees of Counsels, and
of the reasons which are alleged therein; it being evident that all reasons
are not of like weight, certainty, or probability; nevertheless, it were
absurd to say, that the fundamental reason or doctrine, which is necessarily
included, and supposed in any decree of an Oecumenicall Council can be false;
for so also the decree it self should be false, and the error of both justly
ascribed to the holy Ghost, as Author thereof.

12 But here my Adversary shoots his bolt far beyond the mark; for as not
all Decrees of Oecumenicall Counsels are certain, infallible, and of faith,
but only those which are made by true Ecclesiastical authority, and are
propounded as of faith, and which are general to the whole Church, and do
bind all the faithful, so neither must the fundamental reason or doctrine,
which is necessarily included in every decree of an Oecumenial Council be of
necessity certain, infallible, and of faith, but it may be false, and exposed
to error, as the decree it self, whereof it is a fundamental reason.

13 And this I say of decrees, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 194. number. 4. 5.
, that concern not only matters of belief, but also manners, or matters of
fact, such as was the decree of the Apostles at Jerusalem, wherein they
doubted not to say, Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis, Acts 15.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and us, ascribing to the holy Ghosts
assistance their determination, not only of the decree it self, but also of
the foundation, whereupon it was grounded, I mean the equality, justice, and
conueniencie of it. For it cannot be denied, but that the holy Ghost assisted,
and guided them first to determine what was lawful, and convenient to be
decreed, and executed, and then after to ordain, and decree it, the one so
depending on the other, that if they had failed in the former, they would not
have justly decreed the latter; that is to say, if it had not been lawful and
convenient for Christians at that time to abstain from strangled meats and
blood, the Apostles could not have lawfully ordained, and decreed it; and
therefore the Decree being just, and ascribed to the assistance of the holy
Ghost, the foundation or ground, and all the necessary consequents thereof must
needs be granted to be lawful and just, and to flow from one fountain, that
is to say, from the holy Ghosts inspiration and assistance.

14 But first, as concerning matters of belief, I grant with Canus, that it is
certain, and of faith, that the Church cannot err, when she propounds a
doctrine of faith, with an obligation to bind all the faithful to believe the
same: and likewise in Decrees concerning such manners and matters of fact, as
are necessary to salvation, I grant also with the same Canus, that it is
certain, that she cannot err in making such Decrees, for that consequently
it would follow, as Canus well deduceth, that she may also err in doctrine of
faith: and so the Church cannot command any thing to all the faithful, which
is repugnant to the Gospel, or to the law of nature. But whether it be likewise
certain and of faith, that the Church cannot err in Decrees concerning
manners, and matters of fact, which are not necessary to salvation, I will not
now dispute, for not giving occasion to my Adversaries to fly from the
principal question touching the Decrees or Act of the Lateran Council, it
being sufficient at this time, that the judicious Reader, by that which I have
before related out of the doctrine of Canus, may have some light how to judge
of this question. For he grants that it is not heretical to affirm, that
the Charch may err in the canonizing of Saints, for that her judgment herein
depends upon an uncertain ground, to wit, upon the relation, information,
and judgment of other men, which is uncertain and fallible, and consequently,
according to his grounds, she may err in all such Decrees, which depend upon
uncertain and fallible grounds, and foundations. And the leardnest Divines of
his own Society, as Salmeron, Suarez, and Vasquez, who according to the
Censure of this my rash and ignorant Adversary, are very absurd and
impertinent therein, do constantly hold, that the fundamental reason of the
Churches Decree concerning the celebration of the Feast of the B. Virgins
Conception, is not certain, and a point of faith, but controuersed by learned
Catholics without any offense, to wit, that she was sanctified in the first
instant of her Conception, and that to honor this her pure, holy, and
immaculate Conception the said Feast was instituted.

15 Secondly, it is not certain, that the Church now has the same
infallibility, in making Decrees concerning such manners, and matters of fact
as are not necessary to salvation, which the Apostles had in making such
Decrees, for that the judgment of the Apostles being extraordinarily
illuminated, and assisted by the holy Ghost, did not only depend upon the
relation, information, and judgment of men, but also upon the special, and
extraordinary assistance of the holy Ghost, and therefore from that Decree of
the Apostles concerning the not eating of blood and strangled meats, who were
peculiarly and extraordinarily assisted, and replenished with the holy Ghost,
and therefore might well say, Visum est spiritui and nobis, Acts 2.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and us, no sufficient argument can be
brought to prove, that therefore it is a point of faith, that the Church now
cannot likewise err in making such Decrees.

16 Thirdly, Mr. Fitzherbert must also distinguish betwixt the lawfulness of
an Ecclesiastical decree concerning manners and matters of fact, and the
certainty, or infallibility thereof; for that many Decrees may be lawful,
and consequently ought to be obeyed, until the unlawfulness, or injustice
thereof be manifest, and yet not infallible, as it is evident in the civil
laws of temporal Princes and Commonwealths, whose laws are lawful, and
ought to be obeyed by their subjects, so long as the unlawfulness, or
injustice of them is not apparent, and yet they are not therefore infallible.
And so a Decree of the Church after due examination, approouing the final
sanctity of such, or such a man deceased, and upon that ground commanding all
the faithful to celebrate his Feast, is lawful, and ought to be obeyed
until it be manifest, that she was deceived, and misinformed by false
relation, and yet it is not therefore infallible, and a point of faith that he
is truly a Saint, and died in true sanctity, and holiness of life and soul.

17 Wherefore my Adversary for his better instruction may observe that, Caiet.
tom. 1. opusc. tract. 15. de Indulg. c. 8.
which Cardinal Caietane, who nevertheless puts all the infallibility of
ihe Church in the Pope, writes of Indulgences, and the canonization of Saints:
and he may if it please him learn from thence some special documents for his
present purpose. It is always, says he, presumed de iure by the law for the
Judge, unless there manifestly appear an error: and he that supposes upon
a lawful cause such an Indulgence to be given, does affirm the truth, as
he without falsitie affirms such a one to be a Saint, supposing him to be
rightly canonized. So that granting that such a man who is canonized should not
be a Saint, but damned, the doctrine or preaching of the Church would not be
lying or false; for here those things that do not appertain to faith are not
understood to be affirmed but with a grain of salt, that is supposing those
things which are commonly presumed. For the Church does presume the
canonization to be rightly done, and likewise the Indulgence to be rightly
given, but as humane error may perchance happen in the canonization of some
Saint (as Saint Thomas affirms) so humane error may happen in the giving of
an Indulgence. But if any man think, that the Pope cannot err in these
particular actions, as are dispensations as well of the temporal as of the
spiritual goods of the Church, let him also think that he is not a man.

18 The like is also to be said, says Mr. Fitzherbert, P. 201. nu. 6.
of the Decree of the Lateran Council concerning the deposition of Princes, to
wit, that the holy Ghost assisted, and guided them, first to resolve what was
lawful, and convenient to be decreed (that is to say, that Princes should be
deposed by the Pope, if they would not purge their Countries of heresy) and
afterward to ordain and decree it; for if it had not been lawful and
convenient, that the Pope should depose Princes in that case, the Council
could never have lawfully decreed it, neither could the Decree possibly be
lawful if the Pope had not that power; so as it is evident that the Decree
being just (as proceeding from the assistance of the holy Ghost) the
determination not only of the justice and conueniencie of it, but also of the
Popes power to perform it, must needs be granted to proceed in like manner
from the holy Ghost, inspiring as well the ground, and foundation of the
Decree, as the Decree it self.

19 But that the like cannot be said of the Decree or rather Act of the
Lateran Council I have sufficiently showed before, both for that there is no
mention made in that Council of the deposition of Princes, but only of
inferior Magistrates, Landlords, or Lords, and also because that Act was not
made by Ecclesiastical power, but by the consent, and authority of absolute
Princes, and moreover for that it is not properly a Decree containing any
precept of faith, or manners, but rather the end, reason, and cause of the
former Decree.

20 And therefore howsoever Widdrington may cavil, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page
202. nu. 7.
about the certainetie of some reasons that have been, or may be alleged in
some Decrees of Counsels, he cannot with any show of reason, or probability
deny, or call in question those foundations, and necessary grounds of this
Canon, or say, that they are less certain then the Canon it self, as he
seems most absurdly to affirm in this argument; wherein I wish also to be
noted, how ignorantly he confounds the foundation of a Decree with the
reasons, which move the Council to make it, or are added thereto, as though
all the reasons, which are brought and alleged by a Council, or move them
to determine any thing, were the foundations of their Decrees, whereas many
reasons, yea texts of Scriptures are probably alleged in Counsels for the
explicotion only, or some confirmation of their Decrees, and not as the
foundations of them.

21 But how grossly this man seeks to delude his Reader in this whole
Discourse of his I have already made most manifest, and therefore the
aspersions of absurdity, ignorance, and impertinencie, wherewith he charge
me, do agree to none so much as to himself. For neither did I make in the
aforesaid argument any such inference concerning either the Decree, or the
reason of the Decree of the Lateran Council, as he very shamefully would
persuade his Reader, neither did I confound the foundation of a Decree with
every reason which moves the Pope or Council to make it, or are added
thereunto, but only with fundamental reasons, and whereon that Decree does
wholly depend, in so much that the Pope or Council would not have made that
Decree, but upon supposall that such a reason or doctrine is true: as is the
reason, which moves Popes to canonize any Saint, or to celebrate his Feast,
for that they suppose him to have died in final sanctity, which reason is the
foundation of their Decree, and yet is not infallible and of faith according to
the doctrine of many learned Divines, as I showed before: And the like is also
of the reason, which moved Pope Sixtus the fourth according to the doctrine of
the learned Jesuits to celebrate the Feast of the Blessed Virgins Conception,
for that he supposed her Conception to be pure, holy, and immaculate, which
reason, and ground, is nevertheless uncertain, although it was the foundation
of Pope Sixtus his Decree, which according to Suarez, was also confirmed in the
Council of Trent.

22 Whereby it appears also, says Mr. Fitzherbert, p. 202. nu. 8.
how absurdly Widdrington comprehends the doctrine of the Popes power to
depose Princes under the title of reasons, moving the Council of Lateran to
decree the deposition of them, seeing that the reasons of Decrees are so
extrinsecall thereto, that they may fail, and yet the Decree stand good, and
be of force, whereas the foresaid doctrine of the Popes power is so
intrinsecall, and as I may say, essential to the Decree of the Lateran
Council, that it is necessarily included, and supposed in it, in so much that
the said Decree cannot possibly stand, or be good if that doctrine be not
true, as I have signified before, nu. 6.
and therefore he argues as impertinently in this, as in the rest.

23 But first it is very untrue, that I comprehended the doctrine of the Popes
power to depose Princes under the title of reasons moving the Council of
Lateran to decree the deposition of them, as this man, not to use his own
absurd, and impertinent words, very shamefully affirms: Seeing that I never
granted, that either the Decree of the Lateran Council, or the reason thereof
does concern the deposition of Princes, but only of inferior Lords, and
Magistrates by the consent, and authority of Sovereign Princes, neither did I
in any of my three Instances, or in this Argument, whereof now we treat, make
any mention at all of the Lateran Council, although indeed I have now by the
way, and without any necessity urging me thereunto signified, as you have
seen above, that those words of the Lateran Council, vt extuncipse, etc. that
then the Pope may denounce his Vassalls absolved from their fealty, which my
Adversaries affirm to be the Decree of the Lateran Council ordaining the
practice of the Popes power to depose Princes, cannot, according to their own
grounds, be a true, proper, and formal Decree, containing any precept or
obligation, but rather the reason, cause, and end for which the former Decree
was made, as I have more amply declared before.

24 Secondly, neither are all the reasons of Decrees so extrinsecall thereto,
that they may fail, and yet the Decree stand good; for some are so
intrinsecall, and as I may say so essential to the Decree, that the Decree
cannot possibly stand good, if the doctrine be not true, or at leastwise
presumed to be true, as I showed before in the reason of the canonizing of
Saints, and of celebrating their Feast in honor of their Sanctity, and also
of celebrating the Feast of the B. Virgins Conception in honor of the
unspotted purity thereof: and of these and such like reasons I chiefly meant,
when in the aforesaid argument I demanded, whether the reasons that move Popes
and Counsels to define, or decree something, are not as it were certain
grounds and foundations of their definitions and decrees. So that I may truly
conclude with my Adversaries own words, that he argues as ignorantly,
impertinently, and absurdely in impugning this argument, as in the former, and
in the same manner also he still goes on.

25 But now will you hear, says he, p. 203. nu. 9.
how well Widdrington concludes this his last argument, and condemns
himself of error, or heresy? Thus then he says, Quapropter, etc. Wherefore
no man can doubt, but that great difference is to be made betwixt the voice,
Vbi supra nu. 63
doctrine, and consent of the Church firmly believing, or defining any thing
as a matter of faith, and the voice, doctrine and consent of the Church only
probably thinking. For no Catholic man does deny that he who contemns to
hear the voice of the Church firmly believing does fall into error, or
heresy, whereas Catholic Doctors (whose authority the learned of my
Adversaries will easily admit) do plainly affirm, that he who being moved
with sufficient reason does not embrace the doctrine of the Church only
probably thinking does not expose himself to the danger of heresy, error,
or temeritie. For Alphonsus Salmeron, and Francis Suarez, men truly very
learned, do bring the practice, and consent of the whole Church, to confirm
the immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin, and yet that the contrary opinion
may be defended without any danger of deadly sin they both plainly
acknowledge and cannot also deny without great offense, we, says Salmeron, do
oppose the consent of almost the universal Church, and the uniform doctrine
of all universities. Salmer. tom. 13. ad Romans 5. disp. 51.. deinde. Suarez tom.
2. disp. 3. sec. 2.
And the second ground, says Suarez, is to be taken from the authority of
the Church. And first the universal consent almost of the whole Church; and
especially for these two hundred years almost all Ecclesiastical writers,
Bishops, almost all Religions, and Universities have subscribed. Thus
Widdrington.

26 But first Mr. Fitzherbert is foully deceived in saying, or conceiving, that
this is a conclusion of this my last argument. For it is a conclusion, and as
it were a brief collection, and explication of all the answers I made in that
Apologeticall Preface to all the arguments, by which my Adversaries labored to
convince me, and my doctrine touching the Popes power to depose Princes of
temeritie, error, and heresy. For seeing that all the arguments which they
brought to prove my doctrine to be temerarious, erroneous, yea and
heretical, were grounded chiefly upon the general voice, doctrine, and
consent of the Church, as they pretend, I thought good for a conclusion of all
my answers to these their false imputations, to admonish the Reader of the
aforesaid difference betwixt the voice of the Church firmly believing, and
only probably thinking, whereby he might plainly perceive, that, considering
all my former discourse, and answers, I had clearly freed my self from all
just imputation of heresy, error, and temerity.

27 But secondly, let us now see what exception Mr. Fitzherbert takes against
this my so manifest, and certain conclusion. Wherein I wish, says he Page
203. number. 10.
, to be noted two things,the one, how confident Widdrington, is, that he has
proved by his three instances, or examples, and this his last argument, that
the Church ordaining, and decreeing in the Lateran Council, that Princes shall
in some cases be deposed by the Pope, did not firmly believe, but only
probably think, that the Pope has lawful power, and authority to do it,
whereas you have seen his instances and arguments to be so weak, frivolous,
and impertinent, that they have served to no other purpose, but to discover his
folly, and the weakness of his cause.

28 But truly I cannot but greatly pity this poor man's case, albeit, I am
much ashamed to see and discover his palpable fraud and ignorance. For neither
did I in those three instances, or examples, or in this last argument make any
mention at all of the decree of the Lateran Council; neither did I intend to
make any inference from them concerning that decree, neither did I ever grant
that the Church in the Council of Lateran did ordain, or decree, that Princes
might in some cases be deposed by the Pope, but I always affirmed, that the
aforesaid decree, or rather Act did only concern the deposition of inferior
Magistrates or Lords, by the consent and authority of absolute Princes, and
that therefore that Act, or decree, was not made by mere Ecclesiastical
authority, and consequently could not be a matter of faith, but of fact only,
as are all the decrees of temporal Princes concerning mere matters of fact.
For although it be a matter of faith, that temporal Princes have authority to
make temporal Laws, yet it is not a matter of faith, that in making such
laws they cannot err, and therefore their laws are not matters of faith, but
of fact only; but the Church in making laws to all the faithful concerning
such matters of fact, or manners, which are necessary to salvation cannot err
by commanding anything which is contrary to the Gospel, or the law of Nature,
and therefore such laws are not only matters of fact, but also of faith.

29. That wherein I was confident is this, that seeing my Adversaries have not
hitherto brought, nor will ever in my judgment be able to bring any one
sufficient argument to prove that the doctrine of the Popes power to depose
Princes, was ever firmly believed by the Church as an undoubted point of
faith, but at the most as a probable opinion, no Catholic man can be justly
impeached of heresy, error, or temeritie, as the aforesaid Conclusion of mine
does plainly convince, for maintaining the contrary doctrine. And whether the
instances, arguments, and answers, which I have brought, be weak, frivolous,
or impertinent, or Mr. Fitzh. replies altogether vain, and fraudulent, whereby
he clearly discovers both the weakness of his cause, and also his manifest
fraud and ignorance, I remit to the judgment of any indifferent Reader. And
thus much concerning his first observation.

30 The other thing which I wish, says Mr. Fitzherbert Page 204. nu. 11. 12.
, to be noted is, how Widdrington gives sentence against himself, as having
incurred the note of error, or heresy, in contemning to hear the voice of
the Church firmly believing; for if the Church had not firmly believed, that
the Pope has power to depose Princes, she neither would nor could have
decreed in the Lateran Council, that Princes should be deposed by the Pope;
for albeit she does, and may in particular cases practice some things upon a
probable opinion ( when there is no Definition, or Decree to the contrary) yet
it were most absurd, and temerarious, if not heretical, to say, that she ever
made a general Decree in a Council, touching either faith, or manners; but
upon a most certain, and assured ground: and the reason is, for that otherwise
the Decrees of general Counsels should sometimes be uncertain, as being
grounded only upon a probable opinion; yea all their Decrees might always
with some show of reason be impugned, and rejected by any contentious
heretic, who might and would call the Decree in question, and say, that the
same were only probable, as Widdrington does in this case.

31 Therefore seeing it is most certain, and uniformly believed by all
Catholic Doctors, See Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c. 2. 3. 4. Item Can. l. 5. de
locis c. 5. Bannes 2ae. 2ae. q. 1. ar. 10. dub. 6. concl. 2.
that no Decree of general Counsels made for the whole Church, touching
either faith, or manners, can be repugnant to the verity of the holy
Scriptures, or may be impugned, or called in question by any Christian man, it
follows evidently, that all such Decrees are founded upon assured grounds,
and none upon probable opinions; for if the grounds thereof were or might be
only probable, they might be repugnant to the Scriptures, and lawfully
impugned or denied by any man. Whereupon it follows, that seeing the Lateran
Council has for the special good of the Church decreed that Princes shall be
deposed by the Pope in some cases, the said Council, and consequently the
Church, does firmly, and assuredly believe (and not think only probably)
that the Pope has power to depose Princes; and therefore I conclude, that
Widdrington contemning and rejecting this belief of the Church, is by his own
confession fallen into error, Luc. 19.
or heresy; so as I may well say to him, with our Savior in the Gospel, Ex
ore tuo te iudicio serve nequam.

32 But this observation of Mr. Fitzherbert is so childish, not to say
ridiculous, that no Schoole-boy would argue in such a childish manner: For what
man that has his wits about him, would make this conclusion, that his
Adversary by his own sentence, grant, and confession, is fallen into error or
heresy, and to prove the same brings two propositions, whereof the one his
Adversary does indeed very willingly grant, but the other which is the maine
difficulty between them he utterly denies. By the same manner of arguing I
might also prove, that Mr. Fitzherbert is by his own sentence, grant, and
confession fallen into error, or heresy. For he grants that the Pope has
no other authority to depose Princes, then that which was granted to S. Peter,
and his Successors by those words, I will give thee the keys, etc.
Whatsoever thou shall lose, etc. Feed my sheep, or such like, and that
whosoever impugneth that which is decreed in the holy Scriptures is fallen into
error or heresy, but in those and such like words of the holy Scriptures, was
only granted to Saint Peter, and his Successors authority, to expel men from
the Church of Christ, not from temporal kingdoms, to bind and loose with
spiritual, not with temporal bindings or loosings, to absolve from the bond
of sins, not of debts, to inflict spiritual, not temporal punishments,
therefore Mr. Fitzherbert contemning and rejecting the holy Scriptures is, by
his own confession, fallen into error, or heresy; so as I may well say unto
him with our Savior in the Gospel, ex te ore tuo iudico serve nequam: Now if I
should have argued in this manner against him, he would quickly have answered,
that albeit he grant the Mayor proposition, yet he denies the Minor, and
therefore cannot be said to grant the conclusion, which must be inferred from
the granting of both the premises; and for my goodly argument he both would,
and might deservedly have given me his usual, absurd, impertinent, fond,
foolish, and ridiculous nicknames.

33. In this very like manner he argues against me, to prove that by my
own sentence, grant, and confession, I am fallen into error or heresy, for
contemning and rejecting the voice of the Church, in a general Council
firmly believing. For although I grant the Mayor proposition, to wit, that
whosoever contemns to hear the voice of the Church, or of a General Council
firmly believing, or decreeing any doctrine, as certain and of faith, is
fallen into error or heresy, yet I ever denied the other proposition, to wit,
that the Church, in the Council of Lateran did either Decree the deposition of
Princes, or firmly believe the doctrine thereof, as certain and of faith, and
therefore it cannot be rightly inferred, that I grant the conclusion, which
must be inferred from both the premises; for as the conclusion does follow
from both the premises, and not from one only, so he cannot be said to grant
the conclusion, who grants not both the premises or propositions, but one
only. And therefore those words of our Savior, Exore tuo te iudico serve
nequam, may fitly be applied to himself, who by his own arguing shows
himself to be a very ignorant, fraudulent, and slanderous man, in charging me
to be fallen into error or heresy, by my own grant and confession, which
every Schoole-boy sees to be most false.

34 And as concerning that general reason, which here he brings, why the
Council of Lateran must firmly, and assuredly believe as certain and of
faith, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, to wit, because it is most
certain, and uniformly believed and taught by all Catholic Doctors, that no
Decree of general Counsels made for the whole Church, touching either faith
or manners, can be repugnant to the verity of the holy Scriptures, or called in
question by any Christian man, and that therefore all such Decrees are founded
upon assured grounds, and none upon probable opinions, etc. Besides that, this
reason supposes, which I ever denied, that in the Lateran Council was decreed
the deposition of temporal Princes, which is the maine question betwixt us; it
needs also some further explication. For if Mr. Fitzherbert mean, that no
Decree of a general Council, made for the whole Church touching manners, or
things commanded, or forbidden to be done (whether it be made by mere
Ecclesiastical power, or by that temporal authority, which spiritual
Pastors have received from the express and formal grant and privileges, or
the vertuall and tacit consent, or conniuence of temporal Princes) may be
impugned, or called in question by any Christian man, without some note or
aspersion of temeritie, and impiety, of this I will not contend with him, for
this also may be said of mere temporal laws, which are made by the Princes,
Peers, and Commons of temporal kingdoms, for the temporal good thereof,
which cannot be impugned, or called in question by any private man, without
some note of temeritie, and impiety.

35 But if his meaning be, that all Catholic Doctors do uniformly believe,
and teach, that no Decree of a general Council made for the whole Church
touching manners, which are not otherwise necessary to salvation, may not be
impugned or called in question, without note of heresy, this is very untrue,
and therein he shows either to be little conversant in the reading of
Catholic Doctors, or not to have well observed what they teach. For as I
showed above, learned Canus dare not resolve whether it be heretical to
affirm, that some custom, or law of the Church is evil or unjust, and he
plainly affirms; that it is not heretical to hold that the Church may err
in the canonizing of Saints, and the grounds of such Decrees may be uncertain,
S. Tho. quod. 9. ar. vlt. S. Antonin 3. part tit. 12. c. 8. Caiet. tom. 1.
Opusc trac 15. de Indulg. c. 8.
and fallible. Whereupon Saint Thomas, Saint Antoninus, and Cardinal Caietane
do only say, that it is piously to be believed, that the Church cannot err
in the canonizing of them. And besides that Salmeron, Suarez, and Vasquez, as I
showed above, do constantly hold, that the ground, and foundation of Pope
Sixtus his Decree touching the celebration of the Feast of the B. Virgins
Conception, Chap. 15. nu. 8 9. and seq. Suarez. disp. 21 sec. 2.
was not certain, but only probable; Suarez also affirms, that it is not a
point of faith, that the B. Virgin is corporally assumpted into heaven,
although the Church does celebrate the Feast of her Assumption, and the reason
hereof he gives, for that it is not as yet defined by the Church, neither is
there any testimony of Scripture, or sufficient tradition which may make the
belief thereof infallible.

See. S. August. tom. 10. ser. 34. and 35. de Sa^ctis
36 Whereupon S. Augustine, in the book of the B. Virgins Assumption, and sermon.
35. de Sanctis, if he be the Author of them, does seem to leave it as
doubtful, although he does not deny, but that it may piously be believed:
Caiet. in opusc. de Concept to^. 2. opusc. trac. 1. c. 1 Sotus in 4. d. 43. q.
2. ar. 1. Abul. in c. 22. Matthew. q. 230.
And Cardinal Caietane, and Sotus say only, that it is a very pious opinion:
and Abulensis says, that it is only the more probable opinion. And as
concerning the Resurrection of the Virgin, says he, It is not necessary to
hold the same, because it is not among the articles of our faith, neither is
there any thing defined by the Church, that it ought to be held, therefore it
is lawful for every one to think as he will. And the reasons which are
brought to prove her Resurrection, are certain persuasions, and do not
convince, and yet because it is commonly held, that she is risen, it is more
reasonable to hold the same; but if any man do affirm the contrary, we do
not repugne. Thus Abulensis. And hereof I thought good to admonish the
judicious Reader, that hereby he may most clearly perceive both the
ignorance of Mr. Fitzherbert, who so boldly affirms, that all Ecclesiastical
Decrees which are made for the whole Church touching manners, are founded upon
assured grounds, and none upon probable opinions, and also that we ought not to
condemn so easily any doctrine of heresy or error, unless we see the
contrary, by some clear definition of the Church, or some evident, and
undoubted consequence deduced from thence, to be determined as a point of
faith; neither is it sufficient in this case to bring only probable arguments,
or which in our own judgment seem to demonstrate out of the holy Scriptures,
ancient Fathers, Decrees of Councels, or Theological reasons, which in the
opinion of other learned Catholics do not convince it to be a point of faith.

37 Now you shall see what Mr. Fitzherbert concludes, touching his Reply to
all the answers I gave, especially to the Decree of the Lateran Council. And
now having confuted, says he, Page 205. nu. 13. and seq.
all that which I find in the Preface of his Apologeticall answer, concerning
the Council of Lateran, I will return to examine the rest of his text in his
Admonition, from the which I have been a while diuerted, by his remission of
his Reader to the said Preface. Thus thou Widdrington concludes in his
Admonition concerning as well the Council of Lateran, as my whole Discourse.
Priusquam igitur aliquis clare demonstrauerit, etc. Therefore before some one
shall clearly demonstrate (I do not say, shall only show probably) that the
answers, which I have given to the Council of Lateran, are altogether
improbable, no effectual argument can be deduced from that Council, whereby
it may certainly, and evidently be proved, that it is so certain, that the
Pope has power to depose Princes, that the contrary may not be defended by
Catholics without the note of heresy, error, or temeritie. And this for the
present may suffice to confute this Authors more prolixe, then solid
discourse; for I will perhaps in another place more exactly examine, of what
small force or moment are every one of his arguments. Thus says Widdrington
for the vpshot of his answers to me, wherein we may observe these points
following.

38 First, whereas he exacteth, as you see, some clear demonstrations, that
his answers to the Council of Lateran are altogether improbable, I hope, he,
or at least the indifferent Reader may rest satisfied therein, seeing that I
have made it clear that his answers to the said Council, are not only
improbable, but also frivolous, and sometimes ridiculous, as being wholly
impertinent to the matter, or else prejudicial to himself. Secondly, whereas
he says, that no effectual argument can be deduced from that Council against
him, until it be demonstrated, that his answers thereto are improbable, I may
now conclude, that seeing I have performed as much as he requires in that
behalf (having evidently showed the impobability of his answers) he cannot
deny, but that our arguments deduced from that Council, are effectual to
prove our intent, and that to show that neither, he, nor any Catholic can
avoid the aspersion and note of heresy, if he perscuere obstinately to
impugn, or deny the Popes power to depose Princes, seeing that the practice of
that power is most clearly decreed, and the verity of the doctrine
necessarily included and supposed in the Decree.

39 Thirdly, whereas that which he has said to so little purpose, as you have
seen, seems to him sufficient to overthrow my whole discourse (which he
terms more prolixe then solid) I remit the solidity, as well of my Discourse,
as of his answers, to the judgment of the indifferent Reader, who may easily
judge of both by that which has been here debated b^twixt us, seeing that of
all his answers, arguments, and objections, no one has appeared to be of any
weight, worth, or probability. And truly I do not maruale, that my Discourse
seemed prolixe, yea very teadious to him, considering the little pleasure or
gift that he could take therein; for a short way seems long, to such as pass
it with difficulty, and disgust, finding where to stumble, or fall at every
step. Finally, whereas he promises (though with a perhaps) to examine
elsewhere every particular argument in my Supplement, he may do well for his
Reputation, first, to make good that which he has said already, least such as
shall have read this my Reply, and seen therein how he has trifled hitherto,
may care little to read what he shall write hereafter; but if he list to take
the pains to perform his promise, I hope he shall reap as little credit and
contentment thereby, as he is like to do by these his former labors; for how
weak soever and insufficient I may be to encounter such a Hercules, or Golias
( who dare alone oppose himself to the whole army of Israel) yet I doubt not,
but he shall find, that magna est veritas, and praeualet, and that the further
he wadeth in this matter, the more he shall ingulfe himself in a sea of
absurdities; In the mean time I hope thou have noted, good Reader, that he
has not been able to disp^ooue any one thing in these two Chapters of my
Supplement, which he impugneth, and that in examining his answers thereto, I
have sufficiently overthrown the grounds of his Doctrine, and showed his
vanity, and folly diverse ways. For first I have etc.

40 But to Mr. Fitzherberts three first observations, there needs no other
answer, then to deny them with the same facility, wherewith he affirms them:
for neither he, nor I must herein be each others Judge, but the indifferent
and judicious Reader, who having duly examined both our writings, may easily
discern, whether my answers be of no worth, weight, or probability, and his
arguments and Replies effectual, conuincing and demonstratiue or no: and to
whose arguments and answers, those foul aspersions of improbable, absurd,
malicious, fond, foolish, impertinent, and ridiculous, which are so frequent in
this man's mouth, do more properly agree. And for his fourth, and last
observation, he may see now that I have performed my promise, and that without
a perhaps, I have confuted every particular argument, which he has brought
against my doctrine, either in the two first Chapters of his Supplement, or in
this his Reply against the answer I made to his arguments in that brief
Admonition; so that he, or at least the Reader may plainly perceive, that the
reason, why I did not then answer every particular point of his Discourse, was
not for that I found therein any great difficulty, seeing that what there I
said it was more prolixe, then solid, I have now convinced to be true, but
because the brevity of that short Admonition or Preface, would not
conveniently permit me to answer more particularly so prolixe and verbal
Discourse.

41 Wherefore I shall now expect what a learned Reply this unlearned man will
make to save his credit, and to clear himself of those imputations of
palpable fraud and ignorance, wherewith in this Treatise I do often charge
him, and also of great want of charity, as in the next Chapter you shall more
clearly see. But perhaps the best course and less prejudicial to his
reputation that he can take will be, as D. Schulcknius, or rather Cardinal
Bellarmine has done before him, not to answer at all to the crimes whereof he
is accused, but to procure from the Cardinals of the Inquisition that my book
be forbidden without telling why or wherefore, for what cause or crime, or what
bad doctrine either against faith or manners is contained therein, and by this
means many men at least will be hindered from seeing his shameful fraud and
ignorance. Fo seeing that I have clearly showed, that all his vaunts and
bragges of having convinced my arguments, and answers to be improbable,
absurd, impertinent, fond, foolish and ridiculous etc. are very vain and idle,
notwithstanding that for the patching up of his Reply he has had the helps
of Cardinal Bellarmine, D. Schulckenius, Suarez, and Lessius, if now being
left to himself alone, and destitute of their helps, and of their arguments
and answers, which I have here confuted, he should wade any further in these
deep Theological questions, wherein he has already been so often over head,
and ears, it is evident that he will cast himself headlong into the deep
gulf of perpetual infamy. And therefore he may perchance think it his best
way to get my book forbidden, without declaring why, or wherefore, which
course although it may seem to him to be the wisest according to the wisdom
of the world, yet, (to omit what it is to his soul and conscience, and before
the sight of Almighty God) how prejudicial this course is both to his cause,
and credit, how scandalous it is to Protestants, and what little satisfaction
it gives to Catholics, who are desirous, and are also bound to search out the
truth in this dangerous and difficult point touching their obedience due to God
and Caesar, and by such exorbitant prohibitions are hindered from the fully
examining thereof, there is no indifferent man of any judgment but may most
clearly perceive.

52 All the rest which Mr. Fitzherbert adds in this Chapter, it being only a
Recapitulaton, of that he says he has proved against me in this his whole
Reply, needs no other answer, then to affirm the quite contrary, and for
confirmation thereof for avoiding of an over tedious repetition of what I have
proved against him in this whole Treatise, and how I have cleared my self and
my doctrine from all note of heresy, error, and temeritie, and proved it to
be truly probable, and himself to be a very ignorant, corrupt, and very
vainglorious and unconscionable man, to remit the Reader to all the places
which are here cited by him, and have been clearly confuted by me, and more
particularly to the Contents, Abridgement, or as it were Index of all the
things which are handled by me in this Treatise, which he may see partly in the
very beginning of the first part before the Preface to the Reader, and partly
of this third.

43 To conclude therefore this Chaper, seeing that I have made it manifest in
his Treatise, that no one effectual argument grounded either upon the holy
Scriptures, the law of Nature or Nations, the Canonical or Civil law, or any
other Theological reason has hitherto been brought by my Adversaries, which
is sufficient to persuade any judicious man, that the doctrine for the Popes
power to depose Princes, to dispose of temporalls or to inflict temporal
punishments, is certain, and of faith, and the contrary heretical, erroneous,
or improbable, it is evident, that the new Oath of Allegiance, which is chiefly
grounded upon the denying and impugning of this doctrine, and the practice
thereof, may with a safe, and probable conscience, and without any note of
dangerous temeritie, or mortal sin be taken by any Catholic man,
notwithstanding that the Pope by several Breues has judged, and commanded,
or supposed the contrary, for that there is no danger of temeritie, or
disobedience not to follow the judgment and opinion of the supreme Pastor,
when it is contrary to the doctrine of other learned Catholics, or not to obey
his declaratiue precept, when it is not grounded upon any certain, and
infallible doctrine, but either upon the false information, and understanding
of other learned men, or upon the private and probable opinion, at the most, of
his Holiness, as I have amply proved in my Theological Disputation, Disput.
Theol. cap. 10. s^c 2.
all which Mr. Fitzherbert in this Reply of his does fraudulently conceal, who
urges with might, and maine, to terrify thereby the consciences of unlearned
and scrupulous Catholics the Popes declaratiue commandment, who by his
Breues forbids the Oath to be taken, for that it contains in it many
things, which are clearly repugnant to the faith and salvation, and craftily
dissembleth the answers, which I have made thereunto and which are sufficient
to quiet the conscience of any judicious Catholic man, and to take away all
just fear and terror of conscience out of his mind.

44. And especially seeing that his Holiness, (which is very considerable, and
worthy to be observed) has been diverse times with great instance, and
importunity most humbly requested, and in some sort coniured by his Pastoral
office and duty, to make manifest to distressed English Catholics one only
thing among so many, which he says in his Breues are in the Oath manifestly
repugnant to faith and salvation, which his Holiness, without all doubt, in
regard of his fatherly care, and Pastoral office both would and ought to have
made manifest ere this, being urged thereto by so many and earnest
Supplications, if he had not clearly seen (when he had more diligently
examined the whole matter being so greatly urged, and importuned to name but
one only thing among so many, which he said were in the Oath plainly
repugnant to faith and salvation) both that his power to excommunicate, and to
inflict Censures was not denied in the Oath, as Cardinal Bellarmine, and other
Roman Divines by all probable conjectures, as you shall see in the next
Chapter, had informed him, and also that the doctrine for the Popes power to
depose Princes, which is expressly denied in the Oath, and whereon his
prohibition to take the Oath, according to the opinion of all my Adversaries,
was partly grounded, was not a point of faith but only a controversy among
learned Catholics, and as yet not decided by the Judge, and Trithemius in
^ronico. Monast. Hirsaugiensis ad annum 1106.
consequently that it might be denied, and impugned by any Catholic man
without any note of heresy, error, temeritie, or any other deadly sin, so
long as the question remains so undecided, and in controversy among learned
Catholics.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein M. Fitzherberts uncharitable Admonition to the Catholic Reader, that
Widdrington is no other then an heretic disguised and masked under the vizard
of a Catholic, and that his submission to the Catholic Roman Church
proceeds from no other ground, but from a deep dissimulation, or rather an
artificial and execrable hypocrisy to delude and deceive Catholics, is
clearly confuted, and proved to be void of charity, learning, and sincerity.
Also Widdringtons answer to the Popes Breues is confirmed, and he freed from
all disobedience for not admitting them; and lastly the Decree of the
Cardinals, forbidding Widdringtons books, and commanding him to purge
himself forthwith, is fully answered by his Purgation, and humble Supplication
which he made forthwith to his Holiness.

1 MY unlearned Adversary T.F. having not been able in the former Chapters,
as you have seen, to prove any one answer or position of mine to be
improbable or to deserve the least note of temeritie, although he often
vaunteth, that he has convinced, every one of them to be either fraudulent,
malicious, impertinent, absurd foolish, fond, ridiculous, erroneous, or
heretical, and then especially his custom is thus to brag, when he himself
most of all discovers his intolerable fraud, or palpable ignorance, now
this ignorant and uncharitable man does in this last Chapter turn the
sharpness of his pen also against my person, showing himself therein to
have as great want of charity, as of learning and sincerity, and labors to
persuade his Reader, that albeit I pretend to be a Roman Catholic, and do
submit my self, and all my writings to the Censure of the Catholic Roman
Church, yet it is evident, that this is only of purpose to deceive the Reader,
Sec nu. 1. and 19
and that no zealous Catholic can take me for any other then an heretic
disguised, and masked under the vizard of a Catholic. So abundant is forsooth
the charity and zeal of this Religious Father, that he fears not to
miscontrue most plain and manifest words, and deep and solemn Oaths and
protestations in the quite contrary sense, to the great discredit of his
neighbor, whereas by the rules of charity and justice he is commanded to
interpret even doubtful speeches in the better and more favorable sense. S.
Thomas secunda secunda q. 60. ar. 4.
But let us hear what he says.

2. Having now answered, says he, Page 211. number. 1.
my Adversary Widdrington, touching that which any way concerns me, either
in his Admonition before his Theological Disputation, or else in those other
works of his, whereto he remitteth his Readers for their further
satisfaction, I have tought it convenient (good Catholic Reader) to address
this last Chapter only to thee, to admonish thee to take heed that thou be not
seduced with his pretense to be a Catholic, or with the dedication of his
book to his Holiness, and his submission thereof to the judgment of the
Catholic Roman Church, whereby he professes, that if by ignorance he have
failed in any thing, which the Roman Church does not approve, he does also
reprove it, condemn it, and wishes it to be held as not written, let not
this I say seduce thee, or move thee to think that he teaches Catholic
doctrine concerning the matter now in question, seeing that it is evident, that
all this is but a false luster and gloss cast upon his counterfeite ware, of
purpose to deceive thee.

3 It is true all the books I have written hitherto, either in Latin, or
English I did submit to the Censure of the Catholic Roman Church, and in the
first book of all which I published in defense of the temporal right of
Princes against Card. Bellarmines reasons, (whereby he pretended to demonstrate
that it is not so much an opinion, as an heresy to hold, that the Pope has no
authority by the institution of Christ to depose temporal Princes, and to
dispose of temporals) besides the submission thereof, to the said Censure of
the Catholic Roman Church, I did also solemnly protest, and call God to
witness, that neither through the spirit of flattery, nor of contradiction,
but sincerely moved with a vehement desire to find out the truth in this
difficult controversy, which so nearly concerns our obedience due to God,
and Caesar, I did take upon me the writing of that Apology.

4 And my third book, which is the Disputation of the Oath, against which this
man so greatly inueigheth, I did not only submit to the Censure of the said
Catholic Roman Church, protesting also, that if either in that Disputation,
or elsewhere I had through ignorance written any thing which she did not
approve, I also did disprooue it, condemn it, and would have it for not
written, but also I did of set purpose dedicate it to his Holiness, most
humbly and earnestly requesting him, that considering we had diligently
examined all the parts and parcels of the oath, and yet could not find any one
thing among so many, contrary to faith or salvation, his Holiness would be
pleased in regard of his Fatherly care, and Pastoral office, after he had
duly considered all those objections, which we did propound unto him, for, and
against the Oath, to make known unto us his poor and afflicted Catholics,
one only thing among so many, which are so manifestly repugnant to faith and
salvation, as he had declared by his Breues, protesting, that if we could be
assured of one only thing contained in the Oath, which is any way repugnant to
faith, or salvation, we would forthwith obey his declaratiue commandment,
and would hazard our lives, and all our fortunes in defense of the undoubted
Catholic faith.

5 Now this uncharitable man, notwithstanding all these my protestations, and
submissions, will contrary to the commandment of Christ our Savior, and the
known rules of charity, and justice, judge and censure my inward thoughts,
which none but God, and my own conscience can know, and boldly affirms, that
it is evident, Nu. 1.
that all this is but a false luster, and gloss cast upon my counterfeit ware
of purpose to deceive the Reader, and that I am an heretic disguised, Nu. 19.
and masked under the vizard of a Catholic, and that all my pretenses to be a
Catholic, Nu. 26.
and my submission to the Catholic Roman Church, proceeds from no other
ground, but from a deep dissimulation, or rather an artificial, and execrable
hypocrisy to delude and deceive Catholics. But God knows how wrongfully he
belyeth me, to whose justice, for the infinite wrong he has done me, I do
appeal, and I make no doubt, but that he will find him a most just Judge, and
severe revenger either in this life, or in the next, or both, unless he
repent, and satisfy me in time, for the great wrong he has done me.

6 But let us hear the reasons which this unconscionable man brings to
color this rash judgment of his. For if Widdrington, says he Pa. 212. nu. 2
so much respect and reverence his Holiness, and the Roman Church, as he
pretends, how chances it, that utterly rejects three Apostolical Breues
of his Holiness, upon no better ground and reason, but because his Holiness
has been ill informed of the matter, and consequently deceived and absurd?

7 But albeit with all my heart and soul I do greatly respect, and reverence
the Popes Holiness, the Sea Apostolic, the Roman Church, and the Catholic
Roman Church, each of them in their due place and degree, but not all of them
with equal respect and reverence, for that no learned Catholic can deny, but
that betwixt all these a great difference is to be made, neither are the
errors, misdemeanors, or imperfections of Popes, who being men and subject to
humane infirmities as others are, to be attributed to the Sea Apostolic, or
to the Roman Church, although my ignorant Adversary seems not only to make no
distinction betwixt the Pope, and the Sea Apostolic (whereas if he will but
read S. Robert of Lincoln his life in Matthew Paris, he may see what
difference he makes betwixt Pope Innocent the fourth, whom he calls
Antichrist, Mat. Paris in Henrico 3o. page 843.
and whose Breues as containing in them something, which is hateful to Christ
our Savior, detestable, abominable, and very pernicious to mankind he
refused to obey, and betwixt the most holy Sea Apostolic, which he says can
command no such detestable thing) but also he would make his Reader believe,
that I take the Roman Church, and the Catholic Roman Church for all one,
whereas it is manifest, that there is betwixt them, almost as great difference,
as is betwixt the Kingdom of England, and the Christian world, or rather
betwixt Rome, and Christendom, and also very many virtuous and learned Roman
Catholics do not grant that infallible authority to the Popes Holiness, or
to the Roman Church, which they grant to the Catholic Roman Church, according
to that saying of S. Hierome, si autho^i^as quaeritur, Hier. epist. 85. ad
Euangrium.
orbis mayor est vrbe, if authority be demanded, or sought for the world is
greater then a City, which sentence the Gloss upon the Canon Legimus did.
93. citing and expounding says, Here is an argument, that the Decrees of a
Council do preiudicate, or go before the Popes Decree, if they contradict it.

8 Nevertheless I do also willingly acknowledge, that I do not so much
respect, and reverence his Holiness, as to believe that all the commandments
of Popes are just, and all their Breues and Decrees are grounded upon
infallible truth, or that any Catholic is bound to obey his Holiness
declaratiue commandment, when it is only grounded upon a probable opinion,
which no man is bound to follow, it being most evident, that where there is no
authority to command, it is no irreuerence or undutiful respect not to obey;
As likewise although all Subjects are bound to respect and reverence their
temporal Prince, and to obey him in temporalls, as with all my heart and soul
I do greatly respect and reverence my Sovereign Lord King JAMES acknowledging
him to be my only Sovereign Lord in temporalls, to whom I owe all temporal
allegiance, as I acknowledge his Holiness to be my supreme spiritual
Pastor, to whom I owe spiritual obedience, yet if the temporal Prince should
command any thing which to his Su^iects consciences is manifestly unjust, they
may without any irreuerence or undutiful respect to their Prince not obey that
unjust commandment, knowing in that case they are bound rather to obey God
then men, especially if they be ready to suffer without resistance the
penalty imposed by the law.

9. Secondly, that any Catholic might lawfully, and without any irreuerence or
undutiful respect to his Holiness not obey or admit his Breues forbidding
Catholics to take the Oath, for that it contains in it many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation, I yielded in my Theological Disputation, Cap.
10 sec. 2 nu. 50. and seq.
two sufficient reasons, whereof the first and principal Mr. Fitzherbert here
fraudulently concealeth, and both unlearnedly, and guilefully, as you shall
forthwith see, he cauelleth only against the second and less principal
reason. For I did not affirm, that no Catholic is bound to admit his
Holiness Breues only for that he was ill informed of the matter, and
consequently deceived and abused by Cardinal Bellarmine and his other Divines,
albeit this alone had been a very sufficient reason, but chiefly and
principally for that his Breues were grounded upon probable opinion at the
most, that the Pope by the institution of Christ has authority to dispose of
all temporalls, and to depose temporal Princes, which doctrine being not
certain, but in controversy among learned Catholics, and as yet not decided
by the Judge, no Catholic is bound to follow, and consequently, according to
the doctrine of Fa. Suarez, neither bound to obey his declaratiue commandment
which is grounded thereon; for that a declaratiue precept, as is this of his
Holiness forbidding Catholics to take the Oath has no greater force, then
the reason, whereon is grounded: but this first reason, which I brought for the
chief and principal, Mr. Fitzherbert cunnigly dissembleth.

10. For seeing that his Holiness did only in general word forbid English
Catholics to take the Oath for that therein are contained many things which
are manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation, without specifying in
particular any one of those many things, I by probable conjectures, or rather
by moral certainties, all circumstances considered, did gather, that his
Holiness by those many things manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation, did
either understand, as by all likelihood he did, his power to inflict Censures,
to excommunicate his Majesty, to bind and loose in general, etc. and
consequently his spiritual Supremacy, which he conceived were denied in the
Oath, for that Cardinal Bellarmine did publicly in his book against his
Majesty's Apology for the Oath of Allegiance also in this sense understand the
same, and then it is apparent, that his Holiness was misinformed of the
matter, and consequently deceived, and abused, for that it is too too manifest,
as his Majesty himself has against Cardinal Bellarmine convinced, that the
Popes power to inflict spiritual Censures, and to excommunicate his Majesty
was not treated of at all in the Oath, but purposely declined; and Mr.
Fitzherbert also seems covertly to confess as much, for that albeit in his
Supplement he affirmed, See a^oue chap. ^
that the Oath is unlawful for that therein is denied the Popes powers to
excommunicate, for which in my Admonition I taxed him of falsitie, yet now in
his Reply he altogether flies from that point, acknowledging in effect by his
silence, that he dare not now maintain his former assertion.

11 But because I could not certainly know and affirm, although it be very
probable, that his Holiness understood, those many things manifestly repugnant
to faith and salvation, of his power to excommunicate, and to inflict Censures,
etc. as Cardinal Bellarmine, Gretzer, Lessius, and Suarez, did understand
them, I added the second part of the disjunction, to wit, that his Holiness
understood those many things, etc. in the former sense, or else by those many
things manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation he understood his power to
depose Princes, to dispose of all temporalls, and to inflict temporal
punishments, for that his Holiness was of opinion, that the doctrine for his
power to depose Princes, etc. which is expressly denied in the Oath, is certain
and of faith; And if this be the meaning of his Holiness, then if he did
adhere to this opinion by his own reading, study, and learning (whereof I
have no certainty for that I know not whether his Holiness being accounted
only a Lawyer and not to make profession of Schoole-Diuinitie, had before the
publishing of his Breues exactly studied this question, and thoroughly examined
all that could be objected on either side) then, I say that his Holiness was
greatly mistaken, for that it is evident, that this doctrine for the Popes
power to depose Princes, etc. is not certain and of faith, but in controversy
among learned Catholics and as yet not decided by the Judge.

12 But if his Holiness did adhere to this opinion, and conceive that this
doctrine for his power to depose Princes is certain and of faith, as it is
very pobable he did, by the information of Cardinal Bellarmine, and other
Divines of Rome, who consulted of the Oath, as Fa. Parsons relates in his
letter, then I say, that his Holiness has also been ill informed of the
matter, and consequently deceived and abused by them, for that it is a
controversy among the Schoolmen, says Trithemius, Trithem. in Chron.
Monast. Hirsang. ad an. 1106. Almain. de dominat. civil. and Eccles conclus. 2.
in probat.
and as yet not decided by the Judge whether the Pope has power to depose the
Emperor or no: And Almaine a very famous Schoole-Diuine and Doctor of Sorbon,
with very many, or most Doctors, as he says, does resolutely affirm, that
the Ecclesiastical power by the institution of Christ does not extend to the
inflicting of temporal punishments, as death, exile, imprisonment, privation
of goods, much less of Kingdoms, but only of spiritual Censures, neither
was he ever taxed by any man of heresy, error, or temeritie for holding this
opinion.

13 These were the reasons, which I propounded to his Holiness, why English,
Catholics thought themselves not bound to obey his declaratiue precept
contained in his Breues. For these are my express words in my Epistle
Dedicatorie to his Holiness. Cap. 10. sec. 2 nu. 8. and seq.
And this is the reason (most holy Father) why very few Lay Catholics of any
name or worth with us do refuse to take the Oath being tendered them by the
Magistrate. For while they advisedly call to remembrance, that this Oath, before
it was by your Holiness declared to be manifestly repugnant to faith, and
salvation, might with a probable, and consequently with a safe conscience be
taken by any Catholic by reason of the authority of so many learned and
virtuous Priests; and withal they do now not only consider, that your
Holiness prohibition, being a mere declaratiue precept, can have no greater
force to bind, then the reason whereon it is grounded and wholly depends, as
beneath C. 10. sec. 41. and seq.
out of the doctrine of Fr. Suarez shall be made manifest, but also they are
probably persuaded, that your Holiness was by Cardinal Bellarmine, and Fa.
Parsons wrongfully informed of the reason, for which you forbade Catholics to
take the Oath, to wit, for that it contains many things which are plainly
repugnant to faith, and salvation; seeing that neither your authority to
chastise Princes, to excommunicate them, to inflict Censures, or any spiritual
authority, which is certainly known to be granted by Christ to Saint Peter
and his Successors is in this Oath denied as Cardinal Bellarmine, (whom Fa.
Parsons, and diverse other Divines of his Society do follow) by fallacious
inferences labors to deduce, they cannot as yet sufficiently perceive, by
what forcible argument they are bound with the perpetual temporal overthrow of
themselves, and their whole posterity to obey your Holiness declaratiue
commandment, which at the most is grounded upon a probable reason. Neither
do they conceive, that they ought therefore to be accounted rebellious to the
Sea Apostolic, for that they, reserving otherwise all dutiful reverence to
your Holiness, do not in a matter, which is so prejudicial unto them, obey
your Holiness Apostolical letters, which either are written upon false
information, or grounded only upon a probable opinion.

14 And in the tenth Chapter of my Theological Disputation, Sec. 2. nu. 50. 51.
I brought to the objection taken from his Holiness Breues two answers, which
are grounded upon these two reasons. To make therefore said I, now at the last
a compendious answer to all the three Breues, and so also to the whole
objection; To the first Breue, whereon the other two do depend, it is answered
first, that although his Holiness thinking, and in his opinion supposing the
Oath to be of it self unlawful, and to contain many things, which are
contrary to faith, and salvation, does therefore by his letters or Breues
forbid English Catholics to take it, yet seeing that this his prohibition is
only a declaratiue precept, and founded in the private judgment, and opinion
of his Holiness, as before Number. 44. and sequen.
we have showed, as we are not bound to follow the Popes opinion against the
probable opinion of other Catholic Divines, (then especially when by following
it, very great prejudice is like to come to our selves, and many others; and
when the reasons and grounds for his opinion, are for the most part by all men
accounted to be very unsound, as are almost all those arguments, which our
learned Adversaries have objected against the oath) so also we are not bound to
obey the Popes declaratiue precept, which is founded in his opinion, and in the
reason which he alleges, which precept, according to the aforesaid doctrine
of Franciscus Suarez, has no greater force to bind, then has his reason and
opinion, whereon his declaratiue precept does wholly depend.

15 Secondly, it is answered, that there is no English Catholic, who if he be
well instructed, will take the Oath, or approve it to be lawful in that sense,
wherein his Holiness by all probable conjectures has condemned it. For it is
probable, and in my judgment morally certain; that his Holiness did
understand the words of the Oath in that sense, wherein the Divines of Rome did
conceive them, and especially Cardinal Bellarmine, whose advise and opinion in
this so weighty a Theological controversy, which must needs bring great good
or harm to this kingdom, his Holiness, as it is very probable, both
demanded, and followed, who therefore according to his Holiness mind, and by
his permission wrote in defense of his Breues against his Majesty's Apology
for the oath. But Cardinal Bellarmine understood the Oath in this sense, as
though it denied the Popes Primacie in spirituals, his power to excommunicate,
to bind and loose, and also to dispense in Oaths in which sense doubtless it
cannot be denied, but that it contains many things, which are flat contrary to
faith and salvation, but no Catholic does in this sense either take the Oath,
or defend it to be lawful. Neither are the arguments which Cardinal
Bellarmine has brought to prove the same, any way sound and sufficient, but
very fallacious, as I have showed at large in the said Disputation.

16 All this which is only a part of the answer I brought from the objection
taken from his Holiness Breues, I thought fit to repeat here again only for
satisfaction of some scrupulous Catholics, who perchance fearing now to read
my Disputation, it being forbidden by the Cardinals of the Inquisition, without
declaring any cause either in particular, or in general, why it it is
forbidden, of wnich their prohibition I will say more beneath, may here most
clearley see, how soundly, and without any irreuerence, or undutiful respect
to his Holiness, I propound to him the reasons for which English Catholics
thought themselves not bound to obey his declaratiue precept contained in his
Breues, humbly requesting him, that in regard of his Fatherly care, and
Pastoral duty he would vouchsafe to instruct us in the Catholic faith, and to
make known unto us but one of those many things, which he says are in the
Oath so manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation.

17 Whereby the Reader may easily perceive the egregious fraud of this my
unlearned Adversary, in urging so vehemently to my disgrace, the objection
drawn from the authority of his Holiness Breues, and concealing the principal
answer, which I brought thereunto, and whereby I cleared my self from all just
imputation of irreuerence, or undutiful respect to his Holiness. For what
irreuerence or undutiful respect to his Holiness can be justly imagined in
propounding to him, being the supreme Pastor of our souls, with all reverent
and respective words, the reasons which do move us to think that he has
been misinformed of the true sense of the Oath, and the difficulties which do
perplexe our consciences concerning his Breues, and humbly requesting him in
regard of his Fatherly love, and Pastoral office that he would vouchsafe to
teach us, and instruct us in the Catholic faith, and in those things, which he
says are in the oath contrary to faith and salvation? No Catholic subject is
bound so to respect and reverence his superior, albeit he be the Pope, as to
obey his commandments, with blind obedience, when his conscience does dictate
unto him, that they are unjust, but he may with all dutiful respect propound
to his Superior, although he be the Pope, the doubts and difficulties which
his commandment has brought to his perplexed conscience, and desire him, yea,
and charge him, in regard of his Fatherly care, and Pastoral office, that he
will vouchsafe to teach him, and instruct him, in what manner he may quiet his
mind, and take away those difficulties which his commandment has brought to
his troubled conscience.

18 Whereupon it is a common doctrine among Divines, that when a Superior or
Prelate commands any thing, whereof the subject has a probable doubt,
whether it be lawful or no, he is not bound forthwith to obey: And this is
also conform to the rule and instruction, which Pope Alexander the third
gives to the Archbishop of Rauenna, and it is recorded in the Canon law, among
the Popes Decretals, Si quando aliqua tuae fraternitati, etc. If at any time,
Cap. si quando, de Rescriptis.
says the Pope, we direct any thing to thy brotherhoode, which does seem to
exasperate thy mind, thou ought not to be troubled, etc Considering
d^ligently the quality of the matter, for which we write unto thee, either
reverently fulfill our commandment, or by thy letters show a reasonable cause
wherefore thou may not fulfill it; for we will suffer patiently, if thou
do not that which was suggested unto us by bad insinuation, or information.
And among others Dominicus Sotus writes thus, Sot. de detegen. secret. memb.
3. q. 2. in Resp. ad primum.
Prelates and Judges are not in possession in respect of their subjects,
unless for as much as they command lawful things, and therefore when it is
doubtfully, whether they command a lawful thing, then if it be in prejudice
of a third person, because that third person is also in possession of his fame
and goods, the subject must incline to that part where there is the less
danger. Neither are Prelates, who command nothing, whereby is feared any
danger, to Religion, or the Commonwealth, or to a third person bound to render
a reason; but simply they must be obeyed also in doubts, as it has been said
before, because then there is no danger, if it be presumed that the Judge
commands justly: But when such a danger to Relegion, or to the Commonwealth,
or to a third person, is at hand, then if the Subject doubt, he does not
against obedience, if he require of his Prelate a reason of his commandment,
propounding humbly the reason of his doubt.

19 And that this is our very case in refusing to obey his Holiness Breues,
forbidding Catholics to take the new Oath of allegiance, by which prohibition
such great prejudice to Religion, to the Commonwealth, to his Majesty, and to
all his Catholic Subjects, is like to arise, and in humbly propounding to his
Holiness the reasons of our doubts, any man of judgment may plainly
perceive. And if his Holiness having taken upon him the charge and office of
the Supreme spiritual Pastor, and thereby is bound by the express
commandment of Christ, to feed without exception all the sheep of Christ
his flock, that is, not only to punish, correct, and threaten them, but also
to teach, and instruct them in the Catholic faith, and in all things necessary
to salvation, especially when upon urgent cause they require it at his hands,
if he will not vouchsafe to instruct the souls of us poor English Catholics,
who by his Breues have been so greatly troubled and perplexed, and declare
unto us some one of those many things, which he says are in the Oath
manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation, we having by private and public
letters and petitions so often, so instantly, and so reverently demanded it at
his hands, but instead of instruction to send threatenings, Censures, and
prohibitions of our humble Supplications to be instructed by him, whereby our
credit and good name is taken away by the uncharitable courses of some violent
men, what great an account both his Holiness and his Counselors herein have
to render at the day of judgment, to Christ our Savior the supreme Pastor,
and Judge of all, I tremble to consider, and I pray Almighty God with all my
heart, that both his Holiness, and they of his Counsel; may more duly
consider thereof, before it be to late.

20 Thus thou have seen the two reasons and answers, which I brought why any
Catholic man may lawfully, and without any irreuerence, or undutiful respect
to his Holiness, not obey his declaratiue precept contained in his Breues, now
you shall see with what fraud, and ignorance my unlearned Adversary, having
fraudulently concealed the first reason and answer, whereon I did chiefly
rely, cauilleth against the second and less principal reason or answer, and
taxes me of irreuerence, and want of respect to his Holiness, for saying,
that his Holiness was by all likelihood misinformed of the true sense of the
Oath, by Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Divines of Rome, and consequently
deceived, and abused by them.

21 For can any man, says M. Fitzherbert, Pa. 212. nu. 2.
with reason persuade himself, that in such an important matter, as is this of
the Oath, so famous (or rather to say truly, so infamous) throughout
Christendom, so prejudicial to the Roman Sea, so dangerous and burdensome to
the consciences of English Catholics, and so pernicious to their temporal
states (as the world knows it to be) can any man, I say, with reason imagine,
that his Holiness did not at the very first, (before he published his first
Breue) see the Oath it self, maturely weigh and ponder it, yea and
sufficiently inform himself, of all circumstances necessary to the
publication of his Apostolical and judicial sentence? this truly cannot be
imagined of his Holiness, by any charitable Catholic.

22 But first to retort this frivolous argument of my unlearned Adversary upon
Cardinal Bellarmine, and his book published against the Oath, can any man with
reason persuade himself, that in such an important matter, as is this of the
Oath, so famous throughout Christendom, and which so much concernech the
Roman Sea, the Sovereignty of temporal Princes, the consciences and
temporal states of English Catholics, and their obedience due to God and
Caesar (as the world knows that it does) can any man, I say, with reason
imagine, that Cardinal Bellarmine, so learned, worthy, and reverent a man,
did not at the very first (before he published his book against his Majesty's
Apology for the Oath) see the Oath it self, maturely weigh and ponder it, yea
and sufficiently inform himself of all circumstances necessary to the
publication of his book? and yet it is evident, as his Majesty also has
convinced, that Cardinal Bellarmine did not rightly inform himself of the
whole matter, and of the true sense of some clauses of the Oath, and was
deceived, and abused English Catholics in affirming so boldly, that the Popes
power to inflict Censures, and to excommunicate his Majesty, is denied by
those words of the Oath, notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication, etc.
which any Catholic may, without any breach of charity, or undutiful respect
not only imagine, but plainly see, and say to be evidently untrue, and my
Adversary himself, as I signified before, Nu. 10.
by his silence in this point, does in effect acknowledge as much.

23 Besides, can any man with reason persuade himself, or imagine, but that in
such an important matter, as is this of the Oath, so famous throughout
Christendom, etc. his Holiness did at the very first, (before he published
his first Breue) not only see the Oath it self, maturely weigh, and ponder
it, yea and sufficiently inform himself of all circumstances necessary to the
publication of his Apostolical and judicial sentence, but also that he
demanded, yea and followed the advice and judgment of his learned Counsel
(especially of Cardinal Bellarmine, whose opinion in Theological matters, is
accounted at Rome, as it were an Oracle) concerning the true sense and meaning
of the Oath, and of all the parts, and parcels thereof? this truly cannot be
imagined of his Holiness, by any charitable Catholic. Which being so, as any
charitable Catholic may not only imagine, but also evidently see, that
Cardinal Bellarmine affirming so resolutely, that the Popes power to
excommunicate, to bind and loose in general, to absolve from Oaths in
general, and consequently the Popes Primacy in spiritualls, is manifestly
denied in the Oath, did misinforme himself of the true sense and meaning of
the Oath, and was deceived, so likewise any charitable Catholic may not only
imagine, but also with moral certainty persuade himself (all circumstances
considered) that his Holiness also was ill informed, and consequently deceived
and abused by Cardinal Bellarmine of the true sense and meaning of the Oath.

24 Wherefore I never imagined, or conceived, as this man seems to impose
upon me, and therefore charge me with irreuerence, undutiful respect, and
temerity, that his Holiness did not, before he published his first Breue, see
the Oath it self, maturely weigh, and ponder it, and sufficiently, as he
thought, inform himself, both by his own knowledge and learning, and also by
the advice of his learned Divines, and especially of Cardinal Bellarmine, of
the true sense and meaning of the Oath, and of all parts and parcells thereof;
As likewise I never imagined, or conceived that Cardinal Bellarmine did not,
before he published his first book against the Oath, see the Oath it self,
maturely weigh, and ponder it, and sufficiently, as he thought inform
himself, both by his own learning, and by the advice also of other Divines of
Rome, of the true sense and meaning of the Oath, and of all the parts, and
parcells thereof: yet as it is evident, that Cardinal Bellarmine,
notwithstanding all his seeing, weighing, pondering, and informing himself of
the true sense, and meaning of the Oath, was fowly mistaken, deceived, and
misinformed of the true sense, and meaning of those words, [notwithstanding any
sententence of Excommunication, etc.] and some other clauses of the Oath, so
also it is probable, that his Holiness was in the like manner mistaken and
deceived, by the evil information of Cardinal Bellarmine, of the true sense
and meaning of the aforesaid clauses.

25 And by this that also, which Mr. Fitzherbert immediately adds, to tax me
of temerity and malice, and of accusing his Holiness of lack of wisdom, of
impiety, and manifest lying, is both answered, and his fraud and falsehood
plainly discovered. And howsoever, says he, Pa. 212. n. 3
my Adversary Widdrington, or any other, might be so temerarious, to have that
conceit at the first, yet he could not without great malice persist in that
opinion, after the publication of the second Breue, wherein his Holiness
acknowledges, and auoweth, that the former was not false, or surreptitious,
but written upon his own certain knowledge, motion, and will, and after long
and grave deliberation had, concerning all things contained therein, and that
therefore the Catholics were bound to observe it wholly, rejecting all
interpretations to the contrary. This being so, (according to my Adversaries
own relation) it is most evident, that his Holiness had taken sufficient
information of the whole matter, Disp. Theol. c. 10. sec. 2. nu. 59
and all the circumstances thereof, even before he published his first Breue,
and therefore Widdrington affirming the contrary cannot have that opinion,
which a charitable and pious Catholic ought to have, either of the wisdom,
and piety of his Supreme Pastor, or of the authority and verity of his
Apostolical Breues, and Decrees; but does in effect charge him to have lied
manifestly in his second Breue, when he testified that he made the first,
with such mature deliberation, and certain knowledge, as you have heard.

26 To this second Breue, which his Holiness purposely sent hither, as he
himself in the beginning thereof affirms, for that it was reported unto him
that some here did say, that his letters or Breue dated the 22. of October
1606. concerning the forbidding of the Oath were not written according to his
own mind, and his own proper will, but rather for the respect, and at the
instigation of others, for which cause they went about to persuade others, that
his commandments in the said letters were not to be regarded, I gave this
answer, Dis. Theol. c. 10 sec. 2. nu. 59.
which my fraudulent Adversary altogether concealeth. In the second Breue which
was dated the first of September 1607. it is only declared, that the former
letters of his Holiness, (wherein he strictly commanded English Catholics
that they should in no wise take the said Oath) were not false and
surreptitious, but written, not only upon his certain knowledge, and by his
own proper motion and will (by which words nevertheless he does not intend to
deny that he in writing them, used the advice, and opinion of others) but also
after long and grave deliberation had concerning all the things which are
contained in them, and that therefore they were bound to observe them exactly,
setting aside all interpretation, which may persuade to the contrary. Which
last words are so to be understood, that there must be made no frivolous
interpretation of those letters, or no such interpretation, which should make
any man to think, or make any doubt, that they were not written with his
Holiness knowledge and priuity, and by his own proper will. Salas disp. 21.
de Leg. sec. 2. Sa in Aphoris. verbo Interpretatio nu. 5.
For as Ioannes Salas, and Emanuell Sa, both of them Divines of the Society of
Jesus, do well observe, It is lawful for Doctors to interpret all laws,
not indeed by a necessary public, or iuridical, but a private and not binding
interpretation, although the Prince should say, that it should be lawful for
no man to interpret otherwise this our writing, for then he only forbids
frivolous interpretations, and which are expressly contrary to his mind. Which
their doctrine is with far greater reason to be understood of the Popes
declaratiue precept, which is only grounded upon presumption, and upon his own
opinion, and private judgment, whereby he persuades himself, that the thing
which he forbids is otherwise unlawful, as being forbidden by some former
law, whose opinion and also declaratiue commandment grounded only upon his
opinion, when it is against the probable doctrine of other Catholic Divines,
may not only be interpreted, but also contradicted, as I showed before out of
the doctrine of Suarez. Seeing therefore that this second Breue is only an
approouing and confirming of the former, it can have no more force to bind then
the former has, for confirming whereof it was written by his Holiness.

27 By this you may see, that I did not say, as Mr. Fitzherbert untruly
affirms me to say, that his Holiness before he published his first Breue did
not see, maturely weigh and ponder the Oath, and sufficiently as he thought
inform himself of all the clauses contained therein; or that his first Breue
was false or surreptitious, and not written upon his own certain knowledge,
motion and will, and after long and grave deliberation concerning all things
contained therein: But that which I said is, that notwithstanding all his long
and grave deliberation, first either his first Breue was grounded not upon any
certain doctrine and of faith, but only upon his own opinion and of the rest
of his Divines, that the doctrine for his power to depose Princes is certain
and of faith, which, for that the contrary is truly probable, and has ever
been maintained by learned Catholics, no Catholic is bound to follow, and
consequently neither to obey his declaratiue precept, which was grounded
thereon, as from the doctrine of Fa. Suarez I clearly deduced, and this was my
first and principal answer to the first Breue, whereon the two other Breues
did wholly depend: or else secondly that if his Holiness was persuaded by the
information of Cardinal Bellarmine, and his other Divines, as by all
likelihood he was, that in the Oath were contained many things flat contrary to
faith and salvation, for that he thought his power to inflict Censures, to
excommunicate, to bind and loose in general, and consequently his spiritual
Supremacy, were denied in the Oath, that then he was ill informed, deceived,
and abused by the advice of Cardinal Bellarmine, and of his other Divines, for
that it is evident, as I convinced in my Theological Disputation, that no such
thing is denied in the Oath, and this was my second, and less principal
answer.

28 Besides that, Mr. Fitzherbert may in those last words of his, to wit, [
that the Pope testified that he made the first Breue with mature deliberation
and certain knowledge] use some cunning fraud: For his meaning may be, that
his Holiness testified, that he made the first Breue not only with mature
deliberation had concerning all things contained therein, but also with
certain knowledge of the truth and verity of all that he affirmed therein,
as though his Holiness should have said, that he knew certainly, that many
things were contained in the Oath flat contrary to faith and salvation, as he
affirmed in his first Breue, whereas it is evident that his Holiness said no
such thing, but those words [certaine knowledge] which in his second Breue were
placed before, and not after those words [long and grave deliberation etc.] as
this fraudulent man places them, (as though his certain knowledge did
proceed from his long and grave deliberation) do only signify, that his
Breue was not surreptitious, false, feigned, forged, or written without his
priuitie and knowledge, but that it was his true, and undoubted letter or
Breue, and that he certainly knew, that all therein contained was written by
his own power will and motion, which I never denied, or meant to call in
question.

29 And therefore very falsely and dishonestly does Mr. Fitzherbert say, that I
in effect charge his Holiness to have lied manifestly in his second Breue,
when he testified that he made the first with such mature deliberation and
certain knowledge, as you have heard. For I ever acknowledged, as his
Holiness in his second Breue does testify, that his former Breue was not
false or surreptitious, but written as you have heard, upon his certain
knowledge, motion, and will, and after long and grave deliberation had,
concerning all things contained therein: yet from this long and grave
deliberation it does not follow, that therefore his Holiness, and his Divines
found out the truth in all points, and were not in very deed mistaken, and
deceived in the true understanding of some clauses of the Oath, and that they
certainly knew, that the Popes power to depose Princes, which is denied in the
Oath, is a point of faith, or that his power to excommunicate, to bind and
loose etc. which is a point of faith, is denied in the Oath. As also I do
willingly grant, that Cardinal Bellarmines book against his Majesty's
Apology was his own true book, although masked under his Chaplains name,
and not false or surreptitious, but written upon his certain knowledge,
motion, and will, and after long and grave deliberation had concerning all
things contained therein, and notwithstanding all this I dare boldly affirm,
that he knew not certainly, that all the things which he said therein were
true, and that in many things concerning the Oath, whereof some I have named
before, he was fowly mistaken, and deceived, as I have convinced in my
Theological Disputation.

30 Now with the like fraud and falsitie does Mr. Fitzherbert run from the
second Breue to the third, as he did before from the first to the second. And
if the second Breue, says he, Page 213. nu. 4.
did not suffice to clear his Holiness of this imputation, yet his third
Breue must be abundantly sufficient to do it in the opinion of any reasonable
man, seeing that he confirmed thereby his former judgment, giving express
order, and faculty to Master George Birket, the late Archpriest ( as
Widdrington himself also signifies) Ibid. nu. 60.
to punish by the deprivation of faculties all such English Priests of the
Seminaries, as being subject to his jurisdiction had already taken the Oath, or
had taught, or did still teach it to be lawful, and not abstain from the
same, and resorme their error upon due admonition given them, and within a
certain time to be prescribed unto them; whereby, I say any reasonable man
must needs be induced to think, that his Holiness neither was nor could be
all this time (which was more then two years) ignorant of the true nature, and
quality of the Oath, and of the state of the question betwixt the Catholics
and their Adversaries, especially seeing that now he began to draw his
Apostolical sword, proceeding to the punishment of such as did take, or defend
the Oath, which he could not lawfully do without due consideration, and
diligent discussion of the whole controversy, and sufficient information of
all the circumstances thereof,

31 Thus you see how Mr. Fitzherbert turns, and windeth in such a running and
fraudulent manner, that his Reader cannot well perceive of what imputation he
means, when he says, that if the second Breue be not sufficient to clear his
Holiness of this imputation, yet his third Breue must needs be abundantly
sufficient to do it. For that which I said only is, that his Holiness by all
likelihoode was not truly informed by Cardinal Bellarmine and his other
Divines of the true sense, and meaning of some clauses of the Oath, against
which you have seen with what fraud and falsitie my ignorant Adversary has
wrangled and iangled, as though I had taxed his Holiness for publishing his
first Breue, before he had seen, or maturely weighed and pondered the Oath it
self, and all the clauses thereof, and without grave and long deliberation had
concerning all things contained in his Breue, which how untrue this imputation
is wherewith he charge me, I have already showed. Now this silly man
labors to prove, as also he insinuated before, that because his Holiness
did maturely weigh and ponder the Oath and every clause thereof before he sent
hither his first Breue, and did sufficiently inform himself of all
circumstances necessary to the publication of his Apostolical and judicial
sentence, as well concerning the forbidding of the Oath by his first Breue, as
also concerning the punishing of such Priests that should take, or defend the
Oath to be lawful, by his third Breue, sent hither two years after, which he
could not, says my Adversary, lawfully do without due consideration, and
diligent discussion of the whole controversy, and sufficient information of
all the circumstances thereof, therefore his Holiness neither was, nor could
all this time (which was more then two years) be ignorant of the nature and
quality of the Oath, and that therefore he could not be ignorant, but
certainly knew, that there are many things in the Oath flat contrary to faith,
and salvation, as he had declared by his first Breue.

32 But to omit now those words [ sufficient information etc. and that his
Holiness did sufficiently inform himself etc.] which my Adversary here
diverse times repeateth, which because they are equivocal, and may have a
double sense I will declare beneath, it is very untrue, and contrary to the
doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, and of all other learned Divines to say, that
certain and infallible knowledge of truth is in the Pope necessarily annexed
to his long, grave, mature, and diligent consideration and discussion of any
doctrine or matter, unless the doctrine and matter be of such a nature, and
the discussion thereof be done with such circumstances, and in such a manner,
as Christ has promised him his infallible assistance, which even according to
the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, and Canus, Christ has not promised him
in such decrees or definitions, which are not directed, and do not appertain
to the whole Church, as are these his Breues forbidding the Oath, whereof the
two first are only directed to English Catholics, and the third only to Mr.
Birket, then Archpriest. For in customs, laws, or decrees, which are not
common to the whole Church, but are referred to private persons, or Churches
not only the Pope, but also the Church may err and be deceived through
ignorance; I say, says Canus, not only in her judgment of facts, Canus lib.
5. q. 5. conel. 3.
or things done (as whether such a one committed such a sin, has lost his
faculties, ought to be censured, and such like) but also in her private
precepts and laws themselves: and the true and proper reason hereof he
brings from the authority of Pope Innocent the third, which I related also
above, Chap. 13. nu. 11.
for that albeit the judgment of God is always grounded upon truth, which
neither deceives, nor is deceived, yet the judgment of the Church is now and
then led by opinion, which oftentimes does deceive, and is deceived, etc.

33 Whereupon the Reader may most clearly perceive, how unlearnedly my
ignorant Adversary does infer, that because his Holiness had a long, grave,
and mature deliberation, and consultation, concerning the true sense of the
Oath, and of every clause thereof, and did send hither his third Breue for
punishing those Priests that should take or defend the same, therefore he could
not be ignorant of the true sense of every clause thereof, but must certainly
and infallibly know, that many things are therein contained flat contrary to
faith and salvation, as he by his first Breue had declared; as though his
sentence and judgment in Decrees, which are directed only to private persons
or Churches, should be always grounded upon truth, which neither can deceive
nor be deceived, and that he cannot err through ignorance, or be led by
opinion, which oftentimes does deceive, and is deceived in his private laws
and decrees, which are not common to the whole Church, but do belong to
private men, Bishops, or Churches; and that therefore those Priests whom he
binds or punishes by his Censure and sentence, may not be free before God,
and those other Priests whom he does not Censure, may not deserve punishment in
the sight of God, according to that which Pope Innocent in the end of his
aforesaid reason did affirm.

34 But those words which Mr. Fitzherbert often repeateth, that his Holiness
after so long and grave deliberation had concerning all things contained in his
first Breue, (among which the principal was that many things are contained in
the Oath, which are manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation) was
sufficiently informed of the whole matter, are very equivocal, and may have a
double sense. For first these words may signify, that his Holiness after so
long and grave deliberation was sufficiently informed to excuse him from sin
for doing what he did, and for sending hither his Breues to forbid the Oath,
and to punish those Priests that should take the Oath, or teach it to be
lawful, and with this point (for that it little imports our present
question, whether the Oath not only in the Popes opinion and conscience, but
also really, truly, and certainly contains in it many things flat contrary
to faith and salvation, or no, and for that it is a thing secret and unknown
to me) I will not inter meddle, but leave it to the conscience of his
Holiness, and to the judgment of God, who searches the hearts and reins of
men. Yet this I dare boldly say, that in my judgment his Holiness might have
been more sufficiently informed of the whole matter, if he had consulted this
question concerning the certainty of his authority to depose Princes, and
whether his spiritual Supremacy, or any other doctrine of faith or manners
necessary to salvation, is denied in the Oath, not only with his own
Divines, who are known to maintain with such violence both his authority in
temporals over temporal Princes, which is the principal mark at which the
Oath does aim, and his spiritual authority over the whole Church, or a
General Council, but also with the Divines of France, who are not so
vehement for either of them, and with the learned Priests and Catholics of
England, whom it did most concern, and I am fully persuaded, or rather morally
certain, that both the Cardinal Peron, and many other learned Catholics both
of France and England, would at that time plainly have told his Holiness, and
given him sufficient reasons for their saying, that neither the doctrine for
his power to depose Princes, which is expressly denied in the oath, is
certain, and of faith, or the contrary improbable, nor that his power to
excommunicate, or any other spiritual authority of his, which is certain, and
of faith, is denied in the oath.

35 And this also of my own knowledge is very true, as I have signified
heretofore In the Epistle dedicatory nu. 6.
to his Holiness, that a certain Priest, not of meaner sort, did presently
upon the resolution of Mr. Blackewell, then Archpriest, and of diverse other
learned Priests and Catholics, that the Oath might lawfully be taken, with all
the speed he might write to Mr. Nicolas Fitzherbert, being then at Rome, and
sincerely related unto him, how all things here had past concerning the
conference and resolution, of learned Priests end Catholics about the Oath,
earnestly requesting him, that either by himself, or by means of a certain
Cardinal, whom he named to him, he would deal effectually with his Holiness,
not to be persuaded to send hither any Breue against the taking of the Oath,
things standing as they did, for that otherwise his authority, as well
temporal to depose Princes, as spiritual to define without a general
Council, would be more strongly called in question by English Catholics, then
it has been in former times. Now if his Holiness had deferred for a time the
sending hither of his first Breue, and in the mean space had demanded the
opinion of English Catholics, whom most of all it concerned, in this difficult
controversy about the lawfulness of the Oath, he might doubtless have been
more sufficiently informed of the whole matter, then he was, or could be
informed by his own Divines of Rome, whom (besides that they had not taken
such pains in canuassing this question, touching the certainty of the Popes
authority to depose Princes, as many of our English Catholics had) he might
have some cause to suspect, that they would speak partially in favor of his
authority, either for hope of promotion, as being men fervent to advance all
his pretended authority, or for fear of incurring his displeasure, and to be
accounted Adversaries to the Sea Apostolical as the event alas has proved to
be over true.

37 Or secondly the sense and meaning of those words may be, that his
Holiness by that long, grave, and mature deliberation and consultation was
sufficiently, that is, truly and certainly informed of the whole matter, and
of the true sense and meaning of all the clauses of the Oath, and this I say is
very untrue, as likewise it is very untrue, that Cardinal Bellarmine,
notwithstanding all his grave, mature, and long deliberation and consultation
had concerning this controversy (for betwixt this consultation of his
Holiness at which Cardinal Bellarmine was one of the chiefest, and the
publishing of his second book against his Majesty there passed almost four
whole years, and the consultation of his Holiness could continue but few
months, seeing that the Oath was published here about June, and his Holiness
first Breue was dated the first of October next following) he was greatly
mistaken, and deceived both in the understanding of those words of the Oath
[notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication, etc.] and of diverse other
clauses thereof, as I have sufficiently convinced in my Theological
Disputation, and Mr. Fitzherbert by his silence, and not replying to this point
being urged by me thereunto does in effect acknowledge as much: and also in
his opinion touching the certainty and infallibility of the doctrine for the
Popes power to depose temporal Princes, which without any sufficient ground,
(even according to his own principles,) he will needs have to be a point of
faith.

38 And hereby you may see how falsely and slanderously, and with small
respect to his Holiness, whom Mr. Fitzherbert would seem so much to reverence
he concludes in these words: P. 214. nu. 5. Disp. Theol. c. 10. s. 2. nu. 46.
Therefore he that thinks otherwise of his Holiness ( as Widdrington does
affirming that his Breues were grounded upon light foundations, and false
informations) must needs hold him to be the most careless and negligent
Pastor that ever governed the Church of God: whereby any man may judge what
account Widdrington makes of his Holiness, and his authority notwithstanding
his submission of his writings to the Catholic Roman Church.

39 But first it is very untrue, that from my words any such inference can be
gathered, as Mr. Fitzherbert here makes. I gave indeed, as you have seen,
two answers to his Holiness Breues which are briefly comprised in those few
words [light foundations, and false informations.] My first and principal
answer, which this fraudulent man altogeth concealeth, was this; that if his
Holiness Breue forbidding Catholics to take the Oath, for that it contains
many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, was grounded upon the Popes
power to depose Princes, to dispose of temporalls, to inflict temporal
punishments, and to absolve subjects from their temporal allegiance, as all my
Adversaries grant it was chiefly grounded thereon, then I say it was not
grounded upon any certain doctrine, infallible, and of faith, but upon
uncertain and fallible grounds, and which were always impugned by learned
Catholics, which uncertain and fallible grounds I called light, for that they
are not sufficient and weighty enough, let them be never so probable, to build
thereon any certain and infallible doctrine of faith, and which every
Catholic, unless he will deny his faith, is bound to follow. My second
answer, (which this man does also in great part conceal, for that I did
particularly set down wherein his Holiness was misinformed which he wholly
dissembleth) was, that if his Holiness Breue was grounded, as by all
likelihood it was, upon this foundation, that his power to excommunicate, his
power to bind and loose in general, and consequently his spiritual
Supremacy, which according to the common doctrine of Catholics is indeed
clearly repugnant to faith, is denied and impugned in the Oath, then I say,
that his Breues were grounded upon false informations, for that there is no
such thing denied in the Oath, as I have evidently convinced, howsoever
Cardinal Bellarmine has labored to prove the contrary. And neither of
these answers can be sufficiently confuted by any of my Adversaries, neither
are they repugnant to the submission of my writings to the Catholic Roman
Church.

40 So as you see that I made not that irreuerent inference, which Mr.
Fitzherbert here concludes. I affirmed only the Minor proposition, to wit,
that his Holiness Breues condemning the Oath, for that it contains many
things flat contrary to faith, and salvation, were grounded upon an uncertain
and fallible foundation or doctrine, and light, that is, not weighty enough to
make a matter of faith, to wit, that it is against faith to say, that the Pope
has not power to depose Princes, etc. and upon false informations, to wit,
that his power to excommunicate, to bind and loose in general, and
consequently his spiritual Supremacy is denied in the Oath; and both these my
assertions I have sufficiently convinced to be true. But this silly man
thinking thereby to lay a foul aspersion upon me of irreuerence, and small
respect to his Holiness, does himself add the Mayor proposition not affirmed
by me, and therein he plainly shows his own irreuerence, and small respect
to his Holiness, and to many other Popes, accusing him and them by this Mayor
proposition, which he adds, to be the most careless and negligent
Pastors, that ever governed the Church of God. For this is his Mayor
proposition, whosoever affirms, that his Holiness Breues were grounded upon
light, or uncertain foundations, and false informations, must needs hold him
to be the most careless and negligent Pastor that ever governed the Church
of God; by which his assertion he plainly shows what little respect and
reverence he bears to his Holiness and sundry other Popes, who oftentimes,
as I showed before out of Pope Innocent the third, In the Canon, Anobis 2. de
sent. Eucom.
are oftentimes lead in their judgments and Apostolical sentences by
uncertain opinions, which both deceive and are deceived, and not always by
true informations, for which cause, says Pope Innocent, it happens
sometimes, that he who is bound before God is not bound before the Church, and
he that is free before God is bound by a Censure of the Church. So that you see
what account Mr. Fitzherbert, to use his own words, makes of these Popes,
holding them, according to this his assertion, to be the most careless and
negligent Pastors that ever governed the Church of God.

41 For my own part I neither made that irreuerent inference, which Mr.
Fitzherbert here collected, but he himself out of his want of learning and
judgment broached and invented that irreuerent Mayor proposition, from whence,
if it were generally true, that inference may indeed be gathered as well
concerning his Holiness Breues, as also the Decrees and judicial sentences of
other Popes, wherein as Pope Innocentius himself acknowledged they are
sometimes lead, not by truth, but by opinion, and information, which
oftentimes is false, and both deceives, and is deceived: neither did I deny,
that his Holiness before he published his Breues, used grave, long, and
mature deliberation concerning all things contained therein; albeit I must
needs confess, that he might have used a more grave, long, and mature
deliberation, if he would have consulted the matter not only with his own
Divines of Rome, but also with those of France, and these of England whom most
of all it concerned: and doubtless he might by them have had a more
sufficient information of the whole matter and controversy, then he had by
his own Divines alone, as the event shows to be very true. But whether this
his grave, mature, and long deliberation, and consultation with his Divines
only of Rome, was sufficient to excuse him from all carelessness, and
negligence before the sight and judgment of God, I will not, as I said before,
it being a thing not known to me, meddle therewith: neither will I accuse, or
excuse his Holiness from sin for sending hither his Breues so prejudicial
to the Kings Majesty, and to all his Catholic subjects, without making a more
grave, long, and mature deliberation and discussion, but I leave it to the
judgment of almighty God, who only knows the secrets of all men's hearts,
when through ignorance or negligence they commit any offense. And thus you have
seen, that fraud has beguiled it self, and how in that snare, which Mr.
Fitzherbert to tax me of irreuerence and small respect to his Holiness has
said for me, is wily beguily caught himself. Now you shall see with what
fraud and falsitie this silly, ignorant, and deceitful man does still go on.

42 And whereas Widdrington signifies, says he, P. 214. nu. 6.
that his Holiness was deceived by Cardinal Bellarmine, Ibid. nu. 51. and 52.
Item. epi. Dedic. nu. 8.
and Fa. Parsons, he shows himself very vain and absurd in this
conjecture. For how can any man persuade himself with reason, that his
Holiness, meaning to give his Apostolical sentence in a matter of so great
importance, as was this of the Oath ( which sentence he was well assured
should be skanned and censured to the uttermost by all the Heretics and
Politikes of Christendom) would suffer himself to be led or guided by any
two, three, or few persons, were they never so learned, or well steemed of him?
Besides that, it is evident to all those that know how that matter passed, that
it was long debated in certain Congregations of Cardinals, and other great
Divines, wherein Cardinal Bellarmine had only but one voice, as other
Cardinals had, and Fa. Parsons none at all, for that he did not enter therein.

43 But observe, good Reader, the egregious fraud and falsitie of this man,
who would make thee believe, that I did say, that his Holiness was deceived
and misinformed of the true sense and meaning of certain clauses of the Oath,
only by Cardinal Bellarmine and Fa Parsons, and not also by the other Divines
of Rome, who consulted of this matter; for which cause he omitted to set down
entirely my second answer to his Holiness Breues, and also the particular
points, wherein I said his Holiness was misinformed by them, least that his
manifest fraud and falsitie should presently have been discovered. For albeit
in my Epistle Dedicatorie to his Holiness, I named only Card. Bellarmine, and
Fa. Parsons, for that they were the two chief and principal men that first
stirred in this Controversy by public writings, the one of the Italian, and
the other of our English Nation, yet I did not there affirm, that his
Holiness was misinformed, deceived, led, or guided only by Cardinal
Bellarmine, and Fa. Parsons; and in my second answer, whereto also Mr.
Fitzherbert in the margent remitteth his Reader, I expressly signified the flat
contrary, and with Card. Bellarmine, (for Fa. Parsons there I named not) I
also joined the other Divines of Rome. It is probable, said I, Disp. Theo. c.
10. s. 2. nu. 51.
and in my judgment morally certain, that his Holiness did understand the
words of the Oath in that sense, wherein the Divines of Rome did conceive them,
and especially Card. Bellar. etc. See the rest above, nu. 15.
And a little after I set down a copy of Fa. Parsons letter, wherein at the
very beginning thereof, which words Mr. Fitzherbert fraudulently concealeth, he
said, that about some four or five months ago it was consulted (at Rome) by
seven or eight of the learned Divines that could be chosen, who gave their
judgment of it. There reasons ar many, but all deduced to this, that the Popes
authority in chastising Princes upon a just cause is de fide, and consequently
cannot be denied, when it is called into controversy, without denying of our
faith, nor that the Pope or any other authority can dispense in this.

44 Now what a false and fraudulent man is this to make his Reader believe that
I should say that his Holiness was deceived only by Cardinal Bellarmine, and
Fa. Parsons, and in a matter of so great importance as was this of the Oath,
etc. would suffer himself to be led or guided any two, or three, or a few
persons, etc. for which cause he concealed my words, which did expressly
signify the flat contrary, thinking belike, that my Disputation of the Oath,
being forbidden by the Cardinals of the Inquisition, no man would adventure to
skan the matter, and examine whether he had dealt sincerely, or no, but must
believe all to be true that he said, and so all his forgeries should go for
current ware. But truly such corrupt dealings is shameful in a Heathen
writer, or any other moral honest man, much more in Mr. T-F. then Priest
Esquire, and now an eminent man of the Society of Jesus. But now Mr. T. F.
labors much to free, not Cardinal Bellarmine, but his old friend Fa.
Parsons from this Calumny, as he terms it, and to show, that his Holiness,
was not misinformed by Fa. Parsons, and induced by him to send hither his
Breues, to forbid Catholics to take the Oath.

45 Whereto I also add, says he Page 215. number. 7. 8. 9. Disp. Theol. ca. 10.
sec. 2. number. 52. 53. and seq.
, that Widdrington contradicts, and ouerthroweeh his own calumny, touching
Fa. Parsons, with a relation which he makes to justify it, in his
Theological disputation, wherein he lays down the contents of a letter
written by Fa. Parsons, to a friend of his in England, signifying that a
consultation had been made by seven or eight of the best Divines in Rome
about the Oath, and that he himself had conferred twice with his Holiness
touching the same, and that in the first conference he and Thomas Fitzherbert
propounded to his Holiness a certain mean of mitigation, or moderation,
suggested by friends, to the which his Holiness answered, that his meaning was
not to proceed to Censures against his Majesty, but rather to use all gentle
and mild proceeding with him; but as for the authority of the Sea Apostolic,
in such affairs, he was fully resolved rather to suffer death, then to yield
one jot therein. And in the other conference, his Holiness being advertised
that certain Priests did incline to the taking of the Oath, answered, that he
could not take such for Catholics.

46 Thus does Widdrington related Fa. Parsons letters touching his conference
with his Holiness, before the first Breue was sent into England; whereby it is
manifest that Fa. Parsons was so far from persuading or drawing his Holiness
to the resolution which he took concerning the publication of his Breue, that
he sought to induce him to some other course, propounding means of
mitigation, which indeed I can testify to be true upon my own knowledge, as
it may appear by my subscription to that letter of Fa. Parsons, which
Widdrington mentions, if the original be yet extant.

47 And therefore to the end that thou may, good Reader, know somewhat more
of this matter, and upon what occasion his Holiness spoke of Censures against
his Majesty, thou shall understand, that among other things tending to the
mitigation which Fa. Parsons propounded, one was, that it might please his
Holiness to offer to his Majesty, that if his Majesty would use at least
some conniuencie, and moderation toward the poor afflicted Catholics his
subjects, his Holiness would give sufficient assurance by means of Catholic
Princes, that he would never proceed with Censures against him, but bind his
said subjects under the pain of grievous Censure to yield unto his Majesty
all temporal and civil obedience, for the security of his state and person;
which motion his Holiness seemed not to mislike, and therefore signified, that
the same was conform to his intention, which was not to proceed to the rigor
of Censures against his Majesty, but to use all indulgent and courteous
dealing toward him, albeit he was resolved rather to lose his head, then to
yield any jot of his authority in such affairs.

48 But whether his Holiness misunderstood some clauses of the Oath, and was
induced to forbid the said Oath, as containing in it many things flat contrary
to faith, and salvation, only by the information, and instigation of Cardinal
Bellarmine, and of other Divines of Rome, or also by the solicitation of Fa.
Parsons, it is not much material to the substance of my second answer, which
was, as you have seen, that it is probable, and in my judgment morally
certain, that his Holiness understood the words of the Oath, in that sense
wherein the Divines of Rome, and especially Cardinal Bellarmine, (for the
reason I there alleged) did conceive them. But Cardinal Bellarmine
understood the Oath in that sense, as though it denied the Popes primacie in
spiritualls, his power to excommunicate, to bind and lose, and to dispense in
oaths: wherein he was fowly mistaken, as I convinced in the said Disputation.
And doubtless both Fa. Parsons, and the Divines of Rome did agree with
Cardinal Bellarmine in the understanding of the aforesaid clauses of the Oath;
as also Mr. Fitzherbert himself did in his Supplement, as I showed before
Chap. 1.
, follow their opinion, and conceive, that the Popes power to excommunicate is
denied in the Oath, although now by his silence, and not answering to that
point, which I urged against him, it seems that he sees himself to be
deceived therein. Neither can there be made any doubt in the judgment of any
prudent man, that if the Divines of Rome had dissented from Cardinal
Bellarmines opinion in that point, he durst never have adventured to affirm
so confidently in his first book against his Majesty's Apology for the oath,
that the Popes power to excommunicate heretical Kings is plainly denied in
the Oath, and especially after his Majesty had clearly convinced him of
falsity in this point, again in his second book against his Majesty so
boldly to confirm the same.

49 Moreover, that his Holiness was misinformed by Cardinal Bellarmine, with
whom the other Divines of Rome did herein agree, I brought an another
sufficient reason, taken from the first part of Fa. Parsons letter, which Mr.
Fitzherbert does fraudulently conceal, and relates only the last part
thereof, whereon I did not so much rely as upon the former, to prove that his
Holiness was misinformed by Cardinal Bellarmine, and the other Divines of
Rome, for of Fa. Parsons misinforming his Holiness I made no mention at all in
that answer, but only of his urging his Holiness to send hither his Breues
against the oath. My words were these Number. 52.
. Moreover, that his Holiness was persuaded, that in this oath is denied his
spiritual authority to inflict Censures, is plainly gathered by a letter of
Fa. Parsons, who did greatly urge and solicit his Holiness to send hither
his Breues, as both some Jesuits here with us do freely confess, and also no
man who knows how our English affairs were carried at Rome in his days, can
make any doubt thereof. This therefore is the true copy of that letter, etc.
About some four o five months ago, it was consulted by seven or eight of
the learned Divines, that could be chosen, who gave their judgment of it.
Their reasons are many, but all reduced to this, that the Popes authority in
chastising Princes upon a just cause is de fide, and consequently cannot be
denied when it is called into controversy without denying of our faith, nor
that the Pope, or any other authority can dispense in this, etc.

50 Now Mr. Fitzherbert, does fraudulently conceal this part of the letter,
whereby it is manifest, that the Divines of Rome did suppose, that the Popes
authority to punish Princes, and consequently to excommunicate and to inflict
spiritual Censures is denied in the oath; for otherwise, as I showed in that
place, Number. 57.
they had argued very vitiously against the known rules of Logic, from a
particular, to infer an universal, as thus; The Pope cannot chastise Princes
by taking away their lives, or dominions, therefore the Pope cannot chastise
Princes; as though the inflicting of spiritual Censures, and the denouncing of
anathema, Aug. lib. 1. contra aduers. leg. and prophet. cap. 7.
which according to Saint Augustine, is more horrible then any corporal death,
were not to be accounted a chasticing of Princes. We grant therefore, that the
Pope may chastise Princes, by using Ecclesiastical Censures, which is not
denied in the oath, but we utterly deny, that to deprive Princes of their
dominions, or lives are to be ranked among spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
Censures. Thus I argued in that place from the first part of Fa. Parsons
letter, all which my fraudulent Adversary thought best for his purpose to
conceal, and to skip over to the other: part of the letter, thinking from
thence to take some colorable argument to prove, both that Fa. Parsons did
not persuade and draw his Holiness to the publication of his Breue, and also
that the inference I made from thence, to wit, that his Holiness was
persuaded, that his authority to inflict Censures is denied in the oath, is,
sorsooth, improbable and impertinent, wherein, as you shall see, he continues
still his ancient fraud, and falsitie.

51 For first I did not intend to prove by Fa. Parsons letter, or by his
conference with his Holiness, that he urged and persuaded his Holiness to
forbid the taking of the oath; two other reasons I brought here to confirm the
same, which Mr. Fitzherbert after his usual manner concealeth: the one, that
some Jesuits here in England did freely confess the same; the other, that no
man who konweth, how our English affairs were carried at Rome in Fa. Parsons
time can make any doubt thereof: To which may be added two other; the first,
that Mr. Nicholas Fitzherbert, whose letter is yet to be seen. did send word
to a friend of his, that Fa. Parsons labored much to have the oath forbidden:
the second, that the Provincial of the Jesuits at that time, who is yet
living, did boast to diverse persons, that he would cause to be reuersed what
Mr. Blackewell, then Archpriest had concluded concerning the lawfulness of
the oath, and would procure a Breue from his Holiness, to forbid all
Catholics to take the oath, and which with very great expedition, as I
signified in my Epistle Dedicatory to his Holiness, was accordingly performed,
all which are to any man of judgment very probable conjectures, if not moral
certainties, that Fa. Parsons, did urge and solicit his Holiness to send
hither his Breues against the taking of the oath. But howsoever it be, it is
not much material to my second answer or reason, which is, that his Holiness
was misinformed by Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Divines of Rome, that his
power to excommunicate and to inflict Censures, and consequently his spiritual
supremacy is plainly denied in the oath, whether Fa. Parsons did urge and
incite his Holiness to forbid the oath, or no.

52 Besides, for the confirmation of my second answer, those words of the
Breue, for that it contains many things, which are manifestly repugnant to
faith and salvation, and also his Holiness answer to Fa. Parsons, that he
could not hold them for Catholics, who seemed to incline to the taking of the
oath, are very considerable, for that before these our miserable times, wherein
so many new fangled Doctors are ready to coin new articles of faith, and to
tax with such facility, their Catholic brethren of error and heresy, that
will not forth with approve their novelties, it was never in the Church of
God accounted an heresy, to deny the Popes authoirty to depose Princes, or to
inflict temporal punishments, neither has any Catholic Author, who writes
of heresies, or Cardinal Bellarmine himself relating the errors of Marsilius
of Padua, ranked him among heretics, for denying the Popes power to depose
Princes: And very many Catholic Doctors, with Iacobus Almaine, who have not
therefore been branded by any man with any note of heresy or error, do
resolutely affirm, that the authority of the Church does not extend, by the
institution of Christ, to the inflicting of temporal punishments, as death,
exile, imprisonment, privation of goods, much less of kingdoms, but only of
spiritual Censures. And Fa. Suarez himself dare not avouch, Suarez l. 6. c. 1.
that the Popes spiritual authority is plainly, and manifestly, but only
covertly denied in the oath: and this also he gathers from many far fetched
consequences, all which I have clearly answered in my Appendix against him:
And therefore, from the aforesaid words of his Holiness, that he could not
take those Priests for Catholics, that inclined to the taking of the oath, it
may very probably be included, that he was fully persuaded, that not only his
authority to depose Princes, but also his power to excommmicate, and to bind
and loose in general, as Cardinal Bellarmine, and the other Divines of Rome
then conceived, is plainly denied in the Oath.

53 Secondly, whereas Mr. Fitzherbert affirms, that he can testify upon his
own knowledge, that Fa. Parsons was so far from persuading, or drawing his
Holiness to the resolution, which he took concerning the publication of his
Breue, that he sought to induce him to some other course, propounding means of
mitigation, etc. I will not now contend about the thing it self, which he
testifies; for that this may very well be true, that Fa. Parsons did seek to
persuade and induce his Holiness to that course of mitigation, which M.
Fitzherbert mentions, to wit, not to proceed with Censures against his
Majesty (to which course Fa. Parsons might imagine his Holiness to have at
that time some inclination, in regard both of the new oath, then established by
his Majesty, and the Parliament, which does so much derogate from the
pretended authority, which the Bishops of Rome, since the time of Pope Gregory
the seventh, do challenge over temporal Princes, to deprive them of their
Princely authority, and to absolve their subjects from their temporal
allegiance, and also of the severe laws which were then newly enacted against
Catholics, upon occasion of that horrible Gunpowder conspiracy plotted only
by Catholics) and yet withal it may also be true (as only by the way I did
affirm, and by many probable conjectures sufficiently confirm) that Fa.
Parsons did also induce and move his Holiness to the publication of his Breue
against the taking of the oath, for that betwixt these two, there is no
repugnance at all: and whether he did or no, it is not much material to my
second answer or reason, which M. Fitzherbert took upon him to impugn.

54 Nevertheless concerning Mr. Fitzher. testification upon his own knowledge, I
must tell him in plain words, that I can give no credit to his testimony,
albeit he should confirm it by solemn Oath, unless I could be morally
certain, that he uses herein no equivocation, or mental reservation,
whereof I can hardly be assured, considering especially his own particular
practice of equivocation or mental reservation in the time of Pope Clement the
eight in slandering, and traducing so falsely and shamefully those four
Reverend Appellant Priests, for Schismatikes, Spies, Rebels and disobedient
persons to the Sea Apostolic etc. notwithstanding they being present them at
Rome to crave justice, and to make manifest their oppression and innocence,
and also in giving testimony to his Holiness upon his Oath, that those
English books, which Fa. Parsons had delivered to the Inquisition with diverse
propositions therein contained, showing them to be heretical, erroneous etc.
were truly translated, wherein how fowly he, and Fa. Parsons with diverse other
their adherents did equivocate to defend Fa. Parsons credit, not only his own
conscience, but diverse other persons yet living can be a sufficient witness:
and considering also the common doctrine and practice of many of his Society,
not only touching equivocation, but also mental reservation, which in very
deed is flat lying, grounded upon that Chimericall, and not intelligible
union, mixtion, and composition, or rather mere fiction of thoughts and words
in one true mixed, and compound or rather feigned proposition: This I say being
considered (to omit now diverse other scandalous, and pernicious positions and
practices to this purpose, which some of them especially of our English Nation
do maintain, and whereof I will hereafter if they urge me thereunto more
particularly treat) I can give no credit to any thing that Mr. Fitzherbert
shall testify upon his own knowledge, unless by some other means I shall
find it to be true.

55 Now you shall see, what Mr. Fitzherbert observes out of his own
testimony concerning Fa. Parsons conference with his Holiness to tax me of
improbabilitie and impertinencie. This being so, says he, Page 217.
I cannot omit upon this occasion to desire thee, good Reader, to note the
improbable and impertinent inference, which Widdrington makes upon this
answer of his Holiness: Dispu Theol. cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 57.
for he infers thereupon that his Holiness did condemn the Oath by his
Breues, and held them for no Catholics who inclined to take it, because he was
persuaded that his authority to proceed with Censures against the King, and
consequently his spiritual authority was denied thereby; and then he
concludes, Ibid. nu. 58.
that if his Holiness was moved to condemn it for that cause by the
instigation of Cardinal Bellarmine, Fa. Parsons, and those seven or eight
Divines (mentioned in the letter above said) Nimis proh dolor, says he,
manifestum est etc. it is alas too manifest, that his Holiness was deluded, to
the great ignominy of the Sea Apostolic, the grievous scandal of
Protestants, and the utter temporal ruin of very many Catholics. So
Widdrington.

But I also must desire the Reader to note the egregios fraud, and falsehood of
this man. For I did not there infer from the answer of his Holiness, as Mr.
Fitzherbert untruly affirms, that his Holiness did condemn the Oath by his
Breues, and held them for no Catholics who inclined to take the Oath, because
he was persuaded, that his authority to proceed with Censures against the
King, and consequently his spiritual authority was denied thereby: but I made
this inference first from the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, for that he was
of opinion, from which Divines of Rome, and consequently neither his Holiness
did dissent, that the Popes power to excommunicate, and inflict Censures, his
power to bind and loose in general, and consequently his spiritual
Supremacy is plainly denied in the Oath: and secondly, from the first part of
Fa. Parsons letter concerning the consultation of the Divines of Rome had
touching the Oath; for that the Divines of Rome did also suppose, as I proved
in that place, that the Popes power to chastise in general, and consequently
his power to chastise by spiritual Censures is denied in the Oath: So that I
made there no inference from his Holiness answer to Fa. Parsons, but I only
made an explication of the said answer, from the aforesaid inferences, showing
from them the cause and reason, why his Holiness thought them to be no
Catholics who inclined to take the Oath, for that he was persuaded by the advice of Cardinal Bellarmine and the other Divines of Rome, that his power to
excommuniate and to chastise Princes by Ecclesiastical Censures is plainly
denied in the Oath. And therefore Mr. Fitzherbert to conceal his fraud,
omitteth to set down my express words, and the first part of Fa. Parsons
letter, and what I inferred from thence.

57 Wherefore from the discourse, which there I made, and which Mr. Fitzherbert
does fraudulently conceal, I concluded, that Cardinal Bellarmine, Fa. Parsons,
and the other Divines of Rome using such sophistical inferences (to wit, that
because we must swear, that notwithstanding any sentence of Excommunication
made or to be made against his Majesty, we will bear faith and true
allegiance to his Majesty etc. therefore the Popes power to Excommunicate
Kings is denied in the Oath; and because the Popes power to punish Kings by
deposing them, and by absoluing their subjects from their allegiance, is denied
in the Oath, therefore the Popes power to punish Kings in general, and to
bind and loose in general is denied in the Oath) using I say such
sophistical inferences to prove, that in the Oath are contained many things
flat contrary to faith and salvation, were very grossly mistaken. And if his
Holiness trusting to the learning and honesty of these men was moved to
condemn the Oath for that cause by the instigation of them (as by all probable
conjectures or rather by moral certainties he was, as I convinced before) it
is, alas, too too manifest, that he was deluded to the great ignominy of the
Sea Apostolic, the grievous scandal of Protestants, and to the utter
temporal ruin of very many Catholics.

58 Now you shall see how childishly Mr. Fitzherbert cauilleth at that word
[if] as though now at last I made a doubt, and durst not absolutely auerre,
that his Holiness was moved by the instigation of Cardinal Bellarmine, and
the other Divines of Rome to condemn the Oath for the aforesaid causes.
Wherein I wish to be noted, says he, Page 217. nu. 11.
first upon what a weak ground Widdrington rejects the Popes Breues, seeing
that he relyeth only upon his bare opinion, that the Pope was ill informed and
deluded by others, which he labors seriously Ibid. nu. 51. 52. and 57.
to peswade his Reader to be very probable, although it is so coniecturall,
and uncertain, that he is feign to conclude, all as you heard Nu. 58.
with an if, or a peradventure: so as if the Pope was not moved unto it by the
instigation of those whom he names, he concludes, or proves nothing but his
own impudency and temeritie in opposing his idle conceit and fantasy
against the Popes serious and solemn testimony, protesting in his second Breue
(as you have heard) that he forbadde the Oath upon his own certain knowledge,
motion, and will after long and grave deliberation; and therefore I remit to
the prudence, and good conscience of any sincere Catholic, whether he will
believe in this case this man's vain conjecture, or the solemn protestation of
his Holiness.

59 But in very deed I am ashamed that Mr. Fitzherbert should still so
shamefully be wray his egregious fraud and ignorance. For it is evident that I
made no doubt, but expressly, and without a peradventure affirmed, that it is
very probable, yea and morally certain in my judgment, that his Holiness
understood the words of the Oath in that sense, wherein the Divines of Rome, and
especially Cardinal Bellarmine etc. did conceive them; and that Cardinal
Bellarmine who wrote in defense of his Breues, did conceive them in this sense,
that the Popes Primacie in spiritualls, his power to excommunicate, to bind
and loose, and to dispense in Oaths, are denied in the Oath: And therefore
every Schoole-boy may perceive, that those words [ And if his Holiness etc.]
which are a conclusion of the former words, and therefore must have relation
thereunto, are not to be understood in this sense, as my Adversary does
childishly gloss them, to wit, And if his Holiness was moved etc. as
peradventure he was, but as it is very probable, yea and morally certain he
was, as I said before. For what man can with any reason imagine, that Cardinal
Bellarmine in the understanding of the Oath did dissent from the opinion of the
Divines of Rome, who consulted thereon, or that his Holiness did dissent
therein from the opinion of them both? And therefore this is no idle conceit,
or fantasy of mine to conceive so of his Holiness, but a manifest truth, and
moral certainty, and to conceive otherwise of his Holiness, to wit, that he
followed not herein the advice of his learned Divines, and understood not the
words of the Oath in that sense, as they after their long consultation did
understand them, were rather to tax his Holiness of imprudence and temeritie.

60 And if the conceit of mine be so idle, and coniecturall, and uncertain,
as this fraudulent man would seem to make it, why does not he in plain words
deny the same, and say that his Holiness did not understand the words of the
Oath in that sense, wherein Card. Bellarmine, and the other Divines of Rome did
conceive them: but childishly would make his Reader believe, that I my self
grant it to be very coniecturall and uncertain, by concluding my second
answer with an if? whereas it is evident, that I said plainly it was morally
certain, and therefore that [if] to be referred thereunto, and to have this
sense, if it be true, or morally certain, as true it is, that his Holiness
was moved etc. Or why did he not answer the arguments which I brought to
prove, that it was morally certain, but passes them over, as you have seen
with fraud and silence? And when you, Mr. Fitzherbert, in your Supplement
understood the Oath to deny the Popes power to excommunicate and deprive
Princes, and in respect of those two points took upon you to prove the Oath to
be against all laws humane and divine, although now your silence touching
excommunication shows your former courage to be quailed, can any man imagine,
but that you being then at Rome understood those words of the Oath
[notwithstanding any sentence of excommunication etc.] in that sense wherein
Cardinal Bellarmine, and the other Divines of Rome, who consulted thereon, did
conceive them?

61 All which being considered, you may take the impudency and temeritie, which
you would lay upon me, to your self, and freely confess, that it is an idle,
impudent, and temerarious conceit and fantasy for any man to believe, that
his Holiness did not understand the words of the oath in that sense, wherein
Cardinal Bellarmine, and his other learned Divines did conceive them, and
thereupon was moved to forbid the ^^th. Neither is this against the Popes
serious and solemn testimony protesting in his second Breue, that he forbade
the oath upon his own certain knowledge, motion and will, after long and
grave deliberation, for these words; as I showed before, do not signify, that
he forbade the oath, without the advice and counsel of his learned Divines,
for the words, after long and grave deliberation, do rather signify the
plain contrary, but by them it is only signified, that his Breue was not
surreptitious and counterfeit, and made without his priuitie or knowledge. And
therefore M. Fitzherbert, urging those words of his Holiness, which do only
signify, that his Breue was not false and counterfeit, and made without his
knowledge, to prove, that he did not understand the words of the oath in that
sense, as Cardinal Bellarmine, and the other Divines of Rome did conceive
them, and thereupon was moved to send hither his Breues, for the forbidding of
the oath, shows himself to be both childish and malicious, and to want both
prudence and conscience, in taxing me of impudency and temerity, for affirming
that, which no man of judgment, and without great irreuerence to his Holiness
can deny.

62 Now therefore M. Fitzherbert, will for Disputation sake admit, that the
Pope was deluded, and falsely persuaded by others, that his spiritual power to
inflict Censures is impugned by the oath, and will show withal, that I gain
nothing thereby for the justification of the Oath, and for the disproofe of his
Holiness Breues. Secondly, says he, Page 218. na. 12.
although we should admit, that the Pope was deluded, and falsely persuaded by
others, that his spiritual power to inflict Censures is impugned by the Oath,
yet Widdrington gains nothing thereby for the justification of the Oath, and
the disproofe of his Holiness Breues; and this I say for two reasons, the one
because it does not follow upon the answer of his Holiness to Fa. Parsons,
that he forbade the Oath, for that cause (as any man may easily see who list to
examine it:) the other reason is, for that the Oath is forbidden in the Breue
expressly, because it contained many things contrary to faith, and the
salvation of souls, whereby it is evident, that albeit his Holiness had been
falsely persuaded, that his spiritual authority was impugned by the Oath, yet
the prohibition of the said Oath in his Breue might be just, as being grounded
upon other respects, seeing that the Breue declares it to be unlawful for
many causes, and does not mention this for any of them.

63 Yes Mr. Fitzherbert I gain much thereby for the justification of the Oath,
and the disproofe of his Holiness Breues; for seeing that, as you your self
confess, the Oath is unlawful and condemned by the Breues, as containing in
it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, in respect of two
principal points, to wit, the exemption of temtemporall Princes from the Popes
power to excommunicate, and depose them; if you admit, as needs you must and
do, that his Holiness was deluded, and falsely persuaded by others, that his
power to excommunicate, and to inflict Censures is denied in the Oath, you can
give no sufficient reason, why his Holiness might not also be misinformed by
them of the later, and be falsely persuaded by them, that his power to depose
Princes, to dispose of their Kingdoms and to absolve their subjects from their
temporal allegiance, which is indeed expressly denied in the Oath, is a point
of faith, and the contrary doctrine heretical: yea it is as morally certain,
that his Holiness was misinformed by them of this second point, and of all the
clauses of the Oath, which are pretended to be flat contrary to faith and
salvation, as he was misinformed by them of the former point: and so you may
see the weakness of your second reason.

64 And as for your first reason, I cannot see what coherence at all it has
with that whereof you allege it to be a reason. For what connection, or
coherence, I pray you, is there betwixt this your assertion, that though you
should admit, that the Pope was deluded, and falsely persuaded by others, that
his spiritual power to inflict Censures is denied by the Oath, yet Widdrington
should gain nothing thereby, for the justification of the Oath, and the
disproofe of his Holiness Breues, and this assertion, which you allege as a
reason of the former, that it does not follow upon the answers of his
Holiness to Fa. Parsons. that he forbade the Oath for that cause. For who
would not think that man not well to know what he spoke, that should argue
thus: It does not follow upon the answer of his Holiness to Fa. Parsons, that
he forbade the Oath, for that he was deluded, and falsely persuaded by others,
that his spiritual power to inflict Censures is impugned by the Oath,
therefore though we should admit, that the Pope was deluded, and falsely
persuaded by others, that his spiritual power to inflict Censures, is impugned
by the Oath, yet my Adversary gains nothing thereby, for the justification of
the Oath, and the disproofe of his Holiness Breues. For besides that, I did
not say in that place, that from the answer of his Holiness to Fa. Parsons,
it follows, that he forbade the Oath, for that cause, but I said indeed,
that from the first part of Fa. Parsons letter, touching the consultation of
the Divines of Rome about the Oath, and the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine,
from whom the Divines of Rome did not dissent, who teaches that the Popes
power to excommunicate even heretical kings, is plainly denied in the oath, it
follows that his Holiness forbade the Oath for that cause: Nevertheless it
is evident that albeit we abstract wholly from Fa. Parsons letter; if my
Adversary once admit, as he does, that his Holiness was deluded and
misinformed by others concerning this so manifest a point, he can give no
reason why he might not also be deluded and misinformed by others concerning
the other points which are pretended to be in the Oath, flat contrary to faith
and salvation, and so by this my Adversaries grant, I gain much for the
justification of the Oath, and the disproofe of his Holiness Breues, to wit,
that they were grounded upon false informations, either that his spiritual
power to inflict Censures is denied in the Oath, which is very untrue, or that
his power to depose Princes is a point of faith, and the contrary heretical,
which also is manifestly false, as I have sufficiently convinced in this
Treatise.

65 And hereby that which Mr. Fitzherbert immediately adds, is easily
answered, Besides that, says he, p. 218. nu. 13
the answer of his Holiness to Fa. Parsons concerning the authority of the
Sea Apostolic in such affairs ( for so were the word of Fa. Parsons letter)
did not exclude the deposition of Princes from his spiritual authority, but
necessarily include it, because his said answer was to be understood, secundum
subiectam materiam, that is to say, according to the meaning and drift of the
Oath, which was the special subject of that Conference, and therefore,
forasmuch as the Popes power to depose Princes, and to discharge subjects of
their allegiance, is directly denied by the Oath, and that the same is never
effected, or performed, but by virtue of some Censure of Excommunication, it is
manifest, that his Holiness, answering a demand concerning the Oath, and
speaking of the authority of the Sea Apostolic in such affairs, included
therein his power as well to depose, as to excommunicate Princes, especially
knowing well, as he did, that the Oath denying his power to depose Princes,
does by a necessary consequent deny his spiritual authority, which includes
that power, as I have sufficiently declared and proved in this Treatise Chap.
2. per totum. Item chap. 5. and 6.
.

66 You have heard before, that the words which his Holiness used to Fa.
Parsons, were, that as for any actual using Censures against his Majesty he
meat not, but as for the authority of the Sea Apostolic, in such affairs
(which last words, in such affairs, are now added by Mr. Fitzherbert) he was
resolved, and would rather lose his head, then lose one jot. Now my Adversary
labors to show, that by those words, but as for the authority of the Sea
Apostolic in such affairs, his Holiness meant to include not only the
authority to use Censures, which only were mentioned in the words next going
before, and to which only any man, according to the property of the words,
would restrain them, but also to despose them, which is not much material to
the present purpose: for be it so, that his Holiness speaking of the authority
of the Sea Apostolic in such affairs, included his power, as well to depose,
as to excommunicate Princes, it is nothing to the matter; for that which I
intend is, that his Holiness was by Cardinal Bellarmine, and the other
Divines, who consulted of the Oath, not only misinformed, that his power to
excommunicate and to inflict Censures, is plainly denied in the Oath, but also
that his power to depose Princes, is a point of faith, and necessarily included
in his spiritual authority, which is very untrue, as in this Treatise I have
sufficiently declared and proved.

67 But that also which M. Fitzherbert adds for a confirmation of his saying,
to wit, that the Popes power to depose Princes, and to discharge subjects from
their allegiance, is never effected or performed, but by virtue of some censure
of Excommunication, is both false, and also repugnant to the grounds of
Cardinal Bellarmine. For Childericke King of France, which example Cardinal
Bellarmine brings for a proof, that the Pope has power to depose Princes,
was deposed, and his subjects discharged of their allegiance, and not by virtue
of any Censure of Excommunication. And it is one thing, says Becanus, Becanus
inco^trou. Anglic. c. 3. p. 2. page 108.
to excommunicate a King, and another to depose, or deprive him of his
kingdom: neither is the one necessarily connexed with the other. Many Kings
and Emperors have been excommunicated, and not therefore deposed, and
contrariwise many deposed, and not therefore excommunicated. And yet my
ignorant Adversary, to patch up this silly answer of his, does now agreeable
to his learning boldly affirm, that the Popes power to depose Princes, and to
discharge subjects of their allegiance, is never effected or performed, but by
virtue of some Censure of Excommunication; whereas I have sufficiently proved
above, Chap. 1. nu. 21. and seq. and chap. 5. sec. 2. 131. and seq.
out of the doctrine of Suarez, and Becanus, and from the definition of
excommunication, that deposition is not an effect of Excommunication, and that
therefore although they are sometimes joined together, and that some Princes
have been both excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, yet they were not
deposed by virtue of the Censure of Excommunication, for that, as his Majesty
did well observe, In his Premonition. p. 9.
Excommunication being only a spiritual Censure has not virtue to work this
temporal effect.

68 Now you shall see how uncharitably, and also unlearnedly this ignorant man
concludes this point. Whereupon it follows, says he, p. 219. nu. 14
that albeit his Holiness had been persuaded by Cardinal Bellarmine, Fa.
Parsons, and others (as doubtless he was, although this man would seem to
deny the same) that the Oath denying the Popes power to depose Princes,
impugned his spiritual authority, he had not been deluded or deceived
therein, nor had erred in the reason why he forbade the Oath, though he had
forbidden it for that cause only, as it is evident by the Breue he did not,
but for many respects. And therefore thou see, good Reader, what probable
exceptions this silly, sick, and scabbed sheep takes to the judgment and
sentence of his supreme Pastor, and what account he makes of his
Apostolical authority, and consequently what a good Catholic he is.

69 But if Mr. Fitzherbert mean, that the Oath denying the Popes power to
depose Princes and to discharge subjects of their allegiance impugneth his
spiritual authority to excommunicate Princes, and to inflict spiritual
Censures, as needs he must if he will speak to the purpose, for that all
his former discourse has been to impugn my second answer to his Holiness
Breues, which was, that he was misinformed by Cardinal Bellarmine, and the
other Divines of Rome, that his power to excommunicate Princes and to inflict
spiritual Censures is denied in the Oath, then I say that his Holiness was
fowly deluded and deceived in that reason why he forbade the Oath as
containing in it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, although
he did not forbid it for that cause only: But if his meaning be, that the
Oath denying the Popes power to depose Princes, (for to these two general
heads and to all that which does necessarily follow thereon, both this man and
all my other Adversaries do chiefly reduce all their exceptions against the
Oath, and if for any other respects his Holiness forbade the Oath, let my
Adversary name them and he shall hear what we will say thereunto) impugneth
his spiritual authority, for that it is a point of faith that the Pope has
power to depose absolute Princes, to dispose of their temporalls, to inflict
temporal punishments, and to discharge subjects of their temporal allegiance,
and which consequently are included in his spiritual power, then I also say,
that his Holiness was deluded, dedeceiued, and erred also in this reason, why
he forbade the Oath as containing in it many things flat contrary to faith
and salvation, for that it is no point of faith, that the Pope has power to
depose Princes, to inflict temporal punishments, etc. but the contrary has
ever been maintained by learned Catholics.

70 Neither was Almaine (a famous Doctor of Paris) and those very many
Doctors related by him, or any other of those learned Authors, whom partly I
cited in my Apology, nu. 4. and seq.
and partly above in this Treatise, Part. 1.
ever accounted bad Catholics, or silly, sick, and scabbed sheep: Neither
can Card. Bellarmine, even according to his own grounds, (as I have showed
before) and in his own conscience, (whereunto I dare appeal herein,) affirm
that the Decree, or rather Act of the Lateran Council, whereon all my
Adversaries do now at last chiefly rely, to prove their doctrine of deposing
to be of faith, although it should have mentioned, as it does not mention
absolute Princes, is sufficient to make it certain and of faith. And therefore
this ignorant and unconscionable man calling me a silly, sick and scabbed
sheep, and no good Catholic, for not believing this doctrine to be certain
and of faith, which so many learned Catholic Doctors have ever maintained to
be false, and for not admitting his Holiness declaratiue precept which is
grounded thereon, and consequently has no greater force to bind according to
Suarez doctrine, then has the reason whereon it is grounded, shows himself
to have neither learning nor charity, but a vehement desire to disgrace me
with Catholics, and to take away my good name per fas and nefas, whether it
be by right or wrong, as all the rest of his uncharitable and fraudulent
discourse does plainly convince.

71 To this purpose, says he, Page 219. nu. 15. 16.
it is to be noted how peremptorily and arrogantly he writes to his
Holiness, saying, that if he condemn his books or writings as heretical or
erroneous (upon the false informations of his Adversaries) he leaves it to
the judgment of his Holiness, and all the Christian world, how great an
injury he shall do him, and what a great occasion he shall give thereby to
the Adversaries to Catholic verity. So Widdrington. Wherein you see, he does
not promise his Holiness to retract or reform his writings and doctrine in
case that he do condemn them, but anticipateth the judgment of his
Holiness with a protestation of wrong, and of occasion of great scandal,
insinuating also further that the whole Christian world will justify him
therein, in which respect he confidently leaves his cause to the judgment
thereof, meaning by the Christian world (as may well be coniectured) some
general Council whereto he means to appeal; Disp. Theol. cap. 3. nu. 8.
and cap. 10. nu. 23.
and therefore he teaches afterward that it is a probable opinion that the
Pope may err in any definition of his, if it be not approved by a general
Council: so as he shows evidently what starting hole he has found already
to escape away from the Censures of the Sea Apostolic, to wit, by appealing
from the Pope to a general Council, as that miserable man his fellow Sheldon
did, and all Apostataes and heretics are wont to do at their first breach,
and disunion from the Church.

72 Here Mr. Fitzherbert to confirm his rash and uncharitable judgment of
me, that I am no good Catholic, but an heretic disguised, and masked under
the vizard of a Catholic, taxes me of diverse things, wherein also he
plainly discovers his great want both of learning and charity. For first no
man of judgment can deny, but that the aforesaid conditional words, which I
used to his Holiness, are very true, to wit, that if he should condemn my
books as heretical or erroneous, which do sincerely handle this dangerous,
difficult, and great controversy, Azorius tom. 2 l. 12. cap. 5. q. 8.
which ever has been, says Fa. Azor, betwixt the Bishops of Rome on the one
side, and Emperors, and Kings on the other touching the Popes power to deprive
them of their kingdoms, upon the false informations of my Adversaries, he
should both greatly wrong me and also give occasio of great scandal to the
Adversaries of the Catholic faith. Now seeing that, as I there signified, I
have clearly convinced, that my Adversaries, and especially Card. Bell. masked
under the name of D. Schulckenius, has most shamefully corrupted my words,
misconstrued my meaning, and slanderously accused me of error and heresy,
what show of arrogancy can any prudent man imagine it to be, to signify to
his Holiness with humble and decent words, and especially in the defense of my
innocence the plain and manifest truth, and to request his Holiness not to
be mislead in a matter of such importance by the bad informations of my
Adversaries, nor to trust overmuch to their learning and conscience in this
case, wherein they have so fowly abused me, and deluded also his Holiness,
and withal to admonish or forewarne him, that if he should be thus mislead,
all the Christian world would plainly see, that it would be both an infinite
wrong to me, and an occasion of great scandal to the Adversaries of the
Catholic Religion?

73 Secondly, Mr. Fitzherberts interpretation of those my words [I leave to the
judgment of all the Christian world] to wit, that by the Christian world, I
understand some general Council whereto I meant to appeal, is a very false,
and slanderous conjecture. For albeit I am indeed of opinion, and I think
that no man of learning, reading, or judgment can in his heart be of the
contrary, whatsoever in outward show, to speak perchance ad Placebo, or for
other respects he may pretend, that it is neither heresy, error, or
temeritie, but a doctrine truly probable, that the Pope may err in his
definitions if he define without a general Council, and that a general
Council is above a true and undoubted Pope, yet by all the Christian world I
did not understand any general Council neither by those words did I mean, as
God is my witness, to appeal to a general Council, if the Pope upon the
falfe informations of my Adversaries should condemn my books, knowing it to
be in vain for the redress of any present injury to appeal to that which
is not, and God knows when it will be: although if the Council were actually
assembled, I account it no arrogancy for any man, that is wronged by his
Holiness upon the false suggestions, and informations of his potent
Adversaries, to appeal thereunto: But by all the Christian world I understood
all Christian men whatsoever, whether Clerks, or Laikes, Princes, or subjects,
Prelates, or private men, friends, or foes, and my only meaning was, that those
words which I spoke to his Holiness with the aforesaid condition, are so
plainly and evidently true, that I durst therein appeal to the judgment and
conscience of any Christian man whatsoever, yea and of my learned Adversaries
themselves.

74 But I do not promise his Holiness, says Mr. Fitzherbert, to retract and
reform my writings in case that he condemn them, but I anticipate the
judgment of his Holiness with a protestation of wrong and of occasion of
great scandal. True it is, that I did declare to his Holiness, and admonish
him in that place, (but not anticipate his judgment) how shamefully Cardinal
Bellarmine had wronged me in his public writings, most falsely accusing me of
error and heresy, and upon what weak and sophistical grounds he labored
to coin a new article of faith in a matter, which so merely concerns our
obedience due to God and Caesar, humbly requesting his Holiness, that he would
not give credit to the false informations of my Adversaries, and especial of
Cardinal Bellarmine, nor be over confident in his learning or conscience, but
that he would be pleased to examine the whole cause himself, and not to give
judgment against me, or censure my books upon the false reports of my
accusers and adversaries, otherwise the whole world would plainly see what
great wrong is done to me, and what great occasion of scandal would thereby
arise to the Adversaries of the Catholic faith and Religion. Now what
indifferent man that will speak without partiality, can justly accuse him as
arrogant, presumptuous, or to anticipate the sentence of the Judge, who being
falsely accused of most heinous crimes, by one who is both his accuser, and
witness against him, and also greatly favored and esteemed by the Judge, does
in defense of his innocence plainly and modestly declare in particular to the
Judge how fowly and shamefully he is slandered, desiring him not to give
sentence against him upon such false informations, but that he will vouchsafe
to examine the cause himself, and not to be over confident in the testimony
and conscience of his accuser, who is both in great favor with the Judge and
also is brought as a witness against him, otherwise all the standers by will
perceive what manifest wrong is done him, and he will give his Adversaries
great occasion to except and exclaim against him. And this is my very case as
you have seen before.

75 And whereas Mr. Fitzherbert obiecteth, that I do not promise to his
Holiness to retract, or reform my writings in case that he condemn them, to
which he might also have added, that his Holiness has now condemned, or
rather forbidden some of my writings, and I have not as yet retracted or
reformed them: I answer first, that I know not well what this silly man would
conclude from hence, unless he would make his Reader believe that I am
obstinate in my doctrine, which the ignorant man calls an heresy, and that I
do still maintain that it is a probable doctrine, and consequently may be
maintained by any Catholic, that the Pope has not authority to depose
temporal Princes, and that therefore I am no Catholic, but a formal heretic,
disguised and masked under the vizard of a Catholic, and that all my pretenses
to be a Catholic, do proceed from no other ground, but from a deep d
ssimulation, or rather an artificall and execrable hypocrisy to delude and
deceive Catholics: And this is the chief mark at which this rash-headed and
uncharitable man aims at in this Chapter, whereby he plainly discovers
both the bitterness of his intemperate spleen little beseeming the spirit of a
religious Priest, and also that he knows not himself what is required to be
a Catholic, or to have true Catholic faith.

76 Secondly, therefore to answer this inference* I do boldly and resolutely
affirm again, which also I have sufficiently convinced in this Treatise, that
it is a doctrine truly probable, that the Pope has no authority to depose
absolute Princes, or to discharge their subjects of their temporal allegiance,
and therefore it cannot truly be noted of heresy, error, or temerity, and
so the imputation of heresy concerning the doctrine it self, is altogether
avoided; and the submission of all my writings to the Censure and judgment of
the Catholic Roman Church, professing that if through ignorance I have
written any thing which she approoueth not I do also reprove it, condemn it,
and desire it to be h^ld for not written, which is a retractation and
recalling in general of whatsoever I have written amiss, is sufficient to
clear me from all imputation of obstinacy or wilfulness, until I be
certified of some particular thing, which requires a more particular
retractation.

77 True it is, that I did not promise to his Holiness to retract, or reform
my writings and doctrine, in case he should condemn them upon the false
informations of my Adversaries, for that I was not bound to make any such
promise, as you shall more fully see beneath: And now in that manner as the
Cardinals of the Inquisition have by the commandment of his Holiness, as the
Decree mentions, forbidden my Apology, and Theological Disputation, in the
same manner I have retracted, and recalled all that I have written amiss: for
as they have only in general forbidden those books not expressing any cause
or crime either in particular, or in general for which they are forbidden,
although I have most humbly and earnestly requested to know some cause thereof,
so also I have in general retracted and recalled what I have written amiss,
both by abhorring and detesting all heresy and error in general, and also by
submitting my self to the Censure of the Catholic Roman Church, and
solemnly protesting, to be most ready to correct whatsoever in my writings is
to be corrected, to purge what is to be purged, to explain what is to be
explained, and to retract what is to be retracted: which being so, with what
face and conscience can this my ignorant and uncharitable Adversary so
confidently affirm, that no zealous Catholic can take me for any other then
an heretic disguised and masked under the vizard of a Catholic, and that all
my pretenses to be a Catholic do proceed from no other ground but from a
deep dissimulation, or rather an artificial and execrab e hypocrisy?

78 But that unlearned Catholics may not be led blind fold by this ignorant
and silly man, who presumes to be a Doctor and Teacher in these difficult
points of Schoole-Diuinitie, before he has been scarce a Scholar therein,
and that they may have some sufficient light and directions to discern upon
what grounds they ought to build their Catholic faith, and whether they are
bound to believe with Catholic faith all that doctrine to be faith, which the
Pope with the Cardinals of the Inquisition, and his other Divines of Rome
propounds as of faith, and that doctrine to be heretical or erroneous, which
he with their advise and counsel condemns as heretical or erroneous, I
think it not amiss to set down two principal observations to direct them
therein.

79 The first is, that it is certain, and agreed upon by all Divines, that
true Catholic and supernatural faith must always be certain, and
infallible, not only in respect of the object, or the thing which is to be
believed, which must of necessity be true, but chiefly and principally in
respect of the reason or medium, whereby we assent thereunto, for many
opinions (which include intrinsecally a fear and uncertainty, as true natural
science, and supernatural faith include intrinsecally a certainety, and
exclude all fear, doubt, and uncertainty) are true, See Bannes secunda
secundae q. 6. ar. 2.
and in respect of their object also necessary, but the reason for which we
believe, or give assent, is that which makes our true Catholic and
supernatural faith and judgment to be infallible, and this reason is the
revelation of God, propounded to us by the Church.

80 The second is that it is also certain, that there is a great controversy
betwixt the Divines of Rome, and other learned Catholics, especially of Paris,
whether the Pope defining and determining any doctrine to be of faith, and the
contrary heretical without a general Council may err or no, and whether the
Pope be subject or superior to a general Council. Victor. relect. 4 de
potest. Papae and Conc. proposit. 3. Bellar. li 2. de Conc. cap. 13.
Whereupon learned Victoria affirms, that both opinions concerning the
superiority of the Pope or Council are probable, and Card. Bellarmine himself
confesses, that although in the Council of Florence, and in the last Lateran
Council, the question seems to be defined, yet because the Florentine
Council has not so, expressly defined it, and some make doubt, whether the
Lateran Council, which has most expressly defined it, Bellar. ibid. ca. 17.
(albeit afterward he says, that it is doubtful whether she defined it
properly as to be held with Catholic faith) was truly a general Council,
therefore unto this day it remains a question even among Catholics. And all
the world sees, that the Divines of Paris are admitted to Sacraments, which
ought not to be tolerated, if they committed any heresy, error, or temerity,
for defending this doctrine, as public harlots are in some sort permitted at
Rome, but not suffered to receive Sacraments so long as they persist in that
wicked life.

81 And from hence it evidently follows first, that it is not certain and
infallible, that the Pope, with his Cardinals and Divines, yea and with the
particular Roman Church defining, determining, or propounding to the whole
Church any thing to be believed formally, as of faith, without a general
Council, cannot err and be deceived; and consequently such definitions cannot
be certain and infallible, nor can be an assured ground of Catholic faith,
nor a sufficient reason, motive, medium, or cause to believe any thing by him
so defined with Catholic faith; for that the fundamental reason, medium,
cause and motive to believe any thing with Catholic faith must be certain and
infallible, as I showed before out of Bannes, from whom other Divines do not
dissent herein, and if that reason be uncertain, doubtful, or fallible, the
faith or belief, which is grounded and depends thereon, cannot be truly
Catholic, and infallible.

82 Secondly, if the Popes decrees and definitions in things to be believed, as
of faith, albeit directed to the whole Church, and in things which do not
concern his own particular interest, honor, authority, or prerogative, and
wherein therefore there can be no suspicion, that he himself is led by
affection, or his Counselors and Divines by flattery to the making of such
Decrees, are not certain and infallible, but may be false, and exposed to
error, and consequently can be no sure ground of Catholic faith, what
judgment can any sensible man make of such decrees or definitions, which are
neither directed to the whole Church, but to particular persons or Churches,
nor are propounded as of faith, nor grounded upon any doctrine which is
certain, and out of controversy, but only upon a question maintained on both
sides by learned Catholics, and which also concerns the Popes own interest,
authority, and prerogative, as are his Breues directed to English Catholics,
which are neither propounded to the whole Church, nor contain any definition
as of faith, but only a declaratiue precept, which is grounded upon a
controversy, which began in Pope Gregory the seventh his time, and has since
continued betwixt the Bishops of Rome, and Christian Princes, concerning the
authority which Popes pretend to have over all their temporalls?

83 Thirdly, if the Popes Decrees together with the Roman Church, by which he
declares, and defines any doctrine to be of faith, or against faith, may be
fallible, and exposed to error, and consequently can be no certain rule or
ground of Catholic faith, nor any sufficient reason, cause, or motive to
believe any thing with Catholic faith, so long as this controversy among
Catholics, concerning the Popes infallibility in his definitions remains
undecided, much less can a Decree of any Congregation of Cardinals declaring
any doctrine to be of faith, or condemning any doctrine as heretical,
erroneous, temerarious, or scandalous, be an assured ground of Catholic faith,
or a sufficient reason for any man to believe with Catholic faith, that
doctrine to be such, as their Decrees do declare or cond^mne. Which being so,
what judgment, I pray you, can any reasonable man make of such their Decrees,
which condemn no doctrine at all, either in general or particular, but only
forbid certain books to be read or kept, without declaring for what cause or
crime either in particular, or in general they are forbidden, and such books
also as are written against one of the chiefest of their Congregation, of which
sort is that Decree of the Cardinals, wherein two books of mine, written
chiefly against Cardinal Bellarmine are forbidden, without expressing any
cause or crime at all, either in particular or general why they are forbidden.

84 Fourthly, by all this it is evident, what infinite wrong this my ignorant
Adversary, (whether only through blind and inconsiderate zeal, or also
through some passionate spleen taken against me for contradicting his writings,
and some others of his Society, I leave to God and his own conscience to
judge) has both done to me in so falsely, and yet upon such childish grounds,
accusing me to be no Catholic, but an heretic disguised and masked under the
vizard of a Catholic, for not admitting the Popes Breues and declaratiue
precept, grounded at the most upon an opinion, which learned Catholics have
ever impugned, and taxing my doctrine of heresy, for that my books are
forbidden by the Cardinals of the Inquisition, without condemning any position
contained in them of any crime, either in particular or general; and also into
what eminent danger he both casts himself headlong, and seeks also to draw
after him unlearned Catholics, if they will follow such a blind guide in
ways, which he himself, for want of Scholasticall learning has never gone,
by endeavoring to overthrow their Catholic faith, and to persuade them to
build it upon fallible grounds, as upon Popes Breues, which neither are
directed to the whole Church, nor do contain any definition or declaration of
any particular doctrine, and upon the Decrees of certain Cardinals condemning
books only in general terms, which perchance some of them never read, nor
for want of sufficient learning do well understand, but do rely either upon
the relation or judgment of other men, to whom the charge of ouerseeing such
books is committed by them, whereas the grounds of true Catholic faith, and
the fundamental reason, why a man ought to believe any thing with Catholic
faith, must be certain, infallible, and without all controversy. And thus you
see in what a labyrinth this silly man has wound himself, who seeking to
persuade his Reader, that I am no true Catholic, but a disguised and masked
heretic, under the name of a Catholic, for not building my Catholic faith
upon uncertain and fallible grounds, and which are controuersed among learned
Catholics, plainly bewraieth what a sound Catholic he himself is, and upon
what sure grounds he builds his Catholic faith, and would have other
Catholics to build the same, whereas according to the approved doctrine of
all learned Catholics, unless it be built upon certain, undoubted, and
infallible grounds, it cannot be a true Catholic faith, but only an
uncertain and fallible opinion masked under the vizard of Catholic faith.

85 Lastly, that unlearned Catholics may walk warily, securely, and without
danger, and be not misled blindfold by this my ignorant Adversary, they must
carefully observe the difference betwixt the Church firmly believing, and
probably thinking, or, which is all one, betwixt Catholic faith, and opinion.
The first difference is, that the grounds of Catholic faith must be certain,
and infallible, but the grounds of opinion are uncertain and fallible: and
therefore although the Popes definitions, made with mature deliberation, and
grave counsel may be a sufficient ground for Catholics, to think with
opinion, that the doctrine which he defines, is true, if they have no
conuincing reasons to persuade them to the contrary, yet they cannot be
sufficient for Catholics, I do not say, to think probably, but to believe
assuredly with Catholic faith, the doctrine which he so defines, without the
approbation of a general Council to be true. The second difference is, that
albeit every Catholic ought to be so firm, and steadfast in his Catholic
belief, that he must needs believe the contrary doctrine, not only to be
false a part rei, but also to be improbable, yet he ought not to be so firm,
and steadfast in his opinion, as to condemn of heresy, error, or temeritie
other learned Catholics, who having duly examined all the reasons and grounds
for that opinion, shall think against him, or be of the contrary opinion,
although he pretend to prove his doctrine to be true, out of some Decree or
definition even of a general Council, which Decree or definition, the other
learned Catholics of the contrary opinion have seen, examined and answered
thereunto, and this I proved at large in my Theological Disputation Cha. 10.
sec. 2.
, out of the express doctrine of Fa. Vasquez, which my ignorant Adversary does
fraudulently conceal, who, as you have seen, urges against me certain
arguments, which I there related and answered, and dissembleth wholly the
answers, which there I made to the same.

86 Wherefore, although the Pope be the supreme spiritual Pastor of all the
faithful, and therefore ought to teach and instruct them in the Catholic
faith, and in all other things which are necessary to salvation, as also every
Bishop is a spiritual Pastor in his own Dioecesse, and therefore ought to
teach and instruct all those that are committed to his charge in the Catholic
faith, and in all other things necessary to the health of their souls,
because as Cardinal Bellarmine well affirms, Bell. l. 5. de Ro^, Pont. c. 3.
that which the Pope is in the universal Church is every Bishop in his
particular Dioecesse; and those words Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, Bell. l.
2. de. Romans Pont. c. 12 in sine Edit. antiqu^^,
says he, and such like, which are spoken to Saint Peter, in regard of the
Pastoral office are understood to be spoken to all Pastors: yet as no man is
bound to believe with Catholic faith which the Bishop of the Dioecesse does
define or determine to be of faith so long as there is a controversy among
learned Catholics concerning the certainty of that doctrine, for that it is
certain and agreed upon by all Catholics, that every particular Bishop may
err in his definitions, and consequently they cannot be any assured and
infallible grounds of the Catholic faith; So also proportionally no man is
bound to believe with Catholic faith any doctrine whereof there is a
controversy among learned Catholics, albeit the Pope without a general
Council shall define it to be of faith, for that it is a controversy among
learned Catholics, whether the Pope defining without a general Council can
err or no, and consequently until this controversy be decided and determined
by a general Council, or the universal acceptance of the Church as a point
of faith, such his definitions can be no assured and infallible grounds of true
Catholic faith.

87 And if you demand, that seeing the Pope is the supreme spiritual Pastor
of all the faithful, and therefore ought to teach them the Catholic faith,
and direct them in the way to salvation, why are not all Christians bound to
hear his voice, and to embrace all that he shall teach them, and to obey him
in all that he shall command him? I answer with the like demand, seeing that
every Bishop is the spiritual Pastor of all the faithful within his
Dioecesse, and therefore ought to teach them the Catholic faith, and direct
them in the way of salvation, why are not all the faithful within his
Dio^cesse committed to his charge bound to hear his voice, and to embrace all
that he shall teach them, and to obey him in all that he shall command them?

88 But perchance you will say, that the Pope is the supreme spiritual Pastor
and his commandments are Apostolical, as Mr. Fitzherbert in this Treatise
often urges against me the authority of the supreme spiritual Pastor, and
his Apostolical Breues, and commandment, and therefore there is a great
disparitie betwixt the Pope and the inferior Bishops. True it is, that there
is a great disparitie and difference betwixt the Pope, who is the supreme
Pastor, and other Bishops who are not supreme: but as there is a great
disparitie betwixt them, so there is a great difficulty and controversy among
learned Catholics, in what this disparitie, and this supremacy of the Pope
does consist; which were to long to examine at this present, perchance
hereafter if my Adversaries will urge me thereunto I shall treat of this
disparitie and the Popes Supremacy more at large. In the mean time all
Catholics do agree in this, that the Popes Supremacy does not consist in
this, that he cannot command any unlawful thing, and contrary to the law of
God, or that he cannot teach false doctrine, and contrary to the word of God,
or that he cannot exceed the authority, which Christ has granted him, or that
he cannot challenge to him a power or Jurisdiction as due to him, which Christ
has not given him. Yea and according to the doctrine of many famous and
learned Catholics cited by me elsewhere, In disp. Theol. cap. 10. 2 nu. 27.
the Popes Supremacy does not consist in this, that he cannot err and be
deceived in his definitions, albeit they be directed to the whole Church, if
he define without the approbation of a general Council, or the acceptance of
the universal Church, and consequently such his definitions cannot be certain
and infallible grounds of true Catholic Faith.

89 Neither are his commandments, definitions, or letters called Apostolical,
for that they are always conform to the law of God, and to the doctrine of
the Apostles, neither is his authority called Apostolical, for that he has
always the assistance of the holy Ghost anexed to his Decrees and doctrine in
that manner as the Apostles had, but chiefly and principally for that he is the
successor of S. Peter the first Apostle, and has authority and jurisdiction
over all Christians, as the Apostles, and principally S. Peter had, although
not with the like infallibility and continual assistance of the holy Ghost.
And so the parity does still remain betwixt the Pope and other Bishops,
notwithstanding his Primacie, in that both are Pastors, and therefore are
bound by their pastoral function to feed their sheep, to instruct them in
the Catholic faith, and to direct them in the way to salvation, and yet their
sheep are not always bound to hear and follow their voice or call, to believe
with Catholic faith all their doctrine, or to obey all their commandments,
for that their definitions are not certain and infallible, neither are they
always so assisted by the holy Ghost, that they cannot command unlawful
things, So that albeit the Pope be our supreme spiritual Pastor, Superior
and Judge, yet we are not bound to obey him but in lawful things, and to
which his authority does extend.

90 And if you ask again, to whom shall it belong to judge whether the Popes
definitions or doctrine be true or false, or his commandments conform to the
law of God or no, or that he exceed the authority and commission which Christ
has granted him or no? I answer, that if we speak of Judgment, as it is an
act of Justice, or of a Judge doing justice, and supposes in him a superiority
and authority over the person whom he judges, which the Divines call iudicium
potestatis, a judgment of authority; then according to the Divines of Rome
only God can judge the Popes actions, except in case of heresy or of schism,
when more then one contend to be Pope, for in these cases they grant that a
general Council may judge the Pope: But according to the Divines of Paris,
not only in the aforesaid cases, but also in many others, a General Council,
whom they grant to be superior to the Pope, may by way of authority judge the
Popes actions, and declare, determine and define, whether his definitions, and
commandments be conform to the word, and law of God or no. But if we take
judgment, S. Thom. prima secu^da q. 93 ar. 2. secunda secundae q. 51. ar. 3.
and q. 60. ar. 1.
as it is an act of the understanding, and is commonly called by the
Philosophers the second act, or operation thereof, and signifies a right
discerning or determination of the understanding betwixt truth and falsehood,
good and evil in every matter whether it be speculatiue or practical, and
consists in the apprehension of a thing as it is in it self, which the
Divines call iudicium discretionis a judgment of discretion; then every
learned man may judge and discern, whether the Popes definitions or doctrine
be true or false, and whether his commandments be conform to the law of God
or no: neither is that vulgar saying, None can judge his superiors actions, to
be understood of this judgment, but of the former; for this inward and private
judgment is the guide of every man's conscience, by which, for that it is the
rule of all moral actions, he must judge and discern all his thoughts, words,
and deeds, actions, and omissions.

91 Seeing therefore it is a controversy among learned Catholics whether the
Pope can err in his definitions, if he define without a general Council,
and consequently they cannot be infallible grounds of Catholic faith, it is
evident, that whenever the Pope defines any doctrine to be of faith, which
in very deed is Catholic doctrine and of faith, we must not believe with
Catholic faith, that doctrine to be Catholic and of faith because the Pope
has defined the same, for this reason and ground is, as I have said,
uncertain, and fallible, but because the Catholic Church, 1. Tim. 3.
which only is the infallible propounder of Catholic faith, and according to
the Apostle, the pillar and ground of truth, has approved the same to be
Catholic and of faith. And thus much concerning the Popes definitions and
decrees in points of faith, and which are to be believed with Catholic faith.

92 Now concerning manners, and things commanded to be done, or not to be
done, we must carefully distinguish betwixt declaratiue, and constitutiue
precepts or commandments: for in constitutiue commandments, which do make
the thing which they forbid to be unlawful, and do not suppose it to be
otherwise unlawful and forbidden by some former law, first, if the Pope
command a thing which is manifestly lawful, and subject to his commanding
power, we are bound to obey, but with this caveat or prouiso, if by obeying we
are not like to incur any probable danger of some great temporal harm, for
that no Ecclesiastical law, setting aside scandal, or contempt, which are
forbidden by the law of God and nature, does seldom or never bind with any
great temporal loss, as I observed elsewhere In Disp. Theol. cap. 10. 2. nu.
41.
out of the common doctrine of Catholic Divines. Secondly, if the Pope
perchance command a thing* which is manifestly unlawful, then we are bound
not to obey, according to that saying of S. Peter, God must be obeyed ^ather
then men.

Acts cap. 5.
93 Thirdly, if it be doubtful, whether the thing, which the Pope commands be
unlawful, or whether he has authority to command that thing or no, In the
discovery of D. Schulckenius ca^umnies, calum. 15 nu 12. and seq. Sot. de
deteg. secret memb. 3. q. 2.
then, as I observed elsewhere, according to the doctrine of many learned
Divines, as Sotus, Corduba, Salon, Sayrus, and others, we must do that
wherein there is less danger, according to that approved maxim, Of two evils
the lesser is to be chosen. But Sotus does more plainly and distinctly declare
the whole matter. When the Superiors commandment, says he, is of a thing
secure and lawful, where no danger arises to the public good, or to a third
person, in a doubtful matter we must for the most part obey. As for example,
my Superior commands me to study,, or to help sick persons, which are
actions, wherein there is no danger, although it be doubtful, whether he may
impose such a commandment, I must obey; yet I added, says he (for the most
part) because I am not always bound to obey in a doubtful matter, as if the
thing be over burdensome, or laborious to the subject; For if my Superior
command me a long journey, and a hard, or uneasy thing, and it is doubtful
whether he has authority to command the same, I am not bound forthwith to
obey. And a little beneath the same Sotus, as I related his words more at large
above, affirms, that when it is doubtful, whether the Superior commands
that which is lawful if it be in prejudice of a third person, because that
third person is in possession of his credit, and goods, we must incline to that
part where there is less danger. For when such danger does arise to a third
person, if the subject be doubtful, he does not against obedience, if he
demand of his Prelate a reason of his commandment, propounding humbly the
reasons of his doubt. Thus Sotus. And by this the Reader may clearly
understand the true sense and meaning of that vulgar maxim, In doubts we must
obey our Superior, and stand to his judgment.

94 And as concerning declaratiue precepts, which do not make the thing, which
they forbid to be unlawful, but do only declare and suppose it to be
unlawful, as being forbidden by some former law, they have no more force to
bind, as Fa. Suarez expressly affirms, Suarez l. 3. de Leg. c. 20, nu. 10.
then has the reason whereon they are grounded. So that if the reason be
certain, then we are bound to obey, if it be only probable, we are no more
bound to obey that declaratiue commandment, then we are bound to follow the
Popes opinion, against the probable opinion of other learned Catholics. All
this, and much more touching declaratiue, and constitutiue precepts, and his
Holiness Breues in particular, which do only contain a declaratiue precept,
forbidding Catholics to take the Oath, for that it contains many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation, I declared in my Theological Disputation, Chapter
10. sec. 2.
which is abundantly sufficient to free me, and other English Catholics, from
all note of disobedience, for not obeying in this doubtful and disputable
matter his Holiness Breues, and his declaratiue precept contained therein,
which is so prejudicial to his Majesty's authority and so dangerous to his
Catholic subjects, not being able to find any one thing therein, which is
repugnant to faith and salvation, especially humbly propounding to his
Holiness the reasons of our doubts, and earnestly requesting to be satisfied
therein. But Mr. Fitzherbert thought it fit for his purpose, to urge against
me the objections which I there answered, and to tax me not only of
disobedience, but also of error and heresy, and to conceal the answers
which I made thereunto, wherein he plainly discovers his insincere,
dishonest, and uncharitable proceeding, and that his only drift is to disgrace
me with his Reader, and not to examine uprightly the truth of the cause.

95 To conclude therefore this digression, it is evident by the premises, that
if the Pope without a general Council define any doctrine to be heretical,
erroneous, or temerarious, and command all Catholics to believe the same, no
Catholic is bound, or ought to believe with Catholic faith, that doctrine to
be heretical, erroneous, or temerarious for this respect only, because the
Pope has defined and commanded the same, for that it is a controversy among
learned Catholics, whether he has any such authority infallibly to define or
no; and consequently neither his definitions, nor his declaratiue commandments
grounded thereon, can be certain and infallible grounds of Catholic faith.
And thus much touching inward belief. But secondly, if the Pope command that
none shall preach or teach against his definitions or Breues, then we must
observe that golden rule of learned and devout Gerson, that if we neither
perceive any manifest error against faith in his definitions or Breues, nor
that by our silence some great scandal shall arise to Catholic faith, we must
not dogmatize against them, otherwise we must speak freely and fear no
Censures. See his words above, Chap. 14. number. 39. But notwithstanding this
document of Gerson, if any learned man has doubts and difficulties, which do
trouble his conscience concerning the verity or lawfulness of the Popes
definitions or Breues, when they are greatly prejudicial to a third person,
especially to a whole kingdom, it is lawful for him, according to the
doctrine of Sotus, and others before rehearsed, to propound humbly to his
Holiness the reasons of his doubts, desiring to be satisfied therein, for
this is not to dogmatize, or to teach or preach publicly against them,
(although this also according to Gerson be sometimes commendable, yea, and
necessary) but it is a desire to be taught and instructed concerning the
verity or lawfulness of them.

96 Thirdly, if the Pope should excommunicate nominatim* by name all those that
shall teach, preach, or write against his definitions, or Breues, in case they
perceive great scandal to arise to Catholic faith, if they be silent, and do
not oppose themselves, or should excommunicate nominatim those, who shall write
Supplications to his Holiness, to be taught and instructed concerning the
verity, or lawfulness of his definitions or Breues, whereof they have great
doubts and difficulties, which do perplexe their conscience, then they must
remember that saying of our Savior, wherewith Gerson concludes his golden
document, that Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, and let
them assure themselves, that they are unjustly excommunicated, and free before
God, howsoever the Pope has tied them by his Censure: and therefore they may
in this case carry themselves in that manner, as those who are not
excommunicated in the sight of God, though by presumption, which often
deceives, and is deceived, they may be thought by many persons, who know not
their innocence, to be excommunicated: Yet they must not contemn the Censure,
but also for fear of scandal observe it in the face of the Church, although
secretly, and when no scandal is like to arise, they may do all that, which
if they had not been excommunicated, they might have done; and they, who know
their innocence, may in like manner converse with them secretly and without
scandal, as they might before. But notwithstanding any such excommunication,
they may still write supplications to his Holiness until he shall instruct
them, and may still appeal to his Holiness, ad melius informandum, to inform
him better, and to desire to be fully instructed, propounding humbly the
reasons of th^^rdoubts.

97 Lastly, if the Pope, or the Cardinals of the Inquisition, shall forbid
Catholics to read, or keep certain books, to know whether, and by whom such
books may without any license be read, and kept, or no, learned Catholics
must diligently observe for what reason, ground, cause or end they are
forbidden to be read, to wit, whether for that they are repugnant to faith, or
good manners: and also they must carefully consider the natures, properties,
and differences of declaratiue and constitutiue precepts, and that, according
to the common doctrine of Divines, whenever the reason or end of any law does
generally cease, the obligation also of that law does cease. So that if the
books are forbidden, for that they are repugnant to faith, and thereupon may
be dangerous to souls, and this reason is not true, but only pretended and
falsely supposed, the reason, end, and cause of this prohibition does altogether
cease, to him who sees this false pretense: And this observation I have set
down chiefly for learned men; For those that be unlearned must be guided and
directed by virtuous, discreet, and learned men, which learned men, who take
upon them to guide and direct others, if through affectate and wilful
ignorance they do err (for that they will not duly examine the matter, when
they have sufficient cause to doubt thereof, but either for fear, or flattery
will believe with blind obedience the Popes, or Cardinals words, knowing
certainly that they may err and oftentimes have erred, and now have sufficient
cause to doubt, and consequently to examine whether at this present they have
erred or no, seeing that learned Catholics do in public writings dedicated
to his Holiness make great doubts, and give great reasons to show that they
have erred at this very present, desiring to be satisfied therein) these
learned men, I say, shall render a strict account at the day of judgment, for
the temporal or spiritual harm, which those poor ignorant souls, who have
trusted to their learning and conscience, have sustained by their advise and
counsel, and also they are bound to make satisfaction and restitution in this
world for all the temporal loss, which those poor souls have incurred by
their rash and pernicious counsel, proceeding from wilful and affectate or
desired ignorance.

98 Nevertheless also unlearned Catholics, when they have just cause to doubt
of the truth and lawfulnes of any Decrees either of Pope, or Cardinals, which
are prejudicial to a third person, and especially to their temporal Prince,
and the whole kingdom, are bound for as much as by their natural wit, and
capacity they are able, to examine the matter, and not to be led blindfold
without sufficient reason, which may fully satisfy their understanding and
conscience. And this doctrine, which I have here in this digression set down,
is so sound, easy and perspicuous, that no learned man can take any just
exception thereat. Yet I have not set it down, for that it is necessary to
satisfy my Adversaries objections, which before I clearly answered, seeing
that neither the Pope by his Breues, nor the Cardinals of the Inquisition by
forbidding my books have defined, determined, or declared this doctrine of the
Popes power to depose Princes to be of faith, because there is no mention at
all made of this doctrine either in the Popes Breues, or in the aforesaid
Decree of the Cardinals; but I have set it down only for satisfaction and
instruction of the Catholic Reader that he be not led hood-winckt by the
gross ignorance of my unlearned Adversary T.F. who, as it seems, does not
know what heresy, or disobedience is, and yet pretends to be their guide and
director therein, but both of them may do well to remember that saying of our
Savior, Si caecus caeco ducatum praestet, ambo in foueam cadunt, If the blind
be guide to the blind both fall into the ditch. And by all this it is
evident, that I and other Catholics cannot any way be justly taxed of
disobedience for propounding to his Holiness with all humility the doubts and
reasons which we have, not to admit his Breues, which are so prejudicial to
his Majesty and our selves, and most humbly requesting him, that he will
satisfy and instruct us therein, but alas what little satisfaction we have
received from his Holiness you shall see beneath.

99 Now to return to my ignorant and uncharitable Adversary, who has
labored in vain to prove not only that I am disobedient and irreuerent to
the Sea Apostolic, but also an heretic disguised, and that my submission to
the Censure of the Catholic Roman Church proceeds from no other ground but
from a deep dissimulation or rather an artificial and execrable hypocrisy to
delude and deceive Catholics, and also that my meaning is to escape the
Censures of the Church by appealing from the Pope to a general Council, all
which how false and slanderous they are you have already seen: and yet we
read that the Doctors, and Catholics of Paris have diverse times appealed
from the Pope being not well informed and advised, to a future Council: now
this silly and unconscionable man will, forsooth, confirm his aforesaid rash
judgment of me concerning the last point of my appealing to a Council, by
the example of Luther, who at his first breach and disunion from the Church,
did, as all Anostataes and heretics are wont to do, appeal from the Pope to
a general Council.

100 This is manifest, says he, p. 220. nu. 17
even in Luther himself, who after he had begun to set abroach his heresy,
retained for a while the good opinion of many Catholics, with his pretense
still to reverence, and highly esteem the Popes authority insomuch that he
wrote to Pope Leo in these words: Quare, Beatissime Pater, Surius an. 1517
prostratum me pedibus tuae Beatitudinis offero, etc. Wherefore most holy
Father, I offer my self prostrate at the feet of your Holiness with all that
I have, or am: do you quicken, or kill, call or recall, approve or reprove,
as it shall please you, I will acknowledge your voice, as the voice of Christ
governing in you. So he; making, as you see a far greater, and more absolute
submission then Widdrington does, albeit within a while after being condemned
first by a Legate of the Pope, and after by the Pope himself, he appealed
first from the Legate to the Pope, and afterward from the Pope to a future
Council* and what became of him in the end the world has seen, and felt by
the bad fruits of his Apostacy; Ibid. anno 1519
Sed Deus meliora.

102 But first this silly man will not, as I suppose, find fault with Luther
for the humble submission he made to the Pope, but all that he can reprehend
in him, may be two things, the one is, that he did it not sincerely and from
his heart, which if it be so, as also it may be otherwise, I cannot but much
dislike such deep dissimulation; But for my own part I protest before
almighty God, that the submission I made of my self and all my writings to
the judgment and Censure of the Catholic Roman Church, I did it with all my
heart and without any dissimulation at all. The second may be, that he did
appeal afterward from the Pope to a future Council, which although I do not
intend ever to do, but will take patiently all the Censures, which shall be
imposed upon me, I will only appeal still to the Pope himself to inform
him better, and to make known to him and to the whole world my oppression and
the justice of my cause: yet neither Luther nor any other can be accounted an
heretic, Apostata, or Schismatike for appealing from the Pope to a future
Council upon a just cause, seeing it is well known, that the Masters,
Doctors, and the whole University of Paris did also appeal from the said
Pope Leo to a future Council: The copy of this Appeal which was made in the
year 1517. the 27. of March, is to be seen in Bochell. lib. 8. Decret.
Eccles. Gallic. cap. 8.
who were not therefore accounted heretics, Apostataes, Schismatikes, silly,
sick, scabbed or rotten sheep.

102 Secondly, Luther within two years after he began to publish his
doctrine, revolted wholly from the Catholic Roman Church, and renounced all
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, but since I began to write, there be seven
years fully expired, and yet I continue still in the unity of the Catholic
Roman Church, and do acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be my supreme
spiritual Pastor, Father, and Superior. And albeit my opinion be, that no
Catholic is bound to admit his Holiness Breues, forbidding Catholics to take
the Oath, and to obey his declaratiue commandment contained therein, for the
reasons signified before, which I humbly propounded to his Holiness, desiring
him most earnestly, as being our chief Pastor, Teacher, and Instructor, to
give us some satisfaction therein, yet I cannot therefore in the judgment of
any learned man be justly accounted a disobedient child to his Holiness,
seeing that it is evident, as I showed before out of Dominicus Sotus, that if a
Superior impos^ a commandment, whereby danger is feared to Religion, or to
the commonwealth, or to a third person, (as all the world knows, that the
forbidding of the Oath, is here in England prejudicial to Catholic Religion,
to his Majesty and the temporal State, and to all his Catholic subjects) if
the subject be doubtful, that such a danger will arise, he is not bound
forthwith to obey, but he may without any disobedience demand of his Prelate
a reason of his commandment, propounding humbly the reasons of his doubts.

103 Besides, Luthers doctrine was within two years condemned, not only in
general words, but also his propositions were specified in particular, both by
Pope Leo himself in his particular Bull concerning the same, and also by the
famous Universities of Paris, Louan, and Collen: But albeit two of my books
are by a particular decree of the Cardinal* forbidden in general, and I
commanded under pain of Censures to purge my self forthwith, yet they have
neither expressed any one proposition in particular, neither as yet can I get
them to name one proposition which is repugnant to faith or good manners,
although I have most earnestly requested to know the same, protesting from my
heart to be most ready to correct what is to be corrected to purge what is
to be purged to explain what is to be explained, and to retract what is to
be retracted: which their different proceeding against me and Luther does
plainly argue, that they have begun a work, which they cannot with their
reputation continue, and that there is no such dangerous doctrine contained in
my books, as Cardinal Bellarmine, against whom I did chiefly write, and who
is my accuser. Adversary and Judge, has by all likelihood informed them, and
would gladly to save his own credit, and that he has not falsely to his great
dishonor accused me and my doctrine of error, heresy, and of being no good
Catholic, would make the world believe, for which at the day of judgment he
shall render a strict account. And thus you see, that this comparison, which my
indiscreete Adversary has, to disgrace me, made betwixt me and Luther, does
nothing help, but greatly hurt his cause.

104 Now you shall see what a fraudulent and uncharitable observation he
gathers from hence. That which I wish, says he, Page 121. nu. 18. 19.
to be observed herein, is how little heed is to be taken to Widdringtons
submission of his writings to the Roman Church (he should have said Catholic
Roman Church) considering his doctrine, and the course he holds in the
maintaining thereof. For as Cicero said by Epicurus ( who wrote sometimes very
virtuously and thereby deceived many) it is not so much to be considered what
he writes, as what his grounds and principles are, and how well his writings
agree therewith; as for example what opinion he or any other has or can have
of the authority of the Sea Apostolic, who purposely impugneth the
jurisdiction thereof, contradicting (as I have showed sufficiently in this
Reply) the ancient and general practice of the Church, the express Canons
thereof, and the Decrees of Popes and General Counsels upon an absurd
supposition partly of a bare probability in his own doctrine, and partly of a
possibility of error in Decrees touching matters of fact, which he is not
ashamed to say of the Decree of the famous Ecumenical Council of Lateran,
albeit all Catholics do uniformly teach, that general Counsels lawfully
assembled and confirmed by the Pope, cannot err in any general Decree,
touching either faith or manners, as I have sufficiently signified before See
chap. 16. nu. 11. and 12.
Besides that, he uses the very objections, arguments, answers, shifts, and
euasions of heretics, discovering now and then such an arrogant, proud, and
malicious spirit toward the Sea Apostolic, that no zealous, Catholic can
read him without great disgust and indignation, or can take him for any other,
then an heretic disguised, and masked under the vizard of a Catholic.

105 But to answer the false and fraudulent observation, or rather shameful
calumniation of this malignant spirit, which he would gladly color with the
luster of a feigned, intemperate and Pharisaicall zeal to the Sea Apostolic,
I may rightly say to him as Saint Paul said to Elymas the Magician, O plene
omnidole and omnifallacia, Act. 13.
etc. O full of all guile, and of all deceit, etc. For to begin with his later
words, I do not use any other objections, arguments, and answers, then which
virtuous and learned Catholics haued used before me; neither do I discover
any arrogant, proud, or malicious spirit, toward the Sea Apostolic, whom I
reverence and respect with all my heart; only the plain truth, which
Catholic Doctors have said before me, and which oftentimes breeds enmity,
I do modestly, reverently, and without any flattery, which commonly procures
friends, ^^^downe. And this uncharitable and ignorant man might have done well
to have named some one particular shift, or euation, which I have used, and
which only heretics and no Catholics do use, or wherein I discover such an
arrogant, proud, and malicious spirit toward the Sea Apostolic, that no
zealous Catholic can read it without disgust and indignation, or take me for
any other, than an heretic disguished and masked under the vizard of a
Catholic. But this is a usual trick of slanderers and backbiters, to use
such general speeches, lest if they should descend to particulars, their
malicious and lying spirit would presently be discovered.

106 Secondly, this silly man cannot prove, that any one thing either
concerning my doctrine, and the grounds and principles thereof; or concerning
the course which I hold in the maintenance thereof, does not agree with the
submission I made of my writings to the censure and judgment of the Catholic
Roman Church. For I do not impugn any authority or jurisdiction, which the
Catholic Roman Church acknowledges as due to the Sea Apostolic, but I
impugn only the Popes authority to depose Princes, and to inflict temporal
punishment as a thing certain, and necessarily to be believed or maintained by
Catholics, for that the Catholic Church never acknowledged this authority to
be due to him; neither was this doctrine in the primitive Church, and for many
hundred years after by the ancient Fathers so much as dreamed on, but it has
been challenged and practiced by some Popes since the time of P. Gregory the
7. Res ante ea secula inaudita, A thing not heard of before that age, says
Onuphrius, which their practice and the doctrine thereof has nevertheless
been ever contradicted by Christian Princes and their Catholic subjects; and
therefore it cannot be rightly called the general practice of the Church nor
ancient, but in respect of this our age; not from that practice can any
sufficient argument be drawn to prove the doctrine to be certain, and of
faith, and that the contrary cannot be maintained by any Catholic without the
note of heresy, errors or temeritie: Neither do I contradict or impugn the
express Canons of the Church the decrees of Popes and general Councels and
especially of that famous Lateran Council but I expound them according to the
probable doctrine of learned Divines See above in the first part of this
Treatise. See above chap. 11. from nu. 3. and cha. 12. from nu. 56. and
Hostiensis upon the same Canon Per venerabilem.
, and exposition of the Canonists cited by Innotentius, Hostiensis, and Ioa^^r
Andreas upon the Canon Ad abolendam, and as the Gloss with those Doctors, whom
Hostiensis mentions and calls them Masters, understand the Canon Per
venerabitem, Qui sily sint legitims, and I impugn and contradict the doctrine
and expositions, which my Adversaries make of the Canons of the Church, and
especially of the Decree or Act of this famous Lateran Council.

107 Thirdly, that observation, which my spightfull Adversary urges against
me, may be also urged against Cardinal Bellarmine, and many other zealous and
learned Catholics, who notwithstanding their submission to the Catholic
Roman Church, yet they purposely impugn the authority and jurisdiction of
the Sea Apostolic, contradicting the Popes authority and dominion directly in
temporals, his power to dispense in certain vows, and in marriage which is
not consummated* to give leave to inferior Priests to minister the Sacrament
of Confirmation, to define infallibly without a general Council, etc. albeit
diverse Popes have practiced and maintained the contrary. And therefore if this
man's inference be good, little heed is to be taken to their submission of
their writings to the Catholic Roman Church, seeing that they purposely
impugn the authority and jurisdiction of the Sea Apostolic. But the plain
truth is, that little heed is to be taken to the writings of this ignorant and
uncharitable man, seeing that to prove me to be no other than an heretic
disguised and masked under the vizard of a Catholic, he brings such childish
and witless arguments* which may be retorted upon Cardinal Bellarmine, and
many other learned and zealous Catholics, who purposely impugn that authority
and jurisdiction, which some only* or a great part of Catholics, but not the
Catholic Church, or all Catholics do acknowledge as due to the Pope.

108 But now this uncharitable man at the last vpshot will not shoot at
random, as he has hitherto done, but he will, forsooth hit the very mark,
and will manifestly prove, that no zealous Catholic can take me for any
other, then an heretic disguised, and masked under the vizard of a Catholic.
And what more manifest argument, says he Page 222. number. 20.
can a man desire of the truth hereof, then that his Books are printed
Cosmopoli, and Albionopoli, that is to say in good English in London, with the
consent and approbation of my Lord of Canterbury, and his fellows? Can any man
persuade himself that their Lordships are turned Papists of late, or that they
would suffer books to be printed under the name of Catholics, with Epistles
dedicatorie to the Pope, and submission of the whole to the Censure of the
Roman Church, (he should have added also Catholic) if they did not know that
the Author thereof meant the same for a mere mockery and derision of his
Holiness, honoring him as the Jews did Christ, when they kneeled down, and
adored him, saying, Aue Rex Iudaeorum, and spitting in his face.

109 But although I am infinitely wronged and slandered by this uncharitable
man, in falsely accusing me of the greatest and most infamous crime that may be,
to wit, of heresy and Apostacy and bringing such ridiculous arguments to
prove the same, for the which at the day of judgment he has much to answer,
yet in very deed I do in some sort pity the silly man, for that before he
began to enter into this difficult controversy, wherein he showed himself to
have so little skill, he was of some account among English Catholics; and now
he has so much empaired, or rather quite lost that credit and good estimation
they had of him, by discovering so grossly his great want not only of
Theological learning, but also of moral honesty. The like uncharitable
proceeding, and upon the like uncharitable and frivolous grounds, this zealous
Father used against the Appellant Priests, in the time of Pope Clement the
eight, to disgrace them with his Holiness, as having intelligence with the
State, and to be no good Catholics, etc. but the effect has proved, and Pope
Clement also to the confusion of my backebiting Adversary, and his adherents
has confirmed, and which also I make no doubt, but that his Holiness, and all
the world will ere it be long see and acknowledge concerning their course taken
against me, that Mentita est iniquitas sibi, Iniquity has belide it self.

110 Mark now upon what goodly principles he relyeth, to prove me to be no
other then a heretic disguised and masked under the vizard of a Catholic. My
books, says he, are printed at London, with the consent and approbation of my
Lord of Canterbury, and his fellowet. Be it so: therefore from hence we may
very well conclude, that all English Catholics are infinitely bound to his
Majesty, and the State, who albeit by reason of that execrable Gunpowder plot,
and the damnable grounds, and principles from whence it was derived, might have
taken a fit occasion to repute all Catholics, without any distinction or
difference of persons, to be capital enemies to his Majesty, and his
temporal State, and to persuade themselves, and all the Protestant Subjects of
the Realm, that no true and constant Roman Catholic, can be a true and
constant subject to his Majesty, yet his Majesty and the State, out of their
most gracious favor and clemency were contented, to permit his Catholic
subjects, to clear themselves if they could, of this most foul imputation so
dangerous to themselves, and so scandalous to their Religion, and to make
known to the whole world, that according to the true grounds and principles of
Catholic Religion, his Majesty might be assured, that they might continue
both his true, obedient, and constant subjects in all temporal affairs, by
virtue of the natural bond of their temporal allegiance, which the Pope has
not power to dissolve, and also dutiful children of the Catholic Roman
Church, and of his Holiness in all spiritual matters, among which the
deposing of Princes, and the disposing of temporals, are not, according to the
doctrine of learned Catholics, to be numbered.

111 And for this cause, and upon this motive, as I conjecture, his Majesty
and the State suffered us to write like Catholics of this point, and according
to the grounds and principles of the Catholic Religion which we profess, and
to submit our writings to the Censure and judgment of the Catholic Roman
Church, and to dedicate them to his Holiness, to the end they might see, what
he or other Catholics would, or could except against our doctrine. But this
fradulent and uncharitable man, who like the diligent and careful Be, might,
as you have seen, from this permission, consent, or approbation of his
Majesty and the State, gather honey to comfort the afflicted hearts of
distressed Catholics, and to appease, and mollify the wrath, indignation, and
bad opinion of his Majesty, and the whole kingdom conceived against us, by
reason of that most horrible and abominable Powder Treason plotted and
attempted by Catholics, does like the crafty and malignant serpent, gather
from thence poison to inflict and afflict the hearts of his Catholic
Contrymen, and to exasperate his Majesty and the State against himself,
and other Catholics, and to increase the indignation and bad opinion, which
the whole Realm has conceived against us, wherein he discovers his ill
affected mind toward his Majesty, and his great want of charity toward his
afflicted brethren.

112 But let us go on and see his childish collection: For can any man, says
he, persuade himself, that their Lordships are turned Papists of late, or that
they would suffer books to be printed under the name of Catholics, with
Epistles dedicatory to the Pope, and submission of the whole, to the Catholic
Roman Church, if they did not know that the Author thereof meant the same for
a mere mockery and derision of his Holiness, honoring him as the Jews did
Christ, when they kneeled down, and adored him, saying, Aue Rex Iudaeorum, and
spitting in his face?

113 It is very true, that no reasonable man can persuade himself, that their
Lordships, and the State are turned Papists of late, for permitting Catholics
to free themselves, from this scandalous and slanderous imputation, which this
ignorant and uncharitable man, and his fellows would lay upon them, and to
suffer their books to be printed under the name of Catholics, with Epistles
dedicatory to the Pope, and submission of the whole to the Catholic Roman
Church; as likewise no reasonable man can persuade himself, that Bishop
Bancroft, and the State were turned Papists, for permitting the Apellant
Priests to defend their innocence, and to free themselves from so many
scandalous and slanderous crimes, which this uncharitable fellow, with Fa.
Parsons and his adherents did object against them, and to suffer their books
to be printed under the name of Catholics, and some of them to be dedicated to
the Pope, and to the Cardinals of the Inquisition, and with submission of the
whole to the Censure of the Catholic Roman Church; and also for furthering
their Appeal, by releasing some out of prison for that purpose, and by letters
moving the king of France in their behalf, that he would be a means to his
Holiness, that their cause might be heard, and they not to be oppressed
through the potency of their Auersaries in the Court of Rome, and that if they
were wronged they might be freed of those slanderous imputations, and if
faulty, they might accordingly be censured; for which favors those Priests,
and all their adherents were bound to give most hearty thanks to her Majesty
and the State, by whose means they made known to the world their innocence
and oppression, to the everlasting shame and discredit of their Adversaries,
who in the like manner do now proceed against me, and other Catholics, who
are desirous to make manifest to all the world their dutiful allegiance, which
they owe to God, and Caesar, and which their violent and uncharitable
proceeding I make no doubt, but in the end will turn to their great shame and
confusion, for truth and innocence, although for a time it may be oppressed,
will in the end prevail.

114 Wherefore any man may persuade himself, that his Majesty and the State
still remaining Protestants, may for many good reasons permit such books of
Catholics, which clearly prove that no Protestant Prince can, according to
the doctrine of learned Catholics, be deposed by the Pope, to be printed under
the name of Catholics, with Epistles dedicatory to the Pope, and submission of
the whole to the Censure of the Catholic Roman Church, yet knowing that the
Author thereof meant the same truly and sincerely, and not for a mere
mockery and derision of his Holiness, etc. as my Adversary falsely and
childishly infers: which his inference, as I signified elsewhere may be
retorted against Cardinal Bellarmine, who impugneth the Popes direct authority
and dominion in temporals and yet he dedicated his book to the Pope, and
submitted the whole to his Censure, belike honoring him as the Jews did
Christ, when they kneeled down, and adored him saying Aue Rex ludaeorum, and
spitting in his face. A chife and principal reason, why the State may
prudently permit some books of Catholics to be printed in the aforesaid
manner, may be thereby to know truly and unfeignedly, whether Catholic
religion, and temporal subjection to a Prince of another Religion, true
spiritual obedience of Catholic subjects to the Pope, and true temporal
allegiance of the said Catholic subjects to a King, who acknowledges no such
spiritual obedience to the Pope may stand together; and how far the Popes
authority, by the institution of Christ, does according to the grounds of
Catholic Religion, extend in temporal affairs, to wit, whether to the
deposing of heretical, or wicked Princes, to the disposing of all temporalls,
and to the inflicting of all temporal punishments, in order to spiritual
good, or only to the inflicting of Ecclesiastical or spiritual Censures.

115 For what man of judgment can deny, that it is very necessary for his
Majesty considering the Religion which he professes, to know how far he may
be assured of the unfeigned and constant loyalty of his Catholic subjects, and
how far he may prudently permit, tolerate, or favor them when occasion shall
require, without any probable danger of new gunpowder plots, or other
innouations or conspiracies against the State, to be attempted by them
publicly, or secretly, with the express or tacit commandment, or license of
the Pope? Other reasons may be alleged, which may move the State to suffer my
books to be printed in the aforesaid manner: one may be, a tender
commiseration of distressed Catholics, who for yielding their temporal
allegiance to his Majesty, as he by the new Oath has required at their hands,
and making known to the whole world the lawfulness thereof, even according to
the grounds of Catholic Religion, are slandered and defamed, as being no good
Catholics but heretics, disguis^d and masked under the Vizards of
Catholics, which might move his Majesty and the State, to take compassion of
them, and to suffer them to make their innocence and oppression known to the
whole world, in that manner they should think fittest, being so infinitely
wronged for his Majesty's sake in yielding him that temporal allegiance, which
he requires, and they in their consciences think to be due to him.

116 An other reason, may be a willingness in his Majesty, and the State to
have plainly discovered to the whole world, the different grounds and
principles in things concerning obedience due to God and Caesar, etwixt
Catholics of quiet disposition, and in all other things good subjects, and
such other Catholics, as in their hearts maintain the like violent bloody
maxims that the Powder-Traytors did: and a desire that his Catholic subjects
would plainly let him see, that in all temporal affairs they would and might
lawfully, according to the grounds of Catholic Religion adhere to him,
notwithstanding any authority, by which the Pope might pretend to command them
the contrary, whereby himself, and his State might be the better secured
from all perturbations, which might arise from thence, and they also freed from
most grievous penalties, which otherwise would be imposed upon them.

117 And if the Pope should upon some occasion offered, be desirous to know,
how the Jews that are borne and live in his temporal Dominions, stand
affected toward him in point of their civil loyalty and due obedience, and
whether they thought, that their Chief Priest, or Synagogue, had according to
the grounds of their Religion, authority, to absolve them from the bond of
their natural allegiance, and for that cause should suffer books to be
printed under the name of Jews, with Epistles dedicatory to their chief
Priests, and submission of the whole to the censure of their Synagogue; or if
the French King should for some good respects be desirous to know the like
concerning his Protestant subjects, and thereupon suffer books to be printed,
under the name of Protestants, with Epistles dedicatory to their chief
Ministers, and submission of the whole to their Congregation, or Synod, would
not any man think it to be both a manifest slander, and childish inference,
to conclude from hence, that either the Pope was turned Jew, or the King of
France become a Protestant, for suffering such books to be printed in that
manner, or that therefore they knew the Authors of them meant the same for a
mere mockery and derision of their chief Priests, Ministers, or Synodes,
honoring them as the Jews did Christ, when they kneeled down, and adored
him, saying, Aue Rex Iudaeorum, and spitting in his face. And yet these are the
manifest arguments, which this uncharitable and ignorant fellow obiecteth
against me to prove me an heretic disguised and masked under the vizard of a
Catholic.

118 An other Argument of the like kind urges against mean other as foul a
mouthed and uncharitable Adversary of mine, to wit, that my books are printed
without license and approbation of Catholic Superiors, contrary to the
decrees of the Lateran Council under Pope Leo the tenth, and also of the
Council of Trent. But, besides that this is more then this man does know, or
can sufficiently prove, it is well known, that neither that Lateran Council,
nor the Council of Trent were ever authentically received here in England;
whereupon clandestine marriage, which by a decree of the Council of Trent is
made inualide, is here in England even among Catholics accounted a true and
valid marriage. Moreover, it is well known, that according to the doctrine of
many learned Divines, which I have related else where, In Disp. Theol. cap. 10.
sec. 2. nu. 41.
Ecclesiastical laws do not bind, when there is danger of some great
temporal harm by the observing of them; or when some other necessity to
avoid great scandal, or danger to Religion, or the temporal commonwealth, to
know the truth in a thing necessary to the great temporal or spiritual good
or harm of many persons impugned by craft and violence, and to defend himself
and his credit from the slanderous reports of uncharitable Adversaries, and
such like necessities, which are commanded or permitted by the law of God and
nature, all which may by any man of judgment be applied to the books written
by me.

119 Besides that, says Mr. Fitzherbert, Page 222. nu. 20. and 21.
their Lordships know full well, that Widdrington shall more easily instill his
pernicious doctrine into the minds of Catholics, under the pretense and name
of a Catholic, of a friend, and of a brother of theirs, then if he should
discover himself to be a Protestant, and enemy of their cause, for as the Poet
says, Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen,
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.


Which one translated very aptly thus: It is a safe and common way by
friendship to deceive,
Though safe and common be the way, it is knavery by your leave.


S. Ambrose says, Nihil periculosius his haereticis esse potest, etc. S.
Ambros de filij diuvnt. c. 1.
Nothing can be more dangerous then those heretics, who with some one word
only, as with a drop of poison, do infect the pure and sincere faith of our
Lord, and of the Apostolical tradition. But what would he have said, if he had
seen this fellows books impugning directly the Sea Apostolic, and the whole
course of the Ecclesiastical government under a solemn protestation and
profession of obedience to the Church? would he have thought any thing more
dangerous, or pernicious then him, and his works? No truly.

120 That which his Majesty and the State might very well know (for their
secret thoughts and intentions we cannot know but by conjecture) was this; that
Catholics would hardly believe or read the writings and books of
Protestants, in matters which may be thought to concern Religion: And
therefore to the end his Catholic, subjects might plainly see and discern
according to the grounds of Catholic Religion, the true difference betwixt
spiritual obedience due to the Pope, and temporal allegiance due to himself,
and the proper acts and objects of either of them, and thereby might the more
easily be drawn to give him that temporal allegiance, which he requires at
their hands: And that also all other Catholics of other Countries might
perceive the lawfulness of the Oath, against which the Jesuits especially did
so greatly exclaim, and upon what doctrine and principles his Majesty grounded
the same; and also that he himself might certainly know, what particular
exceptions his Holiness would or could take against any clause of the Oath,
and what one thing in particular therein contained is contrary to faith and
salvation, as his Holiness had in general in his Breues affirmed, that many
things were therein clearly repugnant thereunto, his Majesty thought it not
amiss to suffer my books to be printed under the name of a Catholic, with
Epistles dedicatory to the Pope, and with submission of the whole to the
censure of the Catholic Roman Church in that manner as books are usually
printed by Catholics.

And if S. Ambrose, or any other of the ancient Fathers were now alive, and
should see books of certain Catholics directly impugning the Sovereign
power and authority of Kings, and absolute that Princes (whom they did so
highly honor and reverence, affirming them to be inferior in temporals to none
but God alone) under pretense of zeal to the Sea Apostolic, and subiecting
them to the coerciue temporal power of spiritual Pastors, whereas their
general doctrine was, that with temporal punishments they are not to be
punished, but by God alone, and broaching by violence and without sufficient
ground, with scandal to Catholic Religion, and contrary to the example of
Christ and his Apostles, and the whole primitive Church, new articles of faith
in prejudice of temporal authority; and not permitting any man either to call
their new faith in question, or for his better instruction, or discussion of
the controversy to propound any difficulty against the same, with a desire to
be satisfied therein, albeit he submit himself and all his writings to the
censure of the Catholic Roman Church, but with open mouth crying out against
him, and calling him an heretic disguised and masked under the vizard of a
Catholic: what would S. Ambrose, trow you, or any other of the ancient
Fathers, if they were now alive, say of such Catholics? Truly that nothing can
be more dangerous then such Catholics, who under pretense of zeal to
Catholic religion, and to the Sea Apostolic, invent new articles of faith, in
prejudice of Christian Princes, by wresting many places of the holy Scriptures,
as Quodcunque solueris, Pasce oues meas, Secularia iudicia si habueritis, etc.
to a sense not dreamed of by the ancient Fathers, by reason of their potency in
the Court of Rome, and their favor with his Holiness, whose authority they
pretend to advance, unjustly persecuting those that discover their manifest
frauds and falsehoods.

122 Lastly, that which Mr. Fitzherbert obiecteth here against me, migh
Bartholus, Carerius, and other Canonists obiecteth against Cardinal
Bellarmines book, directly impugning the authority of the Sea Apostolic under
a solemn protestation and profession of obedience to the Church. But the
plain truth is, that neither of us both do impugn that authority whiCh is
certainly known and acknowledged by all Catholics to belong to the Sea
Apostolic, but as he impugneth the direct power of the Pope to dispose of
temporalls, for that there is no sufficient ground to prove the same, albeit
some Popes have challenged the same as due to them, and some Canonists affirm,
that it is heretical to deny the same, so I impugn the doctrine of Cardinal
Bellarmine, who holds, that it is certain, and a point of faith, that the
Pope has at least wise an indirect power to dispose of all temporals, and
consequently to depose temporal Princes in order to spiritual good, for that
there is no sufficient ground to confirm the same.

123 And the like argument might Mr. Fitzherbert urge against all those learned
Catholics, who constantly deny the Pope to have authority to dispense in any
true and lawful marriage which is not consummated (notwithstanding so many
practices of Popes to the contrary) impugning directly the Sea Apostolic, and
the whole course of Ecclesiastical government, under a solemn protestation
and profession of obedience to the Church. For Saint Antoninus does of affirm,
Antonin. 3. part. tit. 1. cap. 21. 3. Caiet tom. 1. opusc. trac. 28. de Matrim.
q. vnica. Nauar. in Manual. cap. 22. nu. 21. Henriq. lib. 11. de matrim. cap.
8. nu. 11. in Com. lit. F. Sot. in 4. did. 27. q. 1. ar. 4.
that he saw the Bulls of Pope Martin the fifth, and Pope Eugenius the
fourth, who dispensed therein: and Card. Caietane relates, that in his time
Popes did oftentimes dispense therein: and Nauar affirms, that Pope Paulus
the third, and Pope Pius the fourth did dispense therein three or four times
by his Counsel and advise. And Henriquez the Jesuit says, that Pope Gregory
the thirteenth did in one day dispense therein with eleven persons: Whereupon
Dominicus Sotus; although he submits himself, and all his writings to the
Censure of the Church, is not afraid, notwithstanding this often practice of
Popes, which my ignorant Adversary calls the practice of the Church, to say
that those Popes erred therein, following the Canonists opinion, which he
affirms to have in it no show of probability: And why then may it not be
said in like manner, that his Holiness condemning the Oath as containing in it
many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, followed Cardinal
Bellarmines opinion, and other Divines of Rome, who hold, that the Popes power
to excommunicate, and inflict Censures is denied in the Oath, and that the
doctrine, for the Popes power to depose Princes, which is denied in the Oath,
is certain and of faith, which their doctrine in my opinion has in it no show
of probability at all even according to those rules, which Cardinal
Bellarmine himself requires to make any doctrine of Pope, or general
Council to be of faith. Whereby is plainly discovered the manifest fraud and
ignorance of my uncharitable Adversary in affirming my doctrine to be
heretical, and my self to be an heretic disguised and masked under the
vizard of a Catholic, for denying the doctrine for the Popes power to depose
Princes to be of faith, whereas, even according to the rules which Cardinal
Bellarmine requires to make a matter of faith, he cannot bring any one
argument, Which has so much as a show of probability to convince the same.

124 Mark now the fraudulent Admonition, which. Mr. Fitzherbert gives to his
Catholic Reader, under pretense, forsooth of sincerity, and the fervent zeal
he has of his souls health. And therefore I hope, says he, Page 223. nu. 22.
thou will be wary (good Catholic Reader) and diligent to discover
Widdringtons fraud thereby to avoid the danger of his poisoned pen, pondering
all this matter in the just balance of prudence, that is to say, that thou will counterpoise his vain pretense of probability, not only with the grave
and sacred authority of the Churches practice for many ages, but also with the
Canons of general and Provincial Counsels with the Decrees of Popes, and
with clear doctrine of so many famous, and learned Writers as he impugneth.
Also that thou will weigh his presumption in defending and justifying the Oath,
with the judgment and authority of thy supreme Pastor, who condemns and
forbids it, the pretended force and soliditie of his doctrine and arguments,
with the ridiculous absurdities, which thou have evidently seen in his
answers to me; outward shows of affection to thee, and desire of thy good,
with the inward intelligence he has with Gods enemies, and thine (who employ
him to deceive thee, serving themselves of him, as Fowlers do of birds, which
they keep in Cages for stalles, to draw other birds with their chirping into
their nets and snares.) Also that thou will balance thy obligation to man,
with thy duty to God, and the loss of thy temporal goods, with the gain of
everlasting glory, from the which the Devil seeks by his means to debar
thee, and therefore I wish thee ever to bear in mind this comfortable lesson
of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.
Quod momentaneum and leave est tribulationis nostrae aeternum gloriae pondus
operatur in nobis.

125 But on the contrary side, I hope thou will be wary (good Catholic
Reader) and diligent, first to discover the manifest fraud and falsehood of this
unlearned and uncharitable man, thereby to avoid the danger of his slanderous
and poisoned pen, in propounding to thee a new article of faith so prejudicial
to the supreme authority of temporal Princes, so dangerous to thy own
spiritual and temporal good, so repugnant to the example and practice of
Christ and his Apostles and of the whole primitive Church, unknown to the
ancient Fathers, until the time of Pope Gregory the seventh, which at the
first broaching thereof, was branded with the mark of nouelty: This nouelty
not to say heresy, Sigeb. ad ann. 1080. Onuph. lib. 4. de varia creat. Romans
Pont.
says Sigebert, A thing unheard of before that age, says Onuphrius; and
lastly, not confirmed by any one argument, which has any show of a probable
proof to confirm, even according to Cardinal Bellarmines grounds, any
doctrine, which has been in controversy among learned Catholics, to be
certain and of faith, and the contrary to be heretical.

126 Secondly, that thou will ponder all this matter in the just balance of
prudence, that is to say, that thou will counterpoise his vain pretended
Catholic faith, newly broached in the Christian world, and the childish and
ridiculous arguments brought to convince the same, with the example of Christ
and his Apostles, with the practice of the primitive Church, with the doctrine
of the ancient Fathers with the authority of learned Catholics, who were never
accounted heretics, or ill belieuers, for impugning the same.

127 Thirdly, that thou will call to mind, what is required, even according to
Cardinal Bellarmines grounds, to make a matter of faith, so that all
Catholics are bound to believe the same, and that all the Acts even of
general Counsels do not appertain to faith, but only the bare Decrees, and
those not all, but those only, which are propounded, as of faith. See also
Estius in Praefat epist. ad Hebraeos. Where also he affirms it to be
probable, that David did not make all the 150. Psalms, although the Council
of Trent in the Decree of Canonical Scriptures expressly mentions, David's
Psalter of a 150. Psalms.
Whereby thou may plainly see, that he has brought no one argument, which
has any color of a probable proof; drawn either from the practice of some
Popes, which he falsely and fraudulently calls the practice of the Church, or
from any Canon, or Decree of Pope, or general Council, or from any other
authority whatsoever to prove this doctrine of the Popes power to depose
Princes, to be a point of faith; and that the Council of Lateran does neither
treat of the deposition of absolute Princes, nor propound the doctrine,
whereof it treats, as of faith.

128 Fourthly, that thou will consider the doctrine of Sotus before rehearshed,
not only concerning the Popes dispensations in lawful and valide matrimony,
when carnal copulation does not follow, so often practiced by diverse Popes,
which nevertheless he impugneth, as not having any show of probability, but
also touching the duty of subjects toward their Superiors, when they command
any thing which is prejudicial to a third person* and the Subject is doubtful
of the lawfulness thereof: Whereby thou will clearly perceive, that it is no
presumption to reject the judgment of his Superior, albeit he be our supreme
Pastor, when it is contrary to the judgment of other learned Catholics, or
not to obey his declaratiue commandment grounded thereon, especially humbly
propounding to him the reasons of his doubts: Neither is it more presumption
for any man to say, that the Pope was deceived in his Breues, following the
doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine, and some other Divines of Rome* who hold it a
matter of faith, that the Pope has authority to depose temporal Princes,
seeing that many learned Catholics have ever maintained the contrary, then it
was for Sotus, and many others of his opinion to say, that all those Popes that
dispensed in the aforesaid Marriages were deceived, following the doctrine of
the Canonists.

129 Fifthly, that thou will weigh my sound Replies and plain dealing, in
propounding to thee sincerely the true state of every difficulty, and omitting
nothing which he obiecteth against me, with his childish and ridiculous
arguments, and answers, and false and fraudulent proceeding, in seeking to
confound thy understanding with general and ambiguous words, and which have
diverse senses, which he omitteth to explain, and in urging those arguments,
which I my self objected and concealing the answers, which I made thereunto:
and in imposing upon me many untruths, thereby to make some show of impugning
my answers; and in particular concerning the Lateran Council, which he so
often says I do impugn, and then especially when I make no mention at all
thereof, whereas it is manifest, that I do not at any time impugn that Decree
or Act, but the exposition, which he and some others make thereof, and I do
expound it according to the grounds and principles of learned Catholics, both
Divines and Lawyers. Also that thou will balance thy duty toward God, with
thy obedience due to Caesar, and render to either of them that which is their
due; neither for fear of disgrace, humane respect, or any other temporal
loss thou will so adhere to the Pope, as to renounce thy allegiance due to thy
temporal Prince, from which the Devil by my Adversaries means under pretense
of zeal to the Sea Apostolic seeks to draw thee. And therefore I wish thee
ever to bear in mind the express commandent of our Savior, Matthew. 22.
Render the things that are Caesar's to Caesar, and the things that are Gods, to
God: and for thy more particular direction herein, especially to remember that
vnboubted principle of Fa. Lessius, which above in the Preface, nu. 15. 16.
I did also recommend to thy memory, A power, which is not most certain, but
probable, cannot be a ground, or foundation to punish any man, or to deprive
him of his right and dominion, De Regulis Iuris in 6o. and ff. de Regulis Iuris
In pari causa.
which he really possesses: for that according to the approved maxim both of
the Canon and Civil law, In a doubtful or disputable case, the state or
condition of the possessor is to be preferred.

130 Lastly, to that which this spiteful man obiecteth against me concerning
my inward intelligence with Gods enemie^, etc. thereby to discredit me with
Catholics, and to draw their affection from me, and to make them believe,
that I am a Spy, and have intelligence with the State to seek the overthrow
of Catholics I answer, that it is a most uncharitable and malicious slander.
For I call God to witness, that I neither began, nor do continue to write of
this dangerous and difficult question at the motion, instigation, counsel, or
advise of any Protestant whatsoever, but upon my own free will and motion,
after long deliberation had concerning all the dangers and difficulties which
were like to befall me thereby, merely and sincerely for the love of God, of
my Prince, and Country and a desire to know the truth in this important
question which so nearly concerns our obedience due to God and Caesar, as I
solemnly and sincerely protested in the Preface of my first book.

131 And as for my intelligence with the State, I do sincerely protest, and
call God to be both a witness and Revenger, if it be not true, that, albeit
I have been sent for sometimes to my Lord of Canterburies Grace, and other
times (although but seldom) have gone unto him of my own accord about my own
particular affairs, and should have gone oftener for diverse respects, but that
I thought it best to abstain, that such slanderous backbyters should not take
occasion, thereby to make greater clamours against me, yet I never gave any
intelligence or information against any Catholic man whatsoever, that might
be to him the least prejudice in the world, albeit I have had sometimes both
fit occasion, and just cause, and which in my conscience I might lawfully have
done in defense of my own good name, to seek redress against some
uncharitable persons, who have most unconscionably wronged me, and sought my
overthrow, who although they be of great account among Catholics, yet if the
truth were known, they would be most odious to all men for their execrable
dissimulation, and unchristian carriage: Nevertheless I thought it best to
remit my innocie and the justice of my cause, to almighty God, who in due time
will be a just Judge, and a severe Revenger, hoping that my patience might in
time be an occasion of their repentance. Yet I do freely confess and
acknowledge that I am infinitely bound to his Majesty, to my Lord of
Canterbury and diverse others of high place and degree, (although I have never
spoken with them) for many special favors, among which I account this not to
be the least, that they have graciously been pleased to suffer Catholics to
make known to the world their unfeigned loyalty, and how much they detest that
horrible and most abominable Powder Treason, and the bloody grounds and
principles thereof, for all which their favors and benefits, I will ever pray
for their eternal and temporal happiness, and account my self unable, to
give them sufficient thanks for the same. And truly I do wish with all my
heart, that all Catholics would give such outward tokens of their true and
inward loyalty, and sincere affection toward his Majesty and the State, that
they might deserve to receive some comfortable favor at their hands.

132 Now for a final conclusion Mr. Fitzherbert will bring a more authentical
testimony and judgment, then his own, concerning my self and my writings,
to wit, the forbidding of two books of mine by a Decree of the Cardinals of
the Inquisition, which nevertheless, as you shall see, is rather a virtuall
confirmation, then any condemnation of my doctrine. And now to conclude, says
he, Page 224. nu. 23. and 24.
with a more authentical testimony, and judgment, then my own, concerning
Widdrington and his works, I think good to give thee here a true copy of a
Decree very lately printed, and published by a Congregation of Cardinals,
deputed by his Holiness for the examination of suspected books, who by his
Holiness express order and commandment have condemned and prohibited such
books of his, as have hitherto come to their hands, to wit, his Apology and
Theological Disputation. For although they find by a certain Preface annexed
to his Theol. Dispu. that he has written also an other book against an
English Doctor, yet because they have never seen it, they have not expressly,
and separately censured, or named it in the Decree; nevertheless the subject
thereof being such, as by the Preface it seems to be (that is to say,
containing the same doctrine them he has delivered in his other a books) all
Catholics may easily judge, what opinion they ought to have of it, and may
justly expect, that if he be a Catholic, as he professes to be, he will
now show it, not only changing privately his opinion, but also publicly
retracting his doctrine, with all convenient speed thereby to clear himself,
according to an express admonition given him in the said Decree, upon pain of
such Ecclesiastical Censures, as shall otherwise be inflicted upon him.

133 The Copy of the Decree is this.
DEcretum Sacra Conregationis Illustrissimorum S.R.E. Cardinalium a S. D. N.
Paulo Quinto, Sanctaque Sede Apostolica ad Indicem librorum eorundemquc
permissionem, prohibitionem, expurgationem, and impressionem in vniuersa
Republica Christiana specialiter deputatorum vbique publicandum.
Sacra Congregatio Illustrissimorum S. R. E. Cardinalium ad Iudicem
deputatorum, viso libro falso inscripto, Apologia Cardinalis Bellarminij pru
Iure Principum, aduersus suas ipsius rations pro authoritate Papali Principes
Seculares in ordine ad bonum spirituale depon^ndi; Authore Rogero Widdringtono
Catholico Anglo 1611. eiusdemque Authoris alio libro inscripto, Disputatio
Theologica de Iuramento Fidelitatis Sanctissimo Patri Paulo Papae V. dedicata,
Albionopoli 1613. vtrumque librum damnandum, atque prohibendum esse censuit;
sicuti de mandato Sanctissimi Domini nostri D. Pauli Papae V. prefenti decreto
penitus damnat, and prohibet quouis idiomate impressium, aut imprimendum; ac
nisi illorum Author, qui se Catholicum profiteur, quam primum se purgauerit,
censuris ac alijs paenis Ecclesiasticis intelligat se omnino coercendum. Mandat
autem, quod nullus deniceps cuiuscunque gradus and conditionis sub paenis in
Sacro Concilio Tridentino, and in Indice librorum prohibitorum contentis,
supradictos libros audeat imprimere, aut imprimi durare, vel quomodocunque apud
se detinere, aut legere, and subijsdem paenis praecipit, vt quicunque nunc eos
habent, vel habuerint in futurum, locorum Ordinarijs, seu Inquisitoribus statim
a presentis decreti notitia illos exhibeant.

In quorum fidem praesens decretum manu, and sigillo Illustrissimi, and
Reuerendissimi Domini D. Cardinalis S. Ceciliae, Episcopi Albanensis signatum,
and munitum fuit, die 16. Martij 1614. P. Episcopus Albanensis Candinalis S.
Cecilia
Locus Sigilli. Reg. fol. 50.

Fr. Thomas Pallauicinus Ordinis Praedicatorum, Secretarius.



Romae, ex Typographia Camerae Apostolicae. 1614.

A Decree.
TO be published every where made by the Sacred Congregation of the most
Honorable Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, specially deputed by our most
holy Lord Pope Paul the fifth, and the holy Apostolic Sea, for the examination
of books, and their permission, prohibition, purgation, and impression
throughout the universal Christian Commonwealth.
The Sacred Congregation of the most Honorable Cardinals of the holy Roman
Church, deputed for the examination of books, having seen a book falsely
entitled, An Apology of Cardinal Bellarmine for the right of Princes,
against his own reasons for the Popes authority to depose Secular Princes in
order to spiritual good, written by Roger Widdrington an English Catholic, in
the year of our Lord 1611. and another book of the same Author, entitled, A
Theological Disputation concerning the Oath of Allegiance, dedicated to the
most holy Father Pope Paul the fifth, Printed at Albinopolis in the year of our
Lord 1613. has judged both the books worthy to be condemned and prohibited,
and by the commandment of our most holy Lord Pope Paul the fifth, does by this
present Decree utterly condemn, and prohibit them in what language soever
they are printed, or to be printed; and except the Author of them, who
professes himself to be a Catholic, do clear himself forthwith, he is
to understand, that he shall be thoroughly punished with Censures, and other
Ecclesiastical penalties. Furthermore it commands under the penalties
contained in the holy Council of Trent, and the Index of forbidden books,
that none of what degree, or condition soever, be so bold from henceforth to
print the foresaid books, or cause them to be printed or keep them with him
in any sort, or read them. Also it commands under the same penalties, that
whosoever has them now, or shall have them hereafter, he shall presently
upon the knowledge of this present Decree exhibit them to the Ordinaries of
the places (where he is) or to the Inquisitours.

In testimony whereof this present Decree was signed, and sealed with the hand
and seal of the most Honorable and most Reverend Lord, the Lord Cardinal of
S. Caecila Bishop of Alba the 16. of March. 1614. P. Bishop of Alba Cardinal
of S. Caecilia.
The place for the seal. Regist. fol. 50.

Fr. Thomas Pallauicinus of the Order of the Preachers, Secretary.



Printed in Rome by the Printer of the Apostolical Chamber. 1614.

134 To this Decree may be added a Letter, which the Popes Nuncius in
Flaunders wrote from Bruxels to Mr. George Birket then Archpriest, touching my
Theological Disputation, dedicated to his Holiness; the Copy whereof is this.

Admodum Reverend Domine vti frater in Christo dilectissime.
PEruenit in vrbem Disputatio Theologica de Iuramento Fidelitatis, tertium sub
Widdringtoni nomine evulgatum opus. Ibi cum diligenter examinatum sit,
declarauit Sanctissimus D. N. nullo modo se dicti operis dedicationem
acceptare, and illius Authorem neque Ecclesiae filium, neque Catholicum
existimare, omnesque insuper Catholicos ab illius lectione abstinere prorsus
debere. De his ante paucos dies per Sanctae Romanae Inquisitionis
Congregationis literas, de mandato suae Sanctitatis edoctus sum, vt de ijsdem
ad Dominationem tuam imprimis scriberem, quo eadem istic Catholicis significes,
ac pro tua prudentia innotescere cures. Deus Dominationem tuam Coelesti sua
custodia muniat. Bruxellis 26. Nouembr. 1613.

Admodum Reuerendae Dominationis tuae

Amantissimus and studiosus.

Very Reverend Sir, and as a Brother most beloved in Christ.
THere came into the City of Rome a Theological Disputation, concerning the
Oath of Allegiance, the third work published under the name of Widdrington.
After it was there diligently examined, our most Holy Lord declared, that he in
no wise accepted the Dedication of the said Work, and that he thought the
Author thereof to be neither a child of the Church, nor a Catholic; and
moreover, that all Catholics should abstain from the reading thereof. Of
these things I was certified some few days since by Letters of the
Congregation of the Holy Roman Inquisition, by the commandment of his
Holiness, to the end that first of all I should write thereof to your
Reverence, that you may signify the same to Catholics there, according to
your wisdom to make it known to them. God defend your Reverence with his
heavenly custody. From Bruxels the 26. of Nouemb. 1613.

Of your Reverence most loving and respective.

135 Now from this Decree Mr. Fitzh. concludes this last Chapter, and his
whole Reply in this manner. So as, says he Page 225. number. 25. and 26.
, I hope (Catholic Reader) thou shall shortly be out of all doubt of what
Religion Widdrington is; for if now, after that this controversy of the Oath
has been many years debated, and discussed by the learned Catholics of
diverse Nations, and determined by two Apostolical Breues, yea, and that his
own Books written in defense of the Oath, are condemned by his Holiness, and
he himself peremptorily admonished under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures,
to clear and conform himself without further delay; if now, I say, after all
this he will pretend (as hitherto he has done) that his Holiness is still
ignorant of the true state of the question, or that he is deceived and deluded
by others; or else if he seek other new shifts, euasions, or delays to
excuse, or defer his conformity to the judgment of his supreme Pastor, he
shall show himself to he either a scabbed or rotten sheep, worthy to be
excluded out of the fold (for fear he infect others) or else a ravening
Wolf clad in a sheep skin. Besides that, it will evidently appear, that
all his former pretenses to de a Catholic, and his submissions to the Sea
Apostolic He should have said to the Catholic Roman Church, for these be
Widdringtons express words.
, have proceeded from no other ground, but from a deep dissimulation, or
rather an artificial and execrable hypocrisy, to delude and deceive
Catholics, which I leave (good Catholic Reader) to thy prudent consideration,
and humbly beseeching Almighty God from the bottom of my heart to illuminate
and inspire him with his grace, that he may see his own lamentable estate, and
prevent the danger of his soul, wherein be runs headlong, if he continue
his wonted course.

136 But to this Decree of the Lord Cardinals, and to the letter of the Pope
Nuncius to Mr. Birkett, and also to all that which Mr. Fitzherbert concludes
from the aforesaid Decree, there needs no other answer, then to set down my
Purgation, and humble Supplication to his Holiness, wherein I desired to know
any one thing, which in the Oath is repugnant to faith or salvation, as his
Holiness in his Breues declared, that there are many things in the Oath flat
contrary to faith and salvation, or any one thing in my books, which are
against faith, or good manners, protesting with all sincerity, to correct what
is to be corrected to purge what is to be purged, to explains what is to be
explained, and to retract what is to be retracted. Whereby it will evidently
appear, that I still remain an obedient child of the Church, and a true
Catholic, and that my submission to the Catholic Roman Church was sincere,
unfeigned, and did not proceed from the least dissimulation at all, and that
from the aforesaid Decree no colorable argument can be drawn to prove me to
be no Catholic, and child of the Church, and to condemn or disprooue, but to
justify, and to approve as well the Oath, as the doctrine, which I have
taught in my Books.

137 This therefore is the Copy of my Purgation, and humble Supplication to
his Holiness, which for satisfaction of some Catholics, who perchance have
not seen it, and also for some other respects I think it not amiss to set
down here again.

To the most Holy, and most blessed Father Pope Paul the fifth, Roger
Widdrington an English Catholic, wishes everlasting happiness.
1THere came unto my hands some few days since, (most blessed Father) a
certain Decree of the Sacred Congregation of the right Honorable Cardinals of
the Holy Roman Church, who are deputed for the examining of Books, dated the
16. day of March, of this present year 1614. and printed in Rome by the
Printer of the Apostolical Chamber, wherein two Books written by me sincerity
nnd simplicity of heart, are by name, but yet only in general words, without
naming any crime either in particular, or in general (at which many do
marvel) altogether condemned and forbidden by the commandment of your
Holiness; And the Author of them, unless he shall forth with purge himself,
is threatened to be punished with Censures, and other Ecclesiastical
punishments.

2 But what manner of purging your Holiness does expect at my hands, who am
the Author of those Books, and of what crime I ought to purge my self
(seeing that in this Decree there is no crime either in particular or in
general objected against me, of which I should purge my self, neither is my
conscience privy to any crime for the making or publishing of those Books) I
cannot verily in any wise perceive. I know that certain Doctors
misinterpreting my words, have in their public writingsfalsly, and very
injuriously, and not to speak a more heinous word (I pray God to forgive them)
impeached me of certain crimes (by whose instigation I know not whether your
Holiness has been moved to condemn those Books) but considering that both
they are my Adversaries in this controversy, and that they are moved in my
opinion, rather by affection, then by solid reason, and also that they do
foully corrupt my words, and wrest them to a bad sense, and never meant by me
(as I could most clearly demonstrate This I have since demonstrated to his
Holiness in the discovery of D. Schulckenius, or rather Card. Bellarmines
slanders.
to your Holiness, if it were now a convenient time) I do not think that so
great authority is to be given, either to their sayings, or writings, of what
learning or dignity soever otherwise they be, that they are of force to bind
me, either to embrace their opinions, especially being grounded upon so weak
foundations, or not to defend my innocence from their false accusations in such
an exceeding great crime, as heresy is.

3 And that your Holiness may clearly perceive, that I have already in these
books, which are forbidden by your commandment, purged my self as much, as
is sufficient for a child of the Catholic Church, I think it necessary to
repeat again, with as much breuity as may be, in what manner I have in those
books made profession of the Catholic faith (which in my opinion abundantly
suffices for the purging of my self from all imputation of heresy, error,
or any other crime, which does depend on these) and for what thing I made
Supplication to your Holiness in that Disputation of the Oath of Allegiance,
that thereby your Holiness may manifestly perceive, that some persons, not of
the meanest degree, although perchance with the ignorant sort of people, they
do greatly impair my credit, yet they do also bring your Holiness into no
small obloquy both among prudent Cacholikes, and especially among those who are
Adversaries to the Catholic faith, whiles they are not afraid to divulge (not
so circumspectly in my judgment as is fitting) that your Holiness did in good
earnest avouch, that you thought the Author of that Disputation, to be neither
a Catholic, nor a child of the Church (whereas the Author does profess
himself both to be a Catholic, and a child of the Catholic Roman Church,
and also submits most humbly that Disputation, and all his other writings to
the judgment of the Holy Catholic Roman Church) neither that you would
accept of the Dedication of that book, whereas that Dedication, as it is
manifest by the Authors Epistle to your Holiness, was only a most humble
Supplication of the Author, and of other Catholics to your Holiness, that
your Holiness, as being the supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, and whose
office is to instruct, and confirm the sheep of Christ in the Catholic faith
would be pleased to instruct them in the Catholic faith, and in those things,
which your Holiness had declared by your Breues, to be in the Oath clearly
repugnant to faith and salvation. And that your Holiness did speak the
aforesaid words, both of the Author, and also of the Dedication, some here
give forth, that your Holiness his Nuncius then residing at Bruxells did
signify as much to M. George Birket the Archpriest, who was then living, and
that the same Nuncius did withal affirm, that he was certified thereof some
few days since, (for so are the express words of the Nuncius his letters,
These letters were dated at Bruxels 2. November. 1613. and are to be seen above
nu. 134.
which are carried about among us) by letters of the Congregation of the holy
Roman Inquisition, by the commandment of your Holiness, to the end, that he
first of all should write thereof to his Reverence, that he according to his
wisdom should signify as much, and make it knwone to Catholics.

4 First, therefore I the Author of those books did protest, that I composed
them, being moved thereunto for the zeal of God, of Religion, and of my
Country, and for more particular reasons, which I related in the beginning of
those books, without any respect of worldly favor, or fear, neither with any
obstinate mind, but only, to find out the Catholic truth, in this most
weighty Controversy, which belongs to the yielding of obedience due by the
law of Christ, to God and Casar, to your Holiness, who is the supreme Pastor.
in earth of our souls, and to our King his most excellent Majesty, In Apol. ad
Lect. in fine.
who in temporalls is inferior only to God; and I did submit most humbly
whatsoever was contained in them, to the judgment and censure of the Catholic
Roman Church, whose child I professed my self to be; and that if perchance
any thing through ignorance had escaped me, In Disp. Theo. in fine.
which should not be approved by her, I did disprooue it, condemn it, and
would have it for not written.

In Disp. c. 6. sec. 3. nu. 18. and seq.
5 Besides, I did profess, that with all due honor and respect I did reverence
all the Canons of the Catholic Church, although I did freely confess, that
betwixt the Catholic Church and the Pope, who is only the first and
principal member thereof, betwixt some Chapters, or Decrees of the Canon Law,
and betwixt others a great difference is to be made; and nevertheless I
sincerely affirmed, that to every one, in his degree and place, I gave
dutiful, but not equal credit. the vast Corpse of the Canon Law, and in the
volumes of the Counsels are contained, either sayings, or assertions of the
ancient Fathers, or Decrees, or sentences of Popes or Counsels; and these are
either doctrinall, and propounded as things to be believed by the faithful,
or else moral, and which in the external discipline of the Church are
commanded to be observed.

6 And first, I did acknowledge, that the doctrine which the Ancient Fathers,
either in expounding the holy Scriptures, or in questions belonging to faith,
have with uniform consent delivered, I did also undoubtedly believe, as being
certainly persuaded, that it was inspired by the Holy Ghost.

7 Secondly, I also with Melchior Canus, and other Divines affirmed, that the
doctrine also of all the holy Fathers in things, which do appertain to faith,
may plously and probably be believed by Catholics, yet that it ought not of
necessity to be followed as certain and infallible.

8 Thirdly, I did profess, that the definitions of General Counsels lawfully
assembled, and confirmed by the Pope, wherein any doctrine is propounded to the
whole Church, to be believed of all men as of Faith, are to be received by
Catholics, as infallible rules of Faith. Nevertheless I did freely affirm
with the aforesaid Melchior Canus, and Cardinal Bellarmine, that those the
said Counsels are defined, or else supposed only as probable, and those
assertions, which either incidently, and by the way are inserted, or for better
declaration or proof of their decisions be produced, are sometimes subject to
error, and may by Catholics without any wrong to the Catholic faith be
rejected. This withal observing, of which also in other places I have
admonished the Reader, that although I professing my self to be a child of
the Catholic Roman Church, do most willingly embrace whatsoever General
Counsels confirmed by the Pope, which represent the Catholic Church, do
propound to the faithful as necessarily to be believed of faith, and which
certainly, and evidently is known to be the true sense and meaning of the
Counsels; Nevertheless, I do not undoubtedly believe every doctrine which
either Cardinal Bellarmine (speaking with due reverence) or any other Doctor,
seeing that they are not appointed by God, to be an undoubted rule of the
Catholic Faith, do cry out to be Catholic doctrine, to be the voice of the
Catholic Church, to be the meaning of the Scriptures, and Counsels, if
especially some Catholic Doctors do hold the contrary; Them truly, as it is
meet, I do reverence with all dutiful respect, and I do much attribute to
their authority, but that all those collections, which they in their
judgments do imagine to be evidently concluded from the holy Scriptures or
Counsels (considering that oftentimes they are deceived and do deceive, For
Card. Bellarmine himself in his old age has recalled many things, which he
wrote when he was younger, and perchance he now growing elder will recall more.
and what they have written when they were younger, they may recall when they
grow elder) are to be accounted for undoubted assertions of faith, and the
contrary opinion of other Catholics to be rather esteemed an heresy, then an
opinion, this truly I cannot take in good part.

9 Fourthly, concerning the Canons, or Decrees of General Counsels belonging
to manners, and to the external government of the Church, I promised to be
most ready to receive willingly all those Decrees, which in places where I
shall live shall be generally received; for these are properly called the
Decrees or Canons of the Catholic or universal Church, which are by common
consent admitted by the Universal Church. Neither doubtless is any man bound
to admit those Laws and precepts, which in the Country where he lives, are
not observed by the people, as according to the received opinion of Divines and
Lawyers I there affirmed. And the same I there auouch^d is to be understood
proportionally of the Decrees of Popes and Provincial Counsels. For as
concerning the Popes definitions belonging to faith, if he define without a
General Council, I confess, that I have oftentimes auerred, that very many,
especially ancient Divines of the University of Paris, whose names I there
Cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 27.
related, are of opinion, that such Definitions, unless they be received by
the Catholic Church as Definitions of Catholic Faith, are subject to error,
whose opinion, both for the authority of so famous men, and also for the
reasons and grounds, whereon that opinion is founded, I with many later Divines
(to whose opinion also Cardinal Bellarmine himself Lib. de Council. cap. 13.
does plainly enough incline, howsoever he would seem also Lib. 4. de Romans
Pont. c. 2. and li. 2. de council. cap. 17.
to auerre the contrary) have also oftentimes affirmed, that it is not to be
condemned of heresy, error, or temeritie, which also now again (speaking
with all dutiful submission) I fear not to confirm.

10 Lastly, concerning my Disputation of the Oath, and the Dedication thereof,
which seems to be that stone of offense, and rock of scandal to some
Divines, especially of the Society of Jesus, and to those Catholics who adhere
to them, I cannot, to speak unfeignedly, in any wise understand what can
justly be objected against it, or what fault I have committed, either in making
it, or else in dedicating it to your Holiness, of which I should purge my
self. For first of all I the Author of that Disputation, and Dedication, have
therein professed, that I did not write it with any obstinate mind, but in
manner of an humbly petition sincerely, and for many reasons, which I there
related, to inform your Holiness more fully, who as here we think, has not
been rightly informed of the reasons, for which English Catholics are of
opinion, that the Oath may lawfully be taken; and for this cause I did dedicate
it to your Holiness that after you had carefully examined all the reasons, for
which English Catholics do think the Oath may lawfully be taken, your
Holiness might provide both for their spiritual and temporal safety, as
according to your fatherly wisdom and charity should be thought most
convenient. And therefore, as in the end of that Disputation I affirmed I did
faithfully set down all the chiefest arguments, which are usually alleged as
well against the taking of the Oath, as in favor thereof; neither did I
affirm any thing of my own opinion, but only as representing the persons of
them, who of set purpose do publicly maintain, that the Oath either may, or
may not be lawfully taken, leaving it to the Fatherly care of your Holiness,
that when you have bin fully informed of the whole progress of the matter, and
have diligently examined all the reasons, for which English Catholics, obeying
the Kings commandment, have taken the Oath you will be pleased particularly to
approve them, or to condemn them, that Catholics in this so most weighty a
matter, which does so nearly concern the prerogative of your spiritual
Authority, and of his Majesty's Royalty, being fearful to resist your
Holiness precept declared in your Breues, and also being desirous to obey, as
much as with a safe conscience they may, his Majesty's command, may clearly
perceive, which particular clauses of the Oath, they are bound to admit, and
which they are bound to reject, and may in plain and express terms without
any ambiguity of words be instructed by your Holiness, in what manner they may
satisfy their own conscience, your Holiness will, and also his Majesty's
desire concerning all the particular parts of the Oath. For as they are very
ready to hazard their whole temporal estate, and also to loose their lives for
the Catholic faith, which by the Church (to whom this office belongs to
define matters of faith, and not to private Doctors, who may deceive and be
deceived) is declared to be truly the Catholic faith; so doubtless they are
unwilling to expose themselves, and their whole Family and Posterity, which
this our age does so much labor to advance, to eminent danger of their
temporal utter ruin, only for opinions, although they be maintained by the
greater and better part of Divines, so that others, although far fewer in
number, do defend the contrary, But as they are desirous with all their hearts
to obey your Holiness in spiritual matters, and in those things, which cannot
be omitted without sin, so also they might justly think themselves to be
more hardly used, then children are wont by their Parents, if in these times
specially, wherein by reason of the Catholic faith, which they profess, they
have grievously incurred his Majesty's high displeasure, who is of a contrary
Religion, they should without sufficient reason be forbidden to give that
temporal Allegiance to his Majesty which they persuade themselves to be by
the Law of Christ due to him, having always before their eyes that
commandment of Christ our Savior, Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and the things that are Gods, Matthew. 22.
to God.

11 And that your Holiness may yet more clearly perceive, that this my
Disputation of the Oath (which is rather to be called a most humble
Supplication to your Holiness) was written in manner of an humble Petition, I
think it not amiss to repeat also word by word these very last words of my
Epistle to your Holiness.

12 This therefore (most Holy Father) is our most humble Supplication to your
Holiness. First, that your Holiness will be pleased to examine diligently the
reasons, for which our English Catholics do think the Oath may lawfully be
taken, and whereof they are persuaded your Holiness is not yet rightly
informed. Secondly, that after you have thoroughly examined them, you will
vouchsafe in regard of your Pastoral carfulness to instruct them, what parts
of the Oath are (I do not say according to the probable opinion of some
Dhctours, but according to Catholic doctrine necessarily to be believed by all
Christians) repugnant to faith and salvation, and therefore cannot be taken by
any Catholic with a safe and probable conscience: Thirdly, that if your
Holiness shall find, that you have not been rightly informed of those
reasons, for which our English Catholics are of opinion, that the Oath may
lawfully be taken, and that therefore they have not in a matter of so great
weight proceeded rashly and unadvisedly, you will be pleased receive them, and
their Priests into your ancient favor, and that if they, or any of them have,
not through their own fault, but through the indiscreet zeal of others
suffered any loss, or detriment in their good names, or other ways, it may be
restored again to them in that best manner, as shall seem convenient to the
charity, justice, and wisdom of your Holiness.

13 Now what there is contained in this our humble Petition, against which your
Holiness has just cause to take so high displeasure, that you will not accept
thereof, I remit to the judgment of indifferent men, but especially of your
Holiness. For by that which we have said, it does manifestly appear, that
this Disputation of the Oath was for that end composed by me, to inform your
Holiness, (who is the supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, and to whom
Christ our Lord has given charge to feed his sheep, not only with precepts
and Censures, but also with the word of Doctrine, and to instruct them in the
Catholic faith) truly of our state, and to propound unto your Holiness
sincerely, and with all dutiful submission those doubts, and difficulties,
which both to my self and to other Catholics do occure about this new Oath,
which is commanded by his Majesty, forbidden by your Holiness, and daily
taken by almost all Catholics of the better sort, to whom it is tendered, yea
even by those, who have the Jesuits for their Directours, howsoever these
Fathers do in outward show seem to condemn the same; that after your
Holiness had duly examined the reasons, and arguments, which are usually
alleged on both sides, against, and for the taking of the Oath, you would be
pleased to satisfy our consciences, and to make known unto us, what parts of
the Oath may, according to the principles of the Catholic faith, be lawfully,
and what parts may not lawfully be taken; and lastly to declare unto us which
be those many things, which your Holiness being not rightly informed by some,
as we imagine, has affirmed in your Breues to be clearly repugnant to faith,
and salvation; for no man, be he never so great an enemy to the Oath, dare
avouch, that all things contained in the Oath, are repugnant to faith, or
salvation.

14 Now I beseech your Holiness to judge, first, whether I the Author of
those Books, who have professed my self to be a Catholic, and a Child of the
Catholic Roman Church, and have subjected all my writings to her judgment,
and Censure, with that submission, that whatsoever should not be approved by
her I would disprooue, condemn, and have it for not written, ought to be
judged by the Supreme Pastor, and Father of the Catholic Church to be no
Catholic, nor a child of the Catholic Church. If I be no Catholic,
doubtless I must be an heretic, and defend obstinately (seeing that heresy,
to be imputed to sin, cannot be without obstinacy) some doctrine contrary to
the Catholic faith. But (to say nothing at this time of the doctrine, which I
maintained in those Books, which if it were clearly heretical, why did not
that Sacred Congregation condemn those Books as heretical?) I protested to
write nothing obstinately, but with an humble and submissiue mind, and ready
to recall my error, as soon as I should perceive to have erred in any thing.
I confess indeed that I may err, but by God his assistance I will never be an
heretic. And if perchance in any thing I have erred, it is no error of malice
or obstinacy, but of ignorance: For I will never by God his protection,
wittingly, and willingly defend any thing at all, which I shall know to be
contrary to sound Doctrine, or to the Catholic faith.

15 Secondly, concerning that which some men, to no small scandal to Catholic
Religion, and to the great disgrace of the Sea Apostolic, especially among
those who be Adversaries to the Catholic Religion, do give out, that your
Holiness should say, that you would not accept the Dedication of my
Disputation concerning the Oath, or rather the most humble Supplication of my
self and of other Catholics, as I have showed before, this only at this
present I will say, that we English Catholics are doubtless most miserable,
who daily enduring so many discommodities of this life for the Catholic faith
which we profess, and having provoked his Majesty, a Prince otherwise most
merciful, who professes the contrary Religion, to take displeasure against
us, which of all the rest we account most grievous, and having therefore for a
long time been, and are daily made a pitiful spectacle to this whole
Kingdom, now by humble Petition craving to be instructed by your Holiness in
those things, which you by your Apostolical Breues have to our most great
temporal prejudice declared to be manifestly repugnant to faith and salvation,
do not only not deserve so much at your hands, as to be heard herein, but
your Holiness does forbid and condemn our Petition, and does threaten the
Author to be punished with Censures, and other Ecclesiastical punishments,
unless he purge himself forthwith, and yet after an unusual manner impeacheth
him of no crime whereof he should purge himself.

16 For behold (most blessed Father) how miserable and to be pitied is our
case. Our Kings most excellent Majesty, to whom by the law of Christ we owe
temporal allegiance, does demand of us, under pain of incurring most grievous
penalties, an Oath which he affirms to be only a temporal Oath, and of
temporal Allegiance; your Holiness, to whom by the law also of Christ we are
bound to obey in spirituals, has by your Breues altogether condemned the same,
as containing in it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation; and has
withal declared, that all those Priests, who either do take the said Oath, or
do teach, or shall teach that it may lawfully be taken, shall be deprived of
their faculties: We English Catholics, being between these two narrow
straights, and fearing least that by avoiding the gulf of Caribdis, we should
fall upon the rock of Scilla, that is, least that we should not render to
God, or Caesar, that which is their due, do most instantly request your
Holiness, who is our Superior Pastor in spirituals, and whose proper office
is to instruct and confirm the sheep of Christ in the Christian faith, that
you will be pleased to show unto us those many things, or at least wise one
among those many, which in this Oath are so repugnant to faith and salvation,
to the end that we may both satisfy our own conscinces, and also fulfill your
Holiness, and his Majesty's commands, as much as in us lies, and Catholic
Religion will permit: And nevertheless your Holiness does not only not admit
our Petition, wherein with all dutiful submission we do propound the reasons
and arguments, which are usually objected against, and for the taking of the
Oath, to be examined by your Holiness, and affirming nothing of our own
opinion, but you do also by the evil information of others, as we are
persuaded, wholly condemn the same without alleging any crime either in
particular or in general against it: and do declare, that the Author
thereof, or your humble Petitioner, except he purge himself forthwith, shall
be grievously punished, and nevertheless you make no mention of any crime at
all, whereof he should purge himself.

17 Is it perchance a crime for those that are in ignorance, error, and doubt,
to have recourse to the supreme Pastor, and Doctor of the Church, to be
instructed by him in faith, and with due submission to propound to him the
doubts and difficulties, which trouble both their own and other men's
consciences, to be answered and satisfied by him, and that not in things of
small moment, but in such as under pain of incurring great penalties do
belong to the yielding of due obedience to God and Caesar? Is it a crime for
children that are hungry to crave bread of their Father, for sheep that want
Pasture to require food of their Shepherd, for Disciples that are ignorant
to beseech humbly some instruction of their Master and Teacher? We English
Catholics do acknowledge your Holiness to be our spiritual Father, Pastor,
and Master, and do most humbly request to be instructed by your Holiness in
the Catholic faith, and in those many things, which your Holiness by your
Breues has declared to be plainly repugnant to faith and salvation; and your
Holiness does damn, and forbid our Petition, and does ordain, after a
manner altogether unusual, that I the Author thereof, who in the name of the
rest have written, and composed the same, except I purge my self very
speedily, shall be punished most severely: For, as I think, in no tribunal
on the earth, this custom is to be found, that any man is compelled by
sentence of the Judge to purge himself under pain of incurring most grievous
punishments, unless the Judge does make known unto him the crime, for which,
if he do not purge himself, he is to be condemned; Besides, that it is
impossible for one to purge himself of that crime, whereof he is ignorant.

18. And to speak freely the truth (for now I being summoned before the
highest tribunal on earth to purge my self, am by the law it self permitted
to speak somewhat more freely, so that I speak truly and modestly) this new
kind of condemning the books of Catholic Authors, and of commanding the
Author to purge himself forthwith, being made by such a public Decree, and
under pain of incurring the penalties contained in the Council of Trent, and
in the Index of forbidden books, without naming any crime eiher in particular,
or in general, for which they are condemned, and of which the Author should
purge himself (considering that the same punishment is not appointed in the
Index for reading without distinction all sorts of forbidden books, neither
do all crimes require the same Purgation) does make both the Sea Apostolic
odious to the Adversaries of Catholic Religion, who will easily from hence
take occasion to persuade themselves, that the Bishops of Rome are wont to
reject at their pleasure, and to suppress violently by threatenings, and not by
reason or argument those opinions, which they do not like, and to promote by
favors, and not by reasons those opinions which are pleasing to them; and also
does littel satisfy prudent Catholics, who can hardly persuade themselves,
that the Sacred Congregation of the right Honorable Cardinals, who are
reputed for the examination of books (to whose informations your Holiness
giving credit as we are assuredly persuaded, has condemned those books, and
ordained, that the Author shall be severely punished, unless be purge himself
forthwith) if they could have found in them any proposition, which is certainly
known to be heretical, erroneous, or repugnant to sound doctrine, they would
have passed it over with such great silence, and (contrary to the usual
manner of the Sea Apostolic in condemning the books of Catholic Authors, but
of such especially who are commanded under pain of Censures to purge
themselves forthwith, as by innumerable examples, which are extant in the
Tomes of the Counsels, and in the Bulls of Popes I could demonstrate) command
the Author to purge himself only in general words, without showing any crime
either in particular, or general, of which he should purge himself.

19 I therefore the Author of those books, whom the Sacred Congregation, by
the commandment of your Holiness has enjoined to purge my self, but as yet
I know not of what crime, a most dutiful child of the Catholic Roman
Church, and of your Holiness in spiritualls, and withal a most loyal subject
of the Kingdom of England, and of our Sovereign Lord KING JAMES in
temporalls, being summoned before your Holiness his supreme tribunal to purge
my self, prostrate at your Holiness feet, do humbly request you, by the
dreadful Majesty of God, the Supreme Judge of all; First, that your Holiness
will judge that which is right, and do me justice, and not give credit to the
information of them who are my Adversaries in this controversy, and have fowly
corrupted my words contrary to my meaning, but that you will examine my cause
by your own certain knowledge, and that you will make known to me all those
things, or at least wise some of them, which in those my books condemned by
your Holiness commandment are clearly known to be repugnant to faith or
good manners. For I protest, that I am most ready to correct those things that
are to be corrected, to purge what is to be purged, to explain what is to be
explained, and to retract what is to be retracted.

2 Secondly, that if your Holiness after due examination of my writings shall
find, that you have been misinformed by some persons, and that nothing is to
be found in those books contrary to Catholic doctrine, as some perchance
have suggested to your Holiness, you will be pleased to recall that sentence
of the Sacred Congregation published against me, and my books, through evil
information, or vehement importunity of some men, or through misunderstanding
the true meaning of my words; and that you will have a care of my good name in
that good sort, as shall beseem your wisdom, charity and justice; and that
you will account me to be a Catholic, and a Child of the Catholic Roman
Church. For that which I did write in another place, In Disp. Theol. in Admon.
ad Lect. nu. 8.
I do here repeat again. I am a Catholic and a Child of the Catholic
Roman Church, and if any man of what degree soever he be, shall wrongfully
accuse me of heresy, let him know assuredly, that by the assistance of
Almighty God I will by all those means, which God and Nature has granted to
innocent men to defend themselves, to the uttermost of my power defend my self
from their calumnies or slanders, until the Church being fully informed of my
opinion, shall in plain and particular words (for no man can recall errors
until he know particularly what they be) condemn the same.

21 Thirdly, that your Holiness will command, that this my purgation, and most
humble Petition may for future memory be registered among the Acts of the holy
Office of the Inquisition, as the condemnation of my books is recorded, as it
appears by the Decree it self, that those who hereafter shall succeed in
that Office, may give their sentence and judgment as well of this my
Purgation, as of that condemnation of my books, and whether I am to be
accounted a Catholic, and a child of the Church, or an heretic.

22 But if your Holiness will not be pleased to admit this my Purgation, and
most humble Supplication, and to recall the sentence which upon evil
information has been denounced against my books, and to have a care of my
good name, which has been wrongfully taken away, although I know right well
that the same most merciful and great God, who in times past preserved the
credit of that holy man Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, with whom Pope
Innocentius the fourth being wonderfully offended, Mat. Paris in Henrico 3o. ad
ann. 1253.. Diebus sub ijsdem, and ad annu. 1254.. Hoc etiam an. Dominus Papa
determined to cast his dead bones out of the Church, and to bring him into so
great obloquie, that he should be proclaimed throughout the whole world for
an Heathen, Rebel, and diobedient, for that he had written to the said Pope
Innocentius in the spirit of humility and love, vt errores suos crebros
corrigeret, that he would correct his frequent, or accustomed errors, although
I know, I say that the same God, who is not an accepter of persons, is able
also to deliver me from the unjust attempts, and false informations of any
whatsoever, and to make known my innocence to your Holiness, and to the
whole Christian world; nevertheless prayers, tears, and patience, joined with
the testimony of a good conscience, shall be my chiefest refuge, and this
shall be my daily comfort, that it is no what less but rather more happy and
grateful to God, to suffer persecution for Justice sake at the hands of
Kinsemen, and of the same Household, who in friendship and society ought to be
more straightly linked, then of Strangers.

23 Finally, if in this Purgation, which the Sacred Congregation by
commandment of your Holiness has enjoined me, I have offended any man, as I
hope I have not, by speaking any thig not with that circumspection as is
fitting (for wittingly I would give no man any just cause of offense) I do
most humbly crave pardon both of your Holiness, for whose temporal and
perpetual felicity I will continually pray unto our most merciful God, and
also of the whole Christian world. From my Study in the Feast of S. John
Baptist. 1614.

A most humble Child and Servant of your Holiness, and of the Holy Sea
Apostolic. The Author of the Books as aforesaid, etc.


138 THis is the Purgation and humble Supplication, which I sent to his
Holiness upon the Decree, and commandment of the Lord Cardinals to purge my
self forthwith; which their Decree, if all things be duly considered, does
rather confirm, and strengthen, then any way condemn, disprooue, or weaken
any particular doctrine contained in my books. For can a man with reason
imagine, that those most Illustrious Cardinals would not for their honor
sake, and for satisfaction of the Christian world, have expressed some bad
doctrine contained in my books, but have forbidden them in such general
words, without expressing any one proposition which is in them repugnant to
faith or good manners, and after such an unusual manner have commanded me to
purge my self forthwith, and that under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures,
without declaring any crime either in particular, or in general, whereof I
should purge my self, if the could have named any one proposition, which they
could have clearly maintained to be repugnant to the Catholic faith, or
Christian manners? especially, seeing that my Theological Disputatation, as I
have showed above in my Purgation, was only an humble Petition to his
Holiness, and a sincere propounding to his Fatherly consideration the great
and many difficulties, which by occasion of his Breues condemning the Oath, as
containing in it many things flat contrary to faith and salvation, did vex,
trouble, and perplexe the souls and consciences of his poor afflicted
Catholics, earnestly requesting him, and in regard of his Pastoral office, as
it were coniuring him, that he would be pleased to satisfy their difficulties,
and to make known to them any one thing in the Oath of those many, which by
his Breues he had declared to be clearly repugnant to faith and salvation.

139 Now to say, as some Priests here with us, to excuse this strange
proceeding of his Holiness and the Cardinals, do very indiscreetly and
unlearnedly affirm, that it is against the Majesty of the Court of Rome, to
give English Catholics particular satisfaction in these points, and that they
must obey with blind obedience, and without any further examining of the
matter, whatsoever his Holiness, and the Cardinals of the Inquisition do
decree, and command, although it be in prejudice to themselves, and to their
temporal Prince and State, it is alas rather to be pitied, then answered. For
no man of learning or judgment can make any doubt, but that if a spiritual
Superior, or Prelate of what dignity, or pre-eminence soever he be, shall
command, or forbid any thing, which is dangerous to Religion, to the
Commonwealth, or to a third person, (as all the world sees the forbidding of
English Catholics to take the new Oath of Allegiance, to be here in England
thus dangerous) and the subject is doubtful, whether his prohibition, or
commandment be lawful, or proceeds from lawful and undoubted authority
or no, he is not bound forthwith to obey, but he may without any note of
disobedience propound humbly to his Superior, or Prelate the reasons of his
doubt, and the causes which move him to think assuredly, that his Superior,
or Prelate was misled either by false information, or by his own fallible
opinion in imposing such a dangerous command: and the Superior, or Prelate,
and much more if he be the Supreme Pastor of our souls, is bound by his
Pastoral office to feed all the sheep of Christ's flock, with the word of
doctrine and instruction, in things necessary to salvation, when they shall
humbly and earnestly desire to be therein instructed by him to whom the charge
of their souls is principally committed by Christ our Savior, in those words
spoken to S. Peter, Pasce agos meos, Pasce oues meas, Feed my lambs, Feed my
sheep.

140 Seeing therefore, that we have diverse times most humbly and earnestly
requested his Holiness, being the Supreme Pastor of our souls, to make
known to us any one thing of those many, which he in his Breues has only in
general words declared to be flat contrary to faith and salvation, or any one
proposition contained in my books which is repugnant to faith or good manners,
protesting with all sincerity to purge, and retract forthwith whatsoever is to
be purged and retracted, and have also propounded unto him most humbly the
reasons of our doubts, and why we are persuaded, that he has herein been
misled, and drawn to this course either by his own fallible opinion, or by
the bad information of Cardinal Bellarmine, and his other Divines, most
instantly requesting to be satisfied herein, and as yet cannot receive from him
any satisfaction at all: And which also is very considerable, seeing that I
have since that time made known to his Holiness, and to all the world by
public writings, the manifest slanders, which Cardinal Bellarmine masked
under the name of Doctor Schulckenius, and who also in that Congregation of
Cardinals deputed for the examining of books is one of the chiefest men, and
which is more strange, both my principal Adversary, Accuser, and Judge, has
very falsely imposed upon me, and how shamefully he has corrupted my words and
meaning to prove me an heretic disguised under the fair colorable name of a
Catholic: and to impeach my doctrine of error and heresy; And besides the
discovery of these shameful calumnies, for the which I demanded justice at
his Holiness hands, I have also made an other Supplication to his Holiness,
most humbly requesting him, either to declare unto us what one thing in the
Oath is repugnant to faith and salvation, and what one proposition in my books
is contrary to faith or good manners, or else to cause that Decree of the
Cardinals against my books to be reuersed, and to account me and other
Catholics not to be disobedient children to the Sea Apostolic for not
admitting his Breues which are grounded either upon such an opinion, which no
Catholic is bound to follow, or upon the false information of Cardinal
Bellarmine and his other Divines, or rather upon both: And considering also,
that not only, neither Cardinal Bellarmine has for his credit sake cleared
himself as yet of those foul aspersions and crimes wherewith I have charged
him, nor his Holiness has as yet vouchsafed to give any fatherly instruction
or satisfaction in these our important difficulties and necessary requests,
but also the said Cardinals have after their former manner condemned that my
Supplication only in general words without taking notice of the slanders,
which Cardinal Bellarmine did falsely impose upon me, or expressing any one
proposition contained in that Supplication, or in any other my books contrary
to Catholic doctrine or Christian manners, as in that Supplication I desired
to know; All which things being considered, I leave, good Catholic Reader, to
thy prudent consideration, whether this strange proceeding of theirs be not an
evident sign to any indifferent man, that they can find no one thing in the
Oath, which is repugnant to faith or salvation, nor any one proposition in my
books contrary to faith or good manners, and that in they have entered into
such an exorbitant, uncharitable, and injurious course, and also drawn his
Holiness thereunto, wherein with their honors they can hardly go forward,
and yet rather then they will seem to go backward, and acknowledge freely
that by the advice of Cardinal Bellarmine and other Divines of Rome they have
been deceived, they will still go on, and care not to have innocent
Catholics by their unjust proceedings to be accounted heretics, or
disobedient children to the Sea Apostolic, which in the end will turn to
their great shame and dishonor, and in the mean time, cannot be but very
scandalous to Catholic Religion, very dishonorable to the Popes Holiness,
and themselves, very injurious to English Catholics, and very burdensome to
their own consciences, which so many dangers I beseech Almighty God with all
my heart, that he will inspire them to prevent in time, and before it be to
late. So that it were far better for the credit of my Adversaries, and of
their cause, and for the honor of the Sea Apostolic not to urge any more the
Popes Breues against the Oath, or the Cardinals Decree against my books, but
to bury them with perpetual oblivion, unless his Holiness, and the Lord
Cardinals of the Inquisition will descend to some particular points, which with
their reputation and honor they are able to maintain.

The same submission What reasons the State may have to permit such
submissions, see above in this Chapter from number. 110.
which I made heretofore of all my writings to the Censure of the Catholic
Roman Church, I do here repeat again.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page Line Errors Corrected. 9 25 even ever 30 8 soul souls 55 35 with them
with him 108 34 the 70. Judges the Judges 116 28 Galgatha Galgala 131 1 make
may make 144 19 presenting representing 155 36 of Princes of the Princes 170 14
shall beneath shall see beneath 200 31 was grace was not grace 200 36 reign
Jonathan reign of Jonathan 250 43 nature natural 286 29 not of malice not
malice 286 37 amongst our amongst others our 287 8 pertienent impertinent 330 4
exercied exercised 330 7 as that as at that 347 7 Laws Lawyers 372 25 self
who would self would 389 17 or for 394 13 no nor 396 2 deserves both in
deserves in 408 27 upon to upon him to 411 37 valued valid 418 37 of of his
435 19 Canonica Canonici 442 3 confuted confirmed 450 19 both them both of them
469 21 for that the for the 477 20 to believed to be believed 505 17 lilence
license 508 2 comfort confront 509 27 uncertain certain 515 42 dogmatike
dogmatize 542 41 Decrees Decree 565 2 propound propounded 572 26 running
cunning 576 32 altogeth altogether 584 12 included concluded 585 7 them then
591 15 meat means 591 23 despose depose 596 26 artificall artificial 596 28
aims at in aims in 630 19 nud and 636 11 Dhctours Doctors


