BELLS TRIAL EXAMINED THAT IS A refutation of his late Treatise, entitled. THE
TRIAL OF THE NEVVE RELIGION. By B. C. Student in divinity. Wherein his many
and gross untruths, with diverse contradictions are discovered: Together with
an examination of the principal parts of that vain Pamphlet: and the
antiquity and verity of sundry. Catholic articles, which he calls rotten
rags of the new religion, are defended against the new Ragmaster of RASCAL.
In the Preface likewise, a short view of one THOMAS ROGERS untruths is set
down, taken out of his book called. THE FAITH DOCTRINE AND RELIGION,
PROFESSED AND PROTECTED IN THE REALM OF ENGLAND, etc. with a short memorandum
for T. V. otherwise called Th. Vdal.

Ierem 7. v. 8. Behold you trust to your selves in the words of lying, which
shall not profitt you.

Printed at Roane. 1608.

THE PREFACE TO THE GOOD CHRISTIAN READER.
IN my last book (good Reader) which I published against the challenging
minister entitled. The Doleful knell of Thomas Bell: I very well remember,
that I freed my self from writing ought against him, until I had set forth
his Black Burial, containing an answer to the main of all his blasphemous
books and pestilent pamphlets, is just reasons there specified hindered not my
designement: notwithstanding meeting not long since with a new toy of his,
tricked and trimmed up, with diverse patches and rusty rags, drawn from the
dunghille of his former monuments, and called by him, The Trial of the new
religion: I resolved to examine his depositions, and to try the truth of his
new treatise: and that both because it falls out very fittely and in order,
that having rung Bells Doleful knell, this examination of his Trial, as his
winding sheet should follow, before the solemnity of his foul Funerals and
interring of his carcass be kept: and also for that I fear by the disastrous
conjunction of the planets, that a could frost of poverty, will yet keep back
the spring of the promised work, and therefore I thought it not amiss to
publishe this Treatise being not of any such bulk, but that a few crowns may
dispatch the impression. And lastly, to give Bell sure and certain
intelligence, that it was contempt of him, and his books, that made them pass
so long without answer, and not any rare learning, or stinginge stuff, as in
the light of his dark dreaming conceit, proceeding from much vanity and little
humility, small grace and great pride, he framed to himself.

His eyes I hope by this time be opened to see, that albeit he were an
importune challenger, yet he lay not so close, but that his sides have been
soundly bombasted, and his quarters kindly curried over. That disdainful
style of his which before trampled upon our silence: those mounting words which
in former times menaced nothing but death and destruction: that insulting vain
which did so contemptibly caper upon our quiet carcasses, is now become
bankrupt and fled the country. Those ouerlooking terms and fiery phrases,
those terrible taunts, which with restless pen he runge in our ears, and
never ceased to iangle both in town and country are vanished, and blown away
like the locusts of Egypt. The world is altered, To^nam is turned French: his
hot courage is cooled, the gospelling Golias lies sweating upon the earth
fetching his last gasp, and the false pleasinge luster of his books faded and
coin to nothing. In former times this and such like were his usual songs. No
no they do in effect confess Funeral. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 6.
so much, whiles they neither dare answer any one book at all, nor any one
chapter wholly, but here and there an odd piece or sentence, I protest unto the
gentle Reader I partly blushe on their behalf. But never as I think shall I
live so long to hear any more such music. No no that tune is out of date,
the blood has left his cheeks; and run in post to comfort his faintinge
heart.

It was also no question a brave pangue of his vauntinge spirit, when he came
over us in this insulting manner. They Funeral. lib. 2. cap. 1. page 4.
are so nettled, so pricked and goared with my books, and their religion so
battered with their own best learned doctors, and most skillefull Proctors,
that gladly they would satisfy their Iesuited Popelings, and wipe away that
discredit, which hangs at their beardes, for which end they use many
coosenlnge tricks, iuglings, and lieger-demains, so to stay the outcries of
the people until I be dead, and then by your favor, they will com upon me
with good speed. Canis mortuus non mordet: but before that day, my life I gage
in that behalf, they dare not for their guts publishe any direct and full
a^swear etc. because to snatch here a piece and there a piece, is no answer at
all, but a mere toy for young children to play withal. But pardon him this,
and he will never do so any more whiles he lives, it was the heat of his
zeal and the long gaping after an ouerseeing benefice, that made so many
mad and lofty words to run forth, whiles the door was open. Balams eyes be
now illuminated, and he sees very well, and the world knows, that his
books be not only answearable, but also some of the^ answered. His Downfall of
Popery which in the high pitche of his soaringe pride he affirmed to be such
tickling stuff that every article Funeral. lib. 2. cap. 4 page 10.
co^clusio^, and proposition therein contained, might truly be called, Noli me
tangere, because they dare not (quoth he) for ten thousand millio^s of gould
touch the same fully and directly: when as for all that, every article has been
examined, every co^clusio^ confuted and every proposition perused, answered,
and beaten in pieces, so that the Minister may truly be called Noli mihi
credere, and deserves for this and hundreds more of like quality, ten
thousand millions of whetstones for the reward of his works, the trophies of
his labors, and the perpetual ensign of his false, foolish, and
fantastical monuments.

But to prosecute further in particular this present Pamphlet, the due
examination whereof I have undertaken, two special things remain yet to be
spoken of. The first concerning my self: the second touching the Minister. As
for my self, thou shall understand (good Reader) that I was once determined, to
have answered the treatise fully and wholly, as thou may perceive by the
first and second chapters: but afterward infirmity of body hindering the course
of my studies, and desire of mind to have it dispatched with all speed, caused
an other resolution which may perhaps revive Bells dead spirits, and inflame his
cooled blood, and make him com out once again with his old complaint, that I
have answered him by pieces and patches, and for my lugges and guts durst
not deal with Such are Bells phrases.
the whole, and that I have after much labor and study, much siftinge and
searching, out of the whole tome of his Trial, consisting almost of five and
twenty leaves in quarto, gathered only eight and fifty untruths, and not past
some five or six contradictions. If the wind be got again into that
corner, no remedy but I must bear of his storm with the cloak of patience,
hopinge that the good reader will consider, how as I was not bound to meddle
with his Pamphlet at all, so it was also at my choice to leave what I listed
and take what I pleased, especially making open profession of this my course
taken therein, and have not any way abused the good Reader, as Bell has, who
in his Funeral does make the world believe, that he has wholly answered my
Forerunner, consisting only of four sheets of paper, and yet omitteth many
notable and principal points, as I noted in the Doleful knell as for Page 61.
example, where his congregation is challenged by me to have been unknown for
many hundred years together, (as they are enforced to confess) our Church all
that while bearinge sail in the sight of the world: and also charged to
maintain the heresies of Aerius, Vigilantius, and to take part with Julian the
Apostata, and Turkishe Mahumetans: to all which troublsom objections, he makes
silence to give the solution.

The irreconciliable dissensions likewise of the Protestants in Germaeny, and
the endless brawles of our Mini^sters at home, not in triuiall toies, but in
matters of maine moment and importance, being upon just occasion set before
him, he fayneth himself blind, and will not see any more then pleases
himself: and the better to cloak this his dealinge, he has perverted the
whole order, chopping and chaunginge all things, as best serves for the
concealing of his treachery, as in the foresaid In the Preface a little before
the end.
book is handled. But as for me, albeit I have not taken upon me any intiere
reply, yet shall the good Reader find every chapter examined in order, no one
omitted, and not much worth the speaking of, to be let pass: so that in very
truth it may serve for a just confutation. An other thing also Bell is to
understand, viz, that he has entered into an obligation of all loss of
creditte for ever, if he can be convinced guilty of one only untruth. Be not
these his own words, breathing out nothing else but an argument of a timorous
conscience, and upright dealing, to the commendation of his doctrine, and
winninge popular applause and likinge. And my proceedings Motives page 17.
(quoth he) throughout this whole treatise, shall be such and so sincere, as if
I can be convinced by the adversary, either to allege any writer corruptly,
or to quote any place guilefully, or to charge any author falsely, I will never
require credit at the Readers hand, neither in this work, nor in any other,
that I shall publishe at any time hereafter: of which promise he makes also
mention in his Downfall. This being so, can Bell justly complain if his In
the Preface.
books be not wholly answered, when as one only certain corruption or untrue
charge of any author proved against him does cassiere his creditt, and give him
his deaths wound or with what face can he justly complain, when as in this
Treatise not one or two, but almost therscore of his untruths be displayed, or
how can he deny all his reputation to be lost, and his creditte cracked for
ever. Will he say that he is not truly charged, and plead still for his
innocence and sincerity in proceedinge? So he may I grant, but whether truly
or no, that I remitte to the sequel: desiring the good Reader in: he mean
time, only to pervse over the xx. xxv. xxvj. and xxvij. vntruth^s, and if he
sindeth not that he has alleged writers corruptly, quoted Josephus Angles
guilefully, and charged authors falsely, then a Gods name, let him be still
liked and loved, still culled and embraced for the stout champion, and sure
pillar of the congregation. But if trial shall teach him that he has
forfeited his obligation. no reason or conscience, but the condition should be
performed Thus much touching my self.

Concerning Bell and his Pamphlett, two things occur worthy of consideration.
The first is, that as his Pamphlets called. The hunting of the Romish Fox,
his woeful cry, etc. be either wholly, or principally borrowed from his other
books, though a new title, and an other manner of order and method, may
cause the Reader to think it otherwise, and thereby to have him in admiration,
for his abundant matter and flowinge invention: so this his Trial of the new
religion, will be found upon trial, to be nothing else, but old patches and
pieces of his former works, especially of his Survey and only stitched
together, and botched up after a new fashion. For I assure the good Reader,
except it be the first chapter, entreatinge Of the Popes name, not only all the
rest, (and that in many places almost verbatim) is drawn from his Survey (and
his other books) but also the very Epistle dedicatory it self, such a rare
jewel has he presented to his Patrones. Whether this be so or no, let us
briefly run over the particulars.

His Epistle dedicatory, is taken from his Survey page 341. 342. except a very
flewe lines, and the recapitulation (which he has annexed to the end) of the
chapters following after. Of the first chapter I have already spoken. The
second chapter Of the Popes superroiall power is borrowed from his Survey page
189. where his eight arguments against the supreme spiritual jurisdiction of
the Pope be contained. His third chapter, Of the marriage of Priests, etc.
consisting of five paragraffes, is conveyed from the same book of his Survey.
The first paragraffe, is found page 216. The second, page 224. page 233. and
234. and 228. The third page 267. and 269. The fourth page 268. and 269. and
that which he says of Aeneas Syluius, or Pius the second is in his woeful
cry page 25. and lastly that which he brings of S. Gregory, etc. comes from
his Survey page 222. His fifth paragraffe, is nothing else but a recital, or
recapitulation of the whole chapter: which fashion he observes also in his
other chapters to make perhaps the bulk the bigger for the greater
commendation of his labors.

The fourth chapter Of Pardons, is fetched partly from his Survey, page 278.
279. and wholly from his woeful cry page 17. and 18. The fist chapter Of
Purgatory, takes his first Original from his Motives page 3. 4. and 5. (where
the authority of Roffensis is spunne out at length) and also from his Suruay,
page 297. His sixth chapter, Of Auricular confession, is derived from the same
Suruay, page 501. and 502. And partly from the same sincke, partly from the
puddles of his Downfall, stewe the principal contents of his seventh
chapter, which is Of venial sins. See his Survey page 381. 382. and Downfall
page 383.

His eight chapter, Of the Popes faith, as touching the former part, he took
from his Anatomy, as himself notes in the margent, and that which in the later
part he says of So to and Alphonsus is fetched from his Balance, fol. 9. a,
and fol. 13. b. His ninth chapter, Of the meritt of works excepting that which
he disputes against S. R. is transported from his Survey page 396. 397: and
from his Downfall, page 61. 75. and 69.

His tenth chapter Of Transubstantiation, is but a few rags, gathered from
his Survey, page 436. 437. and his Downfall page 34. The eleauenth chapter Of
Popish invocation of Saints, is shreds of his Suruay page 331. and 340. where
the same tales of S. Thomas and Polanchus were broached before. His twelfth
chapter, Of the communion under one kind, proceeds from his Survey page 402.
and 409. The thirtenth chapter, Of private Mass, springs from the same root
of his Survey page 414. and 415. The sourtenth chapter, Of Pope Martins
dispensation, is drawn from his Downfall, page 40. and his Funeral, lib. 2.
cap. 7. The fiftenth chapter, Of worshipping of images, is a woeful slip, of
his woeful cry page 62. and 63. The sixtenth chapter, Of Church service in the
vulgar tongue, descends from his Survey page 476. 477. etc. The seauenteth
chapter Of the antiquity of Popish Mass, and the parts thereof, acknowledges
the same Survey for sire, page 480. and 481. The eightenth chapter, Of the
profound mystery of Popish Mass yssueth from the same book, page 484. The
ninetenth chapter, Of kissing the Popes feet, has his first head and origin,
in the same Survey page 487.

The twentieth chapter, Of praying upon beads. The one and twentieth, Of
changing the Popes name. The two and twentieth, Of the Paschall torch. The
three and twentieth, Of the Popish Pax, be four brethren, begotten by his
Survey, page 487. 486. 488. and 482. The four and twentieth chapter. Of the
Popes Bulls. The five and twentieth, Of the Popish Agnus Dei. The six and
twentieth, Of Candlemas day, be three sisters, descending from the very same
father, page 492. and 491. The seven and twentieth chapter, Of the doubtful
oath, etc. receives his generation from his Motives page 60. and his Downfall
page 124, etc. The eight and twentieth chapter, Of fasting, has his creation,
from his Survey, page 68. etc. The nine and twentieth chapter, Of the annulling
of Popish wedlock was first handled in his Motives page 63. and 64. and
afterward rehandled in his Downfall, page 36. The thirtith and last chapter
received his first life from his Motives page 56. and 57.

This is the Anatomy, and lively description of his Trial, which discovers
the rare dexterity he has in writing, and from whatfountayne his great show
of abundance flows. His choice of new books is not unlike the variety of
Esopes suppers, or the skilof some poor fiddler, that with two or three course
daunces scraped upon a sluttishe crowde, serves the whole country, and makes
his good masters merry. This is the first thing which I had to say concerning
Bell, and his books.

The second point which I meant to entreat of, and would have the Reader to
note is, that whereas Bells former books did continually ringe out bragges and
brauinges, darings and redarings, challenges and Larums, and the world was
filled with his daily outcriestin this last l'amphlet of his Trial, as also in
his Antepast, (sor so much as I have readde) I meet with no such swelling
words, nor find any smoke of that ^aunting humor. Those winds are allaid,
that terrible tempest is ouerblowne, and the surginge seas, and mounting waves
of such extrauagant insolency calnied and at quiet. Besore we could hear no
other music but the battle and such quarter braules as these. In regard
hereof most gracious In the Epistle ded^catorie of his Funeral.
and dread Sovereign, I now prostrate (quoth Bell) upon my knees, do most
humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, that it will please your Highness,
of your most princely favor, to grant your royal license and safe conduct,
for any English lesuit or lesuited Bapist in the whole world, that shall have
courage to appear, for the true performance of the challenge, in such manner
as is in this reply expressed; Oh most gracious Sovereign I am joyful when I
remember this future combat, I wish in my heart that it may be effected with
all expedition, for I confidently persuade my self in our Lord Jesus, that his
name shall thereby be glorified, your Majesty highely honored, the Papists
stricken dead, and all true hearted English subjects receive unspeakable
endless comfort. If it shall fall out otherwise, and that I shall not be found
even in your Majesty's judgment to have the victory and upper hand, I will be
content to loose my life for my just reward, as one that dishonored your
Majesty and the cause: where also the Echo of the margent returns back
again, the like triumphant tune. O noble king (quoth he) for Christ's sake
grant my request, the victory is already gotten, none of them dare undertake
the quarrel. Let me be hanged, bowelled, and quartered, yea and my corpse cast
to the fowls of the air, if the victory fall not on my side.

Again in an other place. I dare and redare all English Funeral. lib. 2. cap.
2. page 5.
Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, whosoever and wheresoever, to let me have their
speedy answer, and the acceptance of this challenge, etc. No no they dare
never do such an act, dum spiritus hos artus: what they dare do when I am dead
I know not. And again he not only renews his challenge, but also enlarges
it with many big and terrible words, protesting his burninge desire, and
great readiness in this marginall note. A new Fun^val. lib. 2. cap. 5. page 12.
Annexed to the and of his Funeral.
challenge which I desire with all my heart to be performed as knows our
mereifull God. And yet once again he is upon our bones with A fresh Larum, or
new challenge, to all English Jesuits and Iesuited Papists in the universal
world tagge and ragge, none at all excepted, whosoever shall appear in the
shape of man. This was the brave vain and exalted spirit of the magnanimous
Minister, never at quiet but still vrginge and pricking us forward, goading ad
goaringe us to the combat with his continual scoffs, tauntes, girds,
glickes, with incessant and insupportable scorns, and in most contemptible and
disdainful manner, a sample whereof I have here in the former sentences
presented before the (good Reader) a more large view may be had in the
Doleful knel, and that taken only out of the one book of his Funeral.

But he that before, like a princely Eagle soared a lost in the skies, creeps
now like a poor frozen snake in the low vautes and valleis. Esops rumbling
mountain that terrified all the borders, with the fear of some misshapen and
formidable monster, is at last delivered of a ridiculous mouse. Bell that thus
assaulted us with his challenges, and gave us no rest from his darings and
Larums, has now given over that stately style and manner of writing, That
which the merciful God knew before he desired with his whole heart, knows
now that he longs for no such thing, the eadge of his zeal is abated, the
ouerboiling heat of his courage is coaled: In this his Trial, not one
sentence, word, or syllable of any challenge, offer of disputation, or
acceptance of Conserence is mentioned, and as little (for that little which I
have readde) do I find in his Antepast. Quantum mutatus ab illo. From whence
comes this sudden change or what has wrought this unexpected and strange
alteration. Nothing else good Reader but that Bell as at the first surprised
with the desire of vain glory and the worlds applause made his first
challenge yet with a clause to prevent afterclaps, viz if it might stand with
the liking of higher powers: so was he afterward deceived in his accoutes,
erred in his conceits, and made a wrong reckening: For he verily persuaded
himself because he had remained so many years vna^sweared, that the same world
would still have continued: and that the terror of his challenges, had so
benumbed our fingers, that no pe^ne could or would have been stirred against
him. None of them (quoth he to his Majesty as before was noted) dare undertake
the quarrel: and in his Latum. But on the other side if either no Papist dare
appear, to perform and answer the challenge: and to speak plain English,
I think it will fall out so etc. VVhereupon he followed the chase so eagerly,
that no rest or peace could be had from his darings, challenges, and Larums:
but finding now that he was in a wrong box, and that it was rather contempt,
then any fear which caused so long silence, our terrible kilcowe has pulled
in his horns, and he that before like a proud palfry pricked up with prouander
kept a snorting and flinginge, is now become so poor, so lame and lean, that
the kites and crows assure them selves shortly to be the executors of his last
will and testament.

He has met with S. R. his answer to his insolent and challenging
Downfall: or rather that has met In the Epistle to his Majesty.
with him, which has giuene him this deadly greeting. Wherefore seeing that of
late Thomas Bell, a fugitive once from Protestants religion, as he is now from
Catholics, has not only accused but also slaundered the universal Catholic
cause, in a book which he has dedicated to your Majesty, and termed it, The
Downfall of Poperye, and withal challenges, dares, yea adiureth, (in which
case our blessed Savior though with danger of his life made answer) all
English Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and as he speaks Iesuited Papists to
answer him: I have presumed upon your gracious favor to accept his challenge,
and am ready to perform it hand to hand, if your Majesty grant license, and
in the mean time to dedicate to your name this my Confutation of his arguments
and slanders. After this dismoll news, no small coolinge card to the gallant
gamster, and so much the more grievous, by how much he never expected any such
thing: behold, out comes an other book of mine against him, called. The
Doleful knell, in In the Epistle a little from the beginning, and also not far
from the end.
which I have made most humble suit unto the right honorrable Lord Chancellor of
England, (to whom the book is dedicated) for the favor of an indifferent
conference as passed in France, and that in such serious and effectual manner,
as Bell can not but perceive that we be in earnest. In that book also, after I
had set down many of his proud and presumpteous speeches, of his vain
vaunting, and craking challenges, I did as it were prophecy, that the world
should shortly know how he would slip his neck out of In the Preface: about
some seven pages from the end. (...) Chap. 3.
the collar, and not withstanding all his daringe and redaringe, all his brave
boastinge and solemn protestation, find out some one cauilling shift or other,
never to appear in public conference, least he shamed him self and the
congregation for ever. There likewise shall the good Reader find, that I have
answered him so home, and so roundly joined issue with him touching his
challenges, in a chapter intreatinge of that special point, that I suppose he
can not desire more, and make no doubt but that Bell never desired so much.

Finally in my Scholasticall defiance to his Fresh larum in the end of the
Doleful Knell, I have said so abundantly in answer to the particulars thereof
(setting down the same wholly and entierly) that it is no question with me, but
that Bell may say more truly thereof, then he does when he acknowledges his
sins before the receiving of their Communion, viz that the burden thereof is
to him intolerable. And here to the perpetual disgrace of challenging Sr.
Thomas, and perfect satisfaction of the Reader, that he may fully understand,
how we are more willinge to take up his gauntlet, then ever he was in the
height of his greatest vanity to throw it to us, I will adioyn what for the
last parting I say to his Larum, my words be these. To conclude this point,
whereof I have said before so sufficiently both in the Epistle dedicatory, and
in answer to his third chapter, that I make no doubt the Reader remains with
full satisfaction: here not to follow the wandringe Minister in his vain of
vauntinge, to leave words, and to come unto deeds.

Non cauponantes bellum sed belligerantes.

I the meanest of millions, do accept of his challenge here made, and do
undertake to defend, not only those two points of Josephus doctrine and Pope
Martins dispensation, which he has singled out as matters important: but also
all the rest; so it may be, (which is but reason) with that equity and favor,
which was granted to the Protestants in France: and upon the same conditions
do provoke him with a counter-challenge, to the defense of his books,
according to his insolent and manifold daring offers: and for trial of both
these twain, in manner a foresaid, do conjure him, for the credit of the
congregation, and adjure him by the majesty of the Ministry, and exorcise him
by all those Larums and challenges, by all those brauings and braggings which
be found in his books, by all that reputation which he has gotten with his
silly dependants, and that mighty expectation, which he has moved in the minds
of many, that he would procure this safe-conducte, of which he much speaks,
but we can not yet get any sight: and the more to urge and press him: the
more to prick and spur him, to the effecting of so notable and memorable a
piece of service: the more to stir, provoke, and inflame his ministerial
mounting spirit, impatient of disgrace, and to fire the zeal of his fury
forward, I send him this scholasticall denance, with as many challenges, as
will stand between Charing Cross and Chester, and as many dares, as will
reach from Darby to Darington.

These, these doleful news, have cast him into such dumps, that he has small
list to hear either of disputation, or any indifferent Conference and
therefore though he writes still, and uses that as a poor proppe to vphould
his fallinge reputation, least the infamy of cowardice and dast^rdly fear,
with no small desgrace to their cause, should suddenly seize upon him yet the
tickling stringe and mountinge Minekin of brauinge and challenging is not once
touched, that kind of desc^nie is now out of date. He is no true friend of his
that will so much as mention any such matter. If this be not the cause what is
the reason that he which was so furious before like a little lion, is now
become so gentle like a tame cosset? Be it that his haughty and insolent manner
of crakinge, upon better adi^ise of friends disliked him, yet should he in
temperat and modest sort, still have prosecuted his former quarrel, for the
creditt of their gospel, and reputation of his learning, which in the opinion
of his dependants is very great, and in his own incomparable, and accepted of
the offer of S. R. and utterly confounded him in disputation: for he nothing
doubts or at least in former times has not, if his words did truly deliver
his meaning, but that such an act would tend to the glory of God, to the
service of his Sovereign; the honor of his country, the edification of his
auditors, and the comfort of his own soul, as in his Motives he speaks: or
if disputation Page 36.
likes him not, why has he not procured a Safeconduct for such an indifferent
Conference, for the due trial, and examination of the authorities alleged in
his books, as passed in France betwixt the reverend Bishop of Eureux and
now Cardinal, and the Lord of Plessi Marlie: for if that sincerity be used
which he often protests, what readyer way could he have wished, either for
the procuringe to himself eternal renown, and unspeakable creditt to his
cause, or everlasting shame to me, and thereby some disgrace to Catholic
religion. Seeing then he is now so mute, that before was so tonguy: now so dead,
that before was so lively: can any other true cause thereof be assigned, then
that his own conscience, not ignorant of his bad quarrel, and privy to so
many corrupt citations as be found in his books, makes him willing, after so
great expectation moved in men's minds, to shift his hands from any such
business, and slily to steal away, as though Engla^ds Joy were again in
actinge. Or if the humor of self love does so dazele his eyes, that he can not
yet see, into what dangerous straigtes by his many and manifest untruths, he
has brought the reputation of the congregation: and so would for his own part
still venture forward: What can be thought otherwise, of any that penetrate
into the matter as they ought, but that superior authority has commanded the
clapper to silence, for his foolish and dangerous iangling. But he that has
hitherto behaved himself in such insolent and dominiringe manner, odious to God
and the world must not thus pass away: wherefore I give him once again to
understand, that we expect the Safeconduct, which he has so often spoken of:
this we require, urge, and exact at his hands: wherein if he fail, well may
his followers say: Farewell fidelity, the glory of the Gospel is ecclipsed,
shame has shaken hands with the congregation, and no remedy but it must be
proclaimed by us in town and country, that Bell, even the Minister Bell, that
daringe Doctor, that craking challenger, that courageous champion, that Larum
ringer is desperately fled the field, not daringe to endure the encounter of
his auersaries, and has left all the fraternity egregiously cousined, abused
and gulled: or else: which turns as much to his perpetual infamy, and
disgrace: that his mouth is musseled by authority, for having spoken more, then
be can with his own honesty, or reputation to the common cause, defend and
maintain, Wherefore what remains, but that having runge his Doleful knell,
and left him speacheles, and ready to give up his last gasp: and having also
provided here a winding sheet, for the shrow dinge of his carcass, but that I
should with what convenient speed I can, make reddy his Black Burial, that he
may according to his deserts be interred, to the perpetual ignominy of his
name, and everlasting confusion of the congregation.

Before I end, I can not (gentle Reader) but say somthinge, concerning a book
that came lately to my hands, of one Thomas Rogers: which as it is a
commentary upon nine and thirty articles, containing the faith and religion
professed in England, and concordably agreed upon (as he says) by the reverend
Bishops and clergy, at two several Conuocations: so is it graced with this
Emblem. Perused, and by the lawful authority of the Church of England allowed
to be public. In this book, proceeding from so grave a man, as he
insinuates himself to be: from the chaplin, to the principal of their
clergy: entreating of so weighty, and important a subject, as the Synodicall
decrees of their church: and commended to the world, in such singular and
special manner, what can of reason be expected, but that the truth should
sincerely be set forth, without all suspicion of cunninge conueyance: all
fear of sinister relation, or any scruple, or doubt of hateful corruption:
seeing the stayne of such crimes, should not only touch Mr. Rogers, but redound
also as it were, to the infamy of the whole body of their clergy, and
religion. For any, yea of mean insight, may soon make this discourse: that if
the religion of England were sound, and ours false and abominable, no indirect
proceeding needed or would be practiced, either to the aduancinge of their
own, or depressing of ours: and contrariwise, if corrupt courses, be made the
buckler to defend themselves, and the weapon to offend us: what can be thought,
but that there is a flawe in that faith, which is by that means maintained:
and impregnable verity in our religion, which is by such godles shifts
assaulted: now whether this be so or no, and in that gross manner, as not only
those which be of capacity and learning, but even of the meanest and ignorant
sort, shall (especially in some of them) think us to be notoriously abused and
iniuried, remains to be hadled. Wherefore to run over briefly, some few
untruths, and a little to touch the corrupt dealing of Mr. Rogers as my short
time shall give leave, and the straight co^fines of a Preface will permit.

Page 14. He sets upon us in the manner. One Mother A. short list of Mr.
Rogers untruths.
Jane (quoth he) is the Savior of women: a most execrable assertion, of
Postellus the Jesuit. Nay rather it is a most execrable untruth of Mr. Rogers
the Preacher. Can a man of his profession, charge us with so strange,
paradoxicall, and blasphemous an assertion, and so injurious to the sacred
blood of the Redeemer of the whole world, and that both of men and women,
without recoilinge of Conscience: we deny what he says, how does he prove
what so boldly he affirms. Postellus the Jesuit (quoth he) teaches this
execrable dnctrine: which he proves out of the Jesuits Cathechisme. That
Postellus was one of that order, is more then I do know, or more then I list
yet to believe, until I see better prooffes: but if he were, he was no other,
then such a religious man as Luther was, that ran out of his cloister to lay
the foundation of the Gospel. I find him in the Indice of the Council of
Trent, commonly annexed thereunto, enrolde for an heretic and so discharged
from us: albeit I can hardly believe, that ever he could be so mad, as to
broach any such ridiculous, sensles, and blasphemous doctrine. To justify this
of Postellus, Mr. Rogers voucheth the Jesuits Catachisme, that is a most
scandalous and slanderous libel, made by one Pasquiere a French heretic, in
disgrace of that renowned order, as he knows full well, when he cites out of
the same Catachisme two infamous verses, tendinge deeply to the Page 187.
touch of their lives, which none so simple to think, that they would publishe
of themselves. They are so far from being the authors of that filthy and
heretical book, that one Richeome a learned man of that Society, has set
forth a confutation thereof. Should a Catholic compose a like treatise,
bearinge title. The Church of Englands Catechism, fraught with abominable and
most odious opinions, and such in truth as they utterly detest: and should I
produce out of it most loathsome stuff, against them in disgrace of their
religion, would he not condemn both the author, for a monster of the world,
and me for an extreme malicious slaunderer, to press them with any such
damnable testimony? I leave the application to himself.

Page 17. He condemns it in us as an error and dream, that Christ descended
down into hell, to deliver the Souls of our forefathers: and that most
injuriously, for (to omit what may be brought out of sacred scripture) we can
not be condemned herein but the ancient fathers, must bear us company, and
that by the testimony of our adversaries. The fable (quoth Casuin) of a place
under the 2. Instit. cap. 16.. 9.
ground, called Limbus, albeit it has great authors, yet it is nothing else
then a fable. Sutcliffe confesses, that S. Hierom and other fathers believed,
that Lib. 1. de Purgato. cap. 4.
there was a simbus patrum before the coming of Christ. But he adds, that
they affirmed it rather scholasticaliy then dogmatically, which yet he neither
does nor can prove: we take what he grants of their beleuinge, the other we
deny. Willet also can not gainesay the same. We confess In his s^nopsis of the
editio^ 1600. page 353.
(quoth he) that the fathers for the most part of them, to have been in this
error. To conclude this doctrine is taught by the church of England, when as
in the Geneua Psalms, allowed and authorized by received custom amongst them:
this article of the Creed: He descended into hell. is turned thus into meeter.

His soul did after this discende,
into the lower parts.
To them that long in darkness were,
the true light of their hearts.
By what warrant therefore Mr. Rogers expounds them here to the contrary I
know not, him self can best tell.

Page 23. many Papists (quoth he) and namely the Franciscans, blushe not to
say that S. Francis is the Holy Ghost. Mr. Rogers blusheth not notoriously to
injury us with the imputation of so blasphemous an assertion. He quoteth in the
margent for prooffe, the Alcaron of the Franciscans, a most shameless and
scurrilous book, set out by modern heretics against that worthy and
religious order. It seems he bestows much of his time in such spiritual
books as these, and willingly entertaineth such witness against us, as the
Scribes and Phariseis did against Christ: until he discharges himself better,
this injurious and blasphemous untruth must ly upon him self.

Page 29. Speaking of our behavior to the scriptures, he Antidot. euang in
Luc. 16. p. 528.
says. To the same purpose but more blasphemously Stapleton says, as the
Jews were to believe Christ so are we simply and in every thing to believe the
Church of Rome, whether it teaches truth or errors. He fathereth a gross
untruth upon Stapleton; his words be these. Certum est, etc. It is certain
that the Jews ought to have obe^ed Christ, so far forth, as he gave testimony
to the truth, but whether he did that or no, belonged not to the Jews to make
any doubt of, but simply to believe. Wherefore as the Jews ought to have
believed Christ, so ought we simply to believe the Church: not verily whether
Note these words against Mr. Rogers.
it teaches true things or not; but whether that be certain to us or not. We
ought not to doubt but as the father sending Christ; and commanding him to be
heard: so Christ sending his church and commanding that to be heard, has by
his wisdom disposed, that without all danger of error, as well the Church
should be heard of us, as Christ of the Jews. True therefore it is not, that
Stapleton says we are simply and in every thing to believe the Church, whether
it teaches truth or errors, for he affirms the contrary, and his words
contain not any impious or absurd doctrine, though Mr. Rogers, by ouerlashing,
and not reciting his words truly, would make him to speak both impiously and
falsely.

Page 49. He taxes us, for teachinge free will: and these words he cites as
out of the Council of Trent. Man Ses. 6. cap. 1.
has free will, to perform even spiritual and heavenly things. What error
can this be; when straight after Mr. Rogers sets down this proposition. Man
may perform and do good works, when he is prevented by the grace of Christ,
and renewed by the Holy Ghost. But he will say, that the Council of Trent
teaches, that good works may be done without the grace of Christ, and
therefore he cites this doctrine of ours as erroneous, and contrary to a
former proposition of his, which is this. Man can not do any good work that
good is and godly, being not yet regenerate. But herein he does slander the
Council of Trent. In the very place by him quoted it rather has the contrary:
and in the first Canon of that Session most plainly; which is this. Yfany
shall say, that a man is justified before Ses. 6. can. 1.
God by his works, which are done either by the force of humane nature, or the
doctrine of the law, without divine grace by Jesus Christ, be he accursed.
Judge now (gentle Reader) whether Mr. Rogers, has dealt truly with us, and
the Council of Trent or no, when he would persuade the world, that we believe,
that man has free will, to perform even spiritual and heavenly things,
without the grace of God.

In the same page, and very next line, he entreats the Rhemists in like
manner, where he cites these words of theirs. Men believe not but of there own
free will. True it is they say so, but they exclude not in those words Gods
grace, as most injuriously he charge them, alleging their words for that
purpose, for else where they acknowledge that Gods grace and free will must both
concur. 2. Cor. 3. in ver. 5. page 447.
Beside, the better to infame them, he has corrupted the sentence, chopping of
the last words, which be these. August. lib. 1. ad Simplicianum q. 2. so that
the charg of heresy or error touches S. Augustine, from whom those words be
drawn Mr. Rogers without all scruple, cutteth those away, to make his slander
the more colorable against the Rhemists, not having any list to quarrel with
S. Augustine.

Page 65. S. Francis (quoth he) attained unto the perfection of holiness and
could not sin at all. A most injurious slander. In the margent, he may seem
to quote something to the ignorant, sor justification of his bold assertion,
but there is nothing save a latin sentece, which in English is this. Will thou
come to the top or perfection, attend to the life and manners of Blessed
Francis: but these words prove not, that he could not sin, and who is the
author of them, none is here named at all. Is not this great sincerity of Mr.
Rogers, to vent out such an egregious untruth and then to cousin his ignorant
Reader, with a quotation of his own, which yet proves not that, for which it
is alleged.

Page 97. Speaking of the Popes, he enrolleth, diverse of them for heretics.
Some (quoth he) have been heretics. For Siricius, Calixtus, Leo 9. and
Paschalis, condemned the marriage of Priests. A notorious untruth, proceeding
from a soul insected with heresy. Let Mr. Rogers name is he can, any old
approved father or later writer, not tainted with his leuin, that ever
condemned S. Siricius for an heretic. For if it be heresy to condemn the
marriage of Priests, then was the ancient and holy Council of Carthage
heretics: nay then were their forefathers, yea and the Apostles them selves
heretics, if Council. Carth. 2. can. 2.
we may believe them. It does please us all (says that Council) that
Bishops, Priests, and deacons, and such as handle the Sacraments, being
keepers of chastity, should abstain them selves from wives, that what the
Apostles taught, and antiquity it self has kept, we also should observe. And
if it please him to read Bells 12. and 13. untruths in this treatise, he shall
find other authentical authorities for the single life of the clergy, yea
even by the testimony of his own dear brethren the Lutherans of Magdeburge:
which being so, I make no doubt but that the discreet Reader, will rather
condemn this modern Minister, of a notable untruth, then so many worthy
fathers of the Primative Church for heretics.

Page 102. He slaundereth us most palpably, as though we taught this doctrine,
viz that The Church has power to change the Sacraments ordained even by
Christ himself. we utterly deny it, what evidence does he bring to convince us
He quoteth in the margent Council. Trid. ses. 5. cap. 2. where no such thing is
to be found. He must give us leave to suspect, that he used art in setting
down the quotation, when the thing is most false which he obiecteth against
us. The place he means is Ses. 21. cap. 2. where the Council delivers this
doctrine. Praeterea declarat etc. Furthermore the Council declares, that this
power has always been in the Church, that it might in the dispensation of the
Sacraments, their substance remaining sound and untouched, appoint or change
those things, which it should judge to be more expedient for the profit of
those that receive them, or that veneration which is due to the Sacraments,
according to the variety of things, times, and places. The Council in
express terms affirms, that the substance of the Sacraments can not be
altered, and consequently that the Sacraments ordained by Christ can not be
changed, which yet Mr. Rogers directly contrary to their own words, fathereth
upon them.

Page 112. Some write (quoth he) as Busgradus, that if the Pope believe that
there is no life to come, (as some Popes have done) we must believe it as an
article of our faith. Who this Busgradus is I know not, and as little where
the place is to be found: neither am I like by Mr. Rogers: for he neither
tells the one, nor quoteth the other. It is not unlike, but that he is one of
his Suersbies, some odd compannion or other, which he has in store for such
holy purposes. The untruth is so abominable, that it smells before God and
man. Himself must father it, until he can name some known Catholic for
author thereof which he will never do before the wordls end.

Page 115. If S. Hierom (quoth he) had been away at Chalcedon, that Council
had erred. Then surely did it err, seeing certain it is, that he could not be
there, having ended his days before, under Honorius the Emperor. The
authority of Jewel Prosper in Chronico. anno Christi 422.
(who died most miserably in our memory whom he quoteth) is to light for so
weighty a matter. No maruail if Mr. Rogers run into many untruths, if he
follows such a lying master, as was of rare note for that quality.

Page 116. By Councels (quoth he) the Traditions and books of foolish men,
have been made of Ses. 4, decret.
equal authority with the word of God: as by the Council of Trent. He means
the Histories of Toby, Judith, and the Machabees etc. as I suppose, and not all
there admitted for Canonical, least he sweep away the whole Bible. And were
not I beseech him, these books authorized also for Canonical, by the third
Council of Carthage twelve hundred years ago, in which glorious S. Augustine
Can. 47.
was present: Will he also lightely reject this Council as Popish, and
condemn them also for authorizing the books of foolish men: it were plain
dealing I confess, but far better manners rather so to censure himself for
contradictinge such a learned, ancient, and venerable Synod. Again, shall the
Apocalypse, or Revelation of S. John, be the book of a foolish man, because it
was made Canonical by the Council of Trent, and the third of Carthage. For as
the books of Toby and the Machabees were before doubted of by diverse, and not
ratified by the decree of any Council before that of Carthage, so was the
Apocalypse of S. John, and therefore their case is all one. Furthermore be it,
that Mr. Rogers allows them not for Canonical, yet ought he not to term
them the books of foolish men: for then may we give that name to all the
books of the ancient fathers, yea to their Synod of nine and thirty
articles, upon which he makes his commemary: and that which were most pity
of all, both this, and other books of his own may claim interest to the same
title. Lastly does not the congregation of England publicly read both soble
and Judith in their Church service, in the same rank and order with the other
scriptures: and yet with Mr. Rogers, they be the books of foolish men: verily
in this point, he seems to be one of the disciplinarian fraternity.

Pap. 121. He cites Eckius for houlding that not only venial sins but
mortal also, are purged after this life. He slaundereth that learned man, he
teaches no such thing, for then it would follow, that all men should finally
be saved: It may be that he says, the temporvll pain due to mortal sin,
after the eternal is forgiven, is purged after this life: of mortal sin it
self he speaks not, and I do without all fear accuse him of an untruth,
though for lack of the book, I can not pervse the place he alleges, so
learned was the man known, and so sound in religion.

In the same page he abuses Durandus affirminge him to think that the souls
in Purgatory have rest some times upon Sundays and Holy days. In the place by
him quoted de officio mortuorum lib. 7. no such thing is found.

Page 124. He charge us most untruly to hold that repentance is not of
necessity unto the salvation of man: For without the same a Popish pardon
(quoth he) may serve. A great untruth for a pardon profits not any man, but
such as is in the state of Gods grace, which presupposes penance or
repentance. No Catholic author he notes that teaches any such doctrine: and
no maruail, for none can be named. Thus is a gener all untruth received
amongst them, and theresore it should seem that they have obtained some pardon
for that purpose, to imitate their phrase of speakinge.

Page 158. He charge us to abuse the sacrament of Baptisem. So have the
Papists (says he) baptized both Bells and Babels. Before he noted it in us as
an error, that we teach the Sacraments to confer grace ex opere operato. But
I hope he is not so gross as to imagine, that we should suppose that either
Bells or Babels be capable of grace. The Sacramet of baptism is only with us,
given to reasonable creatures: and though bells (for babels we leave to him for
his recreation) and other things be hallowed, with holy water, and other
prayers, and have sometime a name given them, by reason whereof they are said
by the common people to be baptized or Christened, in an improper and
metaphorical sense: yet none whom malice possesses not, will either say or
think, that they be truly and properly baptized, when as the necessary and
formal words of Baptism, viz, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, are not used. It would better become Mr.
Rogers gravity, to dispute formally like a divine, then to cavil upon the
improper speech of the vulgar people, like a wranglinge Sophister.

Page 159. speaking of the Eucharist, he charge us most falsely to use it
magically as a salve against bodily sickness and adversity: citing no author
for proffe of so bold and false an assertion.

Page 157. Entreatinge of the Sacrament of Exteme unction he comes upon us
with this false charge. The minister thereof usually is a Priest, but may be
any other Christian: and a little after he affirms us to houlde, that a woman
may be the minister of that sacrament. A most gross and palpable untruth,
jorged as it seems by him self, when as he names not any other author. They
are accursed by us that shall say, that the proper minister of Extreme Council.
Trid. se^. 14. can. 4. de extrema unction.
unction is not only a Priest, which shows us to be free from his false
imputation.

Page 168. He labors to insame us after this manner. Baptism (quoth he)
serves for the putting away of Original sin only: and that we teach this
doctrine he proves out of S. Thomas of Aquine, whom he quoteth in the margent,
but in such sort, that it seems he meant not that we should ever find it: he
reserreth us to his book, De Sac. altar: which has two and thirty long
chapters, not specifying any one in particular: ensorcinge his Reader by this
means either to believe him, or to great labor before he can reprove him: but
this cunninge must not serve his turn. I challenge him confidently of an
untruth: never shall he be able to justify either out of that book, or any
other what he obiecteth against that myrrhour of learning glorious S. Thomas
of Aquine as who teaches far otherwise, as I will by more particular reference
now declare. Wherefore in the 3 part. q 69. Artic. 1.
third part of his Sum he propounds this question. Whether by Baptism all
sins be taken away: to which he answeareth affirmatively. And in the articles
followinge, he confirms the same verity especially in the seventh: Where he
moves the question, whether the opening of the gare of the kingdom of heaven
be an effect of Baptism, which he resolves in this manner. I answer and say,
that to open the gate of the kingdom of heaven, is to remove the impediment,
by which one is hindered to enter into the kingdom of heaven: and this
impediment is sin, and the punnishement due to sin: but before it was
proved that by Baptism all sin, and all punnishement due to sin, is taken
away, whereof it follows, that the openinge of the gate of the kingdom of
heaven, is the effect of Baptism. Let Mr. Rogers now go and tell such as will
believe him, that S. thomas taught Baptism to take away Original sin only.

Page 169. and 170. He accuses us as though we taught Baptism given to
infants by Protestant ministers, not to be lawful. An untruth, as he may
learn out of the Council Ses. 7. Can. 4. de Bapt.
of Trent, where this Canon is delivered. If any shall say that Baptism which
is given of Heretics in the name of the father, and the some, and the Holy
Ghost, with intention to do that which the Church does, not to be true
Baptism, be he accursed. But says he, in France and Flanders the contrary
has been practiced: for prosse whereof, he sends us to an other place of his
book, where no such thing is found, and never shall he show us to teach,
that any Baptized by Protestants, with due matter, form, and intention, ought
to be baptized again.

Page, 183. Christ has satisfied (quoth he) and was offered only for Original
sin: an error of Thomas Aquinas. Nay rather, it is a most shameless untruth
of Thomas Rogers: no place does he quote, and no marqaile, when he knows not
where to find it, Is this the fidelity, this the sincerity and conscience of
the pretended preacher of the word? If the good Reader vouchsafe to read S.
Thomas he shall find in him the clean contrary doctrine, to 3. part. q. 49.
art. 5.
wit, that we are by the passion of Christ, delivered both from Original and
all actual sin whatsoever.

Page 198. He runs upon the Jesuits thus. The Jesuits (quoth he) can not
brook Episcopal pre-eminence: and in their high court of reformation, have
made a law for the utter abrogation of all Episcopal jurisdiction. A most
notorious slander, as the whole world knows? They live under Bishops,
without any mislike of their dignity, nay with condemninge them of heresy, that
teach otherwise, as is apparante in Cardinal Lib. 1. de Clericis cap. 14.
Comme^t. in 2. 2. disput. 10. quast. ^1.
Bellarmin and Gregorius de Valentia. The book which he quoteth I have not
seen, yet I make no doubt but the author is one of trust, some false brother
or other. The thing it self is so false, as I marvel he blusheth not to putt
it in printe. That they have made a law to abrogate Episcopal jurisdiction,
is most ridiculoue: as though forsooth it were in their power to effect any such
thing, and as though they labor not both in word and writing, for the
upholding of that dignity against disciplinarian Caluinists. The author he
alleges for proffe is some Quodlibet arian minister, though poor VVat son
bears the name. So palpable an untruth known to those that know any thing,
is sufficient, both to cassier the credit of those Quodlibets, and other like
libellaticall pamplets, published under his name, and also deeply to touch the
reputation of Mr. Rogers. True it is, that those religious and learned men to
stop all suggestions of ambition, which has been the bane of many, have a
severe constitution amongst themselves, ratified by vow, that none shall not
only not procure any Ecclesiastical Prelacy, but also resist what he may,
(reserving due obedience to whom he is subject) not to be advanced to any such
dignity: yet may they when it shall seem so good to the Pastor of Gods Church,
be promoted to prelacy: as that worthy man Bellarmine was not only created
Cardinal, but also made Archbishop of Capua. Mr. Rogers as I suppose, is not
acquai^t^d with any such scrupulous nicenes, being more like of the twain to
have made a vow, that he will not refuse any Episcopal promotion if he can
tell how to com by it.

Page 220. To bring our religion into extreme hatred, with all that be of
contrary faith, he charge us with this doctrine, viz, That faith is not to be
kept with heretics. An odious slander and not only of Mr. Rogers, but
commonly received amongst all Protestants. How does he prove it? forsooth out
of the Council of Constance which he quoteth in the margent, but notes not
any particular place: which argues false dealing, the Council being passing
long. Gods Church assembled in that sacred Synod, is notoriously abused, and
we daily iniuried by the licentious pens of protestats. No such thing is in
that Counsel defined. And I desire no more, then that the good Reader will not
give Mr. Rogers or others creditte, before they truly bring forth in particular
words, what they so confidently auouche in general terms.

Thus have I briefly by a sufficient jury of untruths, convicted Mr. Rogers,
of false dealinge, and most injurious and godless proceedinge, against
Catholic religion. To prosecute all, were a work of more labor: for never
was book as I think, coming forth from such a one, of such a subject, with
that authority, and that carried outwardly so brave and glorious a show, and
inwardly was so ugly, foul, and deformed, to the infamy of the author,
discredit of the book, disgrace of their religion, and high commendation of
our faith, which stands upon so sure grounds, that it can not be impugned but
by those means, by which the author of it Christ himself, was condemned to the
shameful and opprobrious death of the cross.

Being thus dispatched of Mr. Rogers: it remains to speak a word or two of
another book, which was not long since sent me and is entitled. A brief
view of the weak grounds of Popery, compiled together by one Mr. Vdall, a
lay gentleman out of diverse English Controuertists, as himself seems to
insinuate, and in all probability can not otherwise be thought, and so no
marvel, if the waters be not sound, when they were drawn from corrupt
fountaynes, and who can ever look for a well shapen garment, made after a
crooked measure. Grapes are not gathered Math. 8. v. 16.
of thorns, nor figs of thistles, as our Savior says: yet does it so much
please Mr. Vdall, that he does seem to take great heart of grace, for that he
was not answered with that expedition he expected. The more have he makes,
the more he urges his own disgrace, if malice has set him a work: but if
it be true zeal of truth, and saving his soul as he pretends, I despair
not of his conversion: wherefore either for the spiritual profitt of himself,
or the commodity of other, or common good of both, I will now present him with
a short sample of such soul flawes as be in his book, minding afterward with
more full hand to prosecute that subject.

In his Preface to his dear Cousins, (whom with poison lurking under sugared
words he labors to inuenime) he accuses us of open blasphemy against the
sacred scriptures: which I think will rather prove a gross untruth on his
part and where is this blasphemy contained? in a book as he tells us of
Cardinal Cusanus, which is entitled De authoritate, etc. Of the authority of
the Church and Council, above and against the scriptures. But I beseech him,
did he ever see this book, which so confidently he alleges: if he has, then
should he have done well to have noted where, that the Reader also might have
found it, seeing it is not amongst the three Tomes of his works, set out at
Basil, In the ^eare 1565.
neither mentioned by Trithemius, who has diligently gathered together, the
works of learned writers: nor yet by Posseuinus who has lately entreated of
the same matter. If he has not: what indiscretion is it, in so weighty a
point, to rely upon the creditt of others. Verily, would such as read
Protestants books, but vouchafe sometime to examine the quotations, it were
not possible that they could be so pitifully deceived, as they daily be:
Cusanus is abused, he ueuer wrote any such book. This untruth it may be he
borrowed from Mr. Jewel, who does not only cite that book, but also (as
Det^ction lib. 5. page 410.
though he had known it very well) quote very many places out of the same, as
he is charged by Doctor Hardinge: which argues that out of true books he
could have proved any thing for himself, that out of one, which was never
written, found so many testimonies to serve his turn. I would not wish Mr.
Vdall, to employ his time so badly, as with the touch of his creditt, and
peril of his own soul, to retale the untruths of such gross merchants.

In his fourth page, thus he writes. Yea Arias Montanus a chief Papist, in his
Hebrew bible, writes in the forefromt and principal leaf of the book, There
are added (says he) in this edition, the books written in Greek, which the
Catholic Church following the Canon of the Hebrews, reckons amongst the
Apocrypha. The true sense of Arias Montanus words is corrupted, either by Mr.
Vdall, or some other from whom he had them, by foysting in diverse of their
own. That learned man in the edition of the Antuerpiae ex osficina Christoph.
Plant. 1584.
Hebrew Bible, with the latin interlineall interpretation, in the title page
says. There are adjoined to this edition, the books written in Greek, which
are called Apocrypha. He says not, they be Apocrypha: but that they are so
called by some, that is the Jews, who exclude them from their Hebrew Canon
which he had there sett^ forth. That other addition; viz which the Catholic
Church following the Canon of the Hebrews reckons amongst the (Apocrypha)
upon which the force of his charge depends, are not in Arias Montanus: where
Mr. Vdall had them, himself best knows.

In fifth page he writes thus. The Council of Laodicea, assured by a general
Council in Trullo did set down the same Canon of the script urs Can. 59.
which both the old Church had, and our Church houldeth: and commands. Ne
aliqui, etc. that none besides be read, and received in to authority. How many
things of note, are comprised in these few lines against Mr. Vdall. First he
seems greatly to reverence these two Councels, which yet is but a copy of his
countenance, to delude the ignorant Reader, for I do not think that he will
stand either to the one or the other, though content he is, to press us with
their authority. For example, the Council of Loadicea, commands Chrisme to
be received after Can. 48. Can. 50.
Baptism: and that the fast of lent be observed: neither of which, I am sure,
pleases Mr. Vdall. Likewise the Council of Constantinople holden in Trullo
allows of images, and their veneration, when it calls them, imagines
venerabiles: venerable images: which I make no doubt nothing pleases his taste.
The same Council forbids Can 82. Can. 6. Can. 58.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, to marry wives after taking of
Orders: and commands Bishops not to dwell with their wives, which they
married before they entered into the higher Orders of the Clergy: which
severity of theirs must utterly dislike him, as being in his opinion, contrary
to the word of God.

Secondly this Council of Constantinople in Trullo is of no authority, as in
which the Pope neither by him self, nor by his Legates, was present, and Pope
Sergius, who then lived, Lib. de sex aetatibus. in Iustiniano.
did disanulle that erraticall Synod, as venerable Bede writetht with what
conscience then can Mr. Vdal call that agenerall Council, and urge the
authority thereof as authentical: when as not only we, but also the
Protestants utterly reject it, albeit in this point we for our parts see no
cause to refuse it. Thirdly true it is not, that the Council of Laodicea,
sets down the same Canon of the scriptures, which the Church of England
allows: for the Apocalypse or Revelation of S. John is omitted. Fourthly,
this Council forbids the readinge of others, not there expressed: yet the
Church of England reads the histories of Judith, and Toby in their public
assemblies: which Mr. Vdall I suppose, will hardly show, how it agrees with
the decree of that Council. Fifthly he has corrupted the Council by addinge
somwhatof his own: for these words: and received into authority be not there
found. Would any ever have thought, that so many things, could have been
notedagainst him, in so small a sentence. If Mr. Vdall has viewed the
Original, hardly can he be excused from malice: if he has not, let him
beshrewe their fingers, upon whose creditt, he committed them to writing.

In the same fifth page, he makes us to allow the fourth book of Esdras most
untruly, and that contrary to his own knowledge, when as in the second page he
confesses, that we account both the third and fourth of Esdras for Apocrypha.

Page 51. To eneruat the force of general Councels thus he writes. Bellarmine
rejects wholly seven general Lib. 1. de Council. cap. 6. and not lib. 10.
cap. 60. as Mr. Vdal quoteth it.
Councels. That learned Prelate is iniuriousoy entreated, for who would not
think, that Mr. Vdall spoke of lawful and true general Councels, as though
such were rejected by Bellarmine, which is nothing so: for he speaks of
certain detestable conuenticles, assembled by the Arrians and other like
perfidious heretics which they called general. Primum generale etc. The first
general Council (says Bellarmine) in the opinion of the Arrians which is
rejected, is the Council of Antioch, etc. Is these be detested by Protestants
also for unlawful and wicked, why is Cardinal Bellarmine singled out as
though he alone refused them? or the matter so cunningly delivered, as though
they were reverenced by Mr. Vdall and Protestants for lawful general
Councels? This is not to deal sincerly, and to seek truth with a pure and
upright heart, unless he be so careless, as to receive all upon the report of
others, which yet can not wholly be excused.

Thus much shall serve at this time, for by Gods asistance, I intend hereafter
more to lay open the manifould maladies of his treatise, and to show with what
weak engines he labors to undermine the impregnable grounds of the
Catholic Church. God grant that the happy news of his conversion, may
cross these my designements, whereof I see no cause to despair, if truly zeal
of religion, and desire of salvation, which so much he would seem to thirst
after, has embouldened him being a lay man, to launch into the depth of these
mystical matters. Let him not rely too much unto those, from who^ he receives
the substance of that he writes, least together with the loss of his
reputation, he incur also the danger of eternal damnation: and if upon this
small warning, he finds himself to have been deceived, wisdom would, he
should more carefully look how he trusts, where he has been abused: and
with greater diligence both to examine his own writers, and also to read our,
namely Cardinal Bellarmine, where he shall find the most of his objections
answered, as the Catholic author of that letter, which he has put down
in his book truly enformeth him. To which, that gives no satisfaction,
alleged by Mr. Vdall for answer, to wit, that Bellarmins reasons, are by
the learned of his side sufficiently handled and replied unto: when as the most
of the arguments in his book be answered by Bellarmine and nothing do I
find brought by Mr. Vdal to insringe his solutions: which gives me just cause
to suspect that he is with the preconceipted sincerity of his own doctors,
carried away into error, and so looks little into the Originals: which if he
did, he could not but find that which he pretends to seek for, if he shut
not his eyes against the truth, as he professes he will not. Which that he
may do, I shall not forgett to commend him to his mercy, who desires not the
death of a sinner, but that all should com to the knowledge of his name. But if
it shall sal out, that he will still proceed forward in his fourmer course, yet
I would wish him in writing, to abstain from all biting and bitter words,
which sometime he breaks into, that the quarrel of God may not he prosecuted
like the quarrels of this world; but with that modesty, which becomes the
prosessors of divinity and religion. And for my part sorry I am, that Bell has
so far given the raynes to his passion, as with such virulent terms, and
insupportable insolency, to cast forth his gantlet of defiance, and to insult
against the whole Church of God, which has made my style before in the
Preface, more stirring and quick, then otherwise I would or thought
convenient, least we might be condemned of cowardice or sear, (to the
prejudice of truth) which so often, and so opprobriously he obiecteth against
us.

Thus much of these matters: now it remains to encounter Bell, and to examine,
and make trial, what substantial stuff is contained in his Trial of the
new religion.

B. C.

BELLS TRIAL EXAMINED CENSVRED AND REFVTED.
The Proeme.
ENtending to note the principal untruths of Bells Pamphlet, (the principal
part and fundamental substance thereof) I have thought good (to take my work
orderly before me) first to salute his Epistle, and see what wholesome stuff he
presents in that to his Patrones.

Bells Epistle Dedicatory.
THE 1. VNTRVTH.
THE Minister stands upon coals, till his fingers be at work, and his
pen busied about his hearts delight, and therefore not to loose any time,
hefalleth roundly to the matter, presenting his patrons with a trick of his
occupation in his very first entrance. His words be these. The visible church
(quoth he) as writes Egesippus, Egesip. apud Eusebium host. lib. 3. cap. 32.
remained a virgin free from all heresies and corruptions during the lise of
the Apostles, that is to say, about one hundred years after Christ, to which
time S. John the Evangelist was living. But after the death of the Apostles
says he, errors by little and little crept into the church, as into a void and
desert house. This assertion is doleful enough and yet very profitable
against all Popish Recusants of our time, as who are not ashamed impudently to
avouch, that after so many hundred years from Christ's ascension, there has
been no error at all, in their Romish Babylon. This collection will prove
doleful enough to him self, and not very profitable to the congregation, by
that time we have sifted his words, and examined the authority alleged, for
it is powdreed with lies, and iugling tricks, thick and three-sould. For first
if he means any such error, as may stand with the integrity of the Catholic
faith, most false it is, that we deny any such error may creep into the
Church: for we willingly confess that Papias, S. Ireneus, and some others held
the error of the Chiliastes (as him self mentions straight after) that S.
Ciprian, and diverse others with him, were carried a way in to the error of
rebaptization: but yet notwithstanding these their errors, they were true
members of the Catholic church, seeing that in questions newly springing up,
error may be incurred but not always heresy, which imports not only an
error in the understanding, but also malice and obstinacy in the will, by
contemninge the Church her decree and determination. But if by error, he
means heresy, as no question he does, both because he says, that during the
lives of the Apostles the Church was free from all heresies and corruptios, but
after their death, error by little and little crept in, and also for that he
terms our Church Romish Babylon or as he speaks in his Survey (where he
handles the very same matter) whorish Babylon; by which Page 342.
words it is plain, that he means heretical errors, for such only makes
our Church Babylon, and to forsake her true spouse Christ, and to commit
spiritual fornication by cleaving to new, damnable, and heretical opinions:
and lastly for that otherwise he proves nothing against us, the scope of his
book being to show, that our religion is not old, but new, as being far
different from the pure faith of the Apostles.

This then being his meaning, most false it is I say that any such errors crept
into the Church (I mean with the corruption of the Churches sincere doctrine,
though I willingly grant that diverse of the Church, have by heresy fallen from
true doctrine, as namely the minister him self) either in the Apostles time,
or shall do until the worlds end, and that by the singular providence of
Christ, who promised that hell gates should not prevail Math. 16.
against his Church, and many like places to that purpose might be alleged.
But what say we to the authority of Egesippus who lived straight after the
Apostles, cited by Bell for justification of that he affirmed? Nothing else, but
that he belieth both Egesippus and also Eusebius, whom he quoteth in the third
book of his history cap. 32. as the relator of those words of Egesippus.
Read the place he that please, no such thing shall there be found, nor the
name of Egesippus so much as once mentioned. The minister was not content to
Bells epistle dedicatorie borrowed from his survey page 341. 342.
present his Patrons, with a cast paragraffe of his Survey, making it the
begininge of his Epistle, for almost two pages together, but he must also abuse
both them and others with a notorious untruth of his own, fatheringe that
upon Eusebius which is not there to be found.

Neither can this dealing of his, proceed from other root then mere malice:
for immediately after this sentence cited out of Eusebius in the 32. chapter of
his third book, he produces out of the 33. chapter of the same book how
Papias and Ireneus were infected with the error of the Chiliastes, and that
very truly, which shows that he perused the place. And in his Survey the
foresaid Page 341. 342.
places be found in like manner alleged the one truly and the other most
falsely. Can this procedinge of his stewe from any other sink then the filthy
puddle of his own corrupt conscience. Beside this, who knows not acquainted
any thing in antiquity, that Simon Magus set his heresy abroach in the
Apostles time, and before the death of S. Peter, (as Eusebius recounteth,)
whose Lib. 2. hist. cap. 12.
death was long before the death of S. John the Evangelist, no less then
fiftye years by Bells own computation: for S. Peter was crucified as he says
Survey page 172.
at Rome under Nero, the fourtith and fourth year after Christ: Nay the same
Eusebius notes though breifely, how Simon Magus was overcome by S. Peter.
Cerinthus also the heretic was in the Lib. 2. hist. cap. 1.
Apostles time, for Ireneus makes mention how S. John the Evangelist, coming
to wash him self Lib. 3. cap. 3.
in the bath, finding there Cerinthus suddenly departed, saying, that he
feared least the bath would fall, for as much as the enemy of truth was then
in it. But what do I dispute further in a matter so evident, for certain it
is out of sacred scripture that heresies were taught long before the death of
S. John. S. Paul (who was beheaded Survey page 172.
at Rome the same day and year with S. Peter as Bell confesses) writing that
Hymenaeus and Philetus erred from the truth, saying the resurrection is done 2.
Tim. 2. v. 18.
already, and had subverted the faith of some: which conuinceth playenly that
their doctrine was heretical, otherwise it could not have subverted faith.
Does not S. John also him self speak of the damnable Nicolaites. This being
so, could Egesippus or Eusebius men of great learning, and conversant Apoc. 2.
in the scriptures, be ignorant of this, or knowing it, can it enter into any
man's imagination, that they would write as Bell alleges them, directly
contrary to the truth, and opposite to their own knowledge: will not any sooner
believe, that the minister has grossly slaundered them, and coined this f^ction
in the forge of his own brains, employed about nothing more, then the
hammering of lies, cauils, and corruptions against the Catholic faith.

The minister proceeding forward, labors to show how errors crept in after
the death of S. John, and tells out of Eusebius, that Papias and Ireneus were
Chiliastes, which I willingly grant: but withal deny, that they were
therefore heretics, as before has been said, and so they help his cause
nothing at all, for he speaks of such errors as be joined with heresy, from
which they were free. Melchior Canus also (quoth he) opposes him self against
all the Thomists and Scotists, both the old and latter Papists: and this he
brings to prove that heretical errors have crept into the Church. He
slandreth that great learned man and professor of divinity, when he would make
him of his own opinion: what he thought of the Churches infallibility in not
erring, he delivers in these conclusions. The first. The faith Lib. 4. de
locu cap. 4.
os the Church can not fail. The second conclusion. The Church can not err in
believing. The third conclusion. Not only the old Church could not err in
faith, but neither the church which now is, and which shall be to the end of
the world, either can or shall err in faith. And yet the minister produces him
as I said, to prove that heresies crept into the church, after the time of the
Apostles: how truly let the reader judge. The question then whereof Canus
speaks, concerns not any point of faith; as in express terms he there
affirms, but a matter debatable in schools. True it is that Bell makes him
to say that he does oppose him self against all the Thomists and Scotists,
both the old and latter Papists: but the word (Papists) is foisted in by him
self, by which he would have the reader to thinck that he spoke of ancient
fathers, when as he talks only of old and new Scholemen, as he might learn
out of the very title of that chapter, which is Of the authority of the Schole
Doctors. The like may be said of Caietanus, Nauarrus, and Roffensis, alleged
for the same purpose by Bell: all which lived in our age, and were well known
not to have swarued from any thing defined by the Catholic church, as I
could show and in particular demonstrat how he abuses them, were it not to be
tedious, especially about the Epistle, whereof I was once determined to have
said nothing at all. Yet must I not omit S. Augustine cited by Bell: What
says he? any thing perhapps to prove that the Church straight after S. John
was infected with heretical error. Mary (quoth Bell) he reputed Epist. ad
Hiero^. 19.
no man's writings wholly free from errors save only the writers of the holy
scriptures. This serves not the turn: S. Augustine must speak of heretical
errors, or else he nothing helps Bell: but I trow he will not make all
others beside the writers of the scriptures to have runn into any such errors:
No nor it is not be imagined, that he will grant that the Communion book, or
the late Provincial council of England confirmed by royal assent, and least
of all his own books to be stained with any such errors, yea or any errors at
all: and yet if S. Austens words be true as Bell alleges them, how these will
be excused I know not, unless he will tell us that S. Austens spoke of his
own and former times, and not of those which should follow after, and so
attribute more prerogative to modern writers, then to the venerable and
learned fathers of the Primitive church, which were a desperate shift, meet
for a man of his shifting conditions. But where I beseech him has S. Augustine
these words? He quoteth, epis. ad Hierom. ep. 19. Where no such thing will be
found: only he faith, that no books are comparable for truth with the books
of the Prophets and Apostle which is not to censure all writers for erroneou^
but not to match them with the Prophets al^ Apostles. That holy doctor was far
enough from thincking that the church could err. Speaking the church of Rome,
and that blessed successi^ he says: Number the Priests yea even from the ve^
In Psalm. cont. parte^ Donati.
seat of Peter, and in that order of fathers see who succded whom: that is the
rock which the proud gates of h^ do not overcome. And to general councels,
I^ which the church is represented he did attribu^ so much, that he excuses
Cyprian from here^ Lib. 1. de Baptismo cap. 18.
because in his time, there was no general Counc^ which had defined that
question of rebaptization which shows evidently that he thought the could not
err. And the custom and authorit^ of the church he reputed so infallible that
h^ says: To dispute against that which the universal chur^ Epist. 118.
holds is most insolent madness. Cold comfort dot^ S. Augustine afforde Bell
to prove that heretica errors have crept into the church.

An other sentence alleged out of S. Austi^ where that holy Father says,
that he does not repute Co^t. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 32.
S. Cyprians writings as canonical, but judge them ^ the canonical, and
whatsoever does not agree with t^ scriptures, that by his leave he does refuse
might ver well have been spared, for who takes them for canonical? nay who
knows not that some ^ his writings be erroneous, though not errorneou^ in
that sense which Bell pretends? and so h^ says much but to little purpose,
unless it be t^ show with what facilitye he can cite author^ untruly, making
them to justify that, to which their words can not be drawn. The premises
duly pondered, the prudent reader can not but understand that I have dealt
friendly with Bell, noting him only for one untruth, when as diverse might very
well have run upon the reckoninge.

The rest of his Epistle conteyneth little else, but a recapitulation of the
chief contents of his books, or a bundle of untruths trussed up together,
which must be examined in the chapters following: only here, whereas according
to his great modesty he says, that he will set before the eyes of all
indifferent readers as clearly as a glass of crystal the original and daily
excrements of Popery, I can not but add, that the excrements of the Catholic
church be principally such Apostates as Luther, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and many
more, that forsook their profession of chastity and a religious life, and the
better to lay the foundations of the new gospel, betoke them selves to the
mortification of new wives, drawn out of Nunneries or other places, where they
could best meet with such kind of cattle. Had it not been for these and such
like other excrements of ours, the congregation would have had poor
increments, and hardly would they have been furnished with Apostles, had not
our church voyded forth such Apostates. Verily he might with far less harm to
his soul employ his talent by setting down their original and procedinge,
then he does in discovering the beginning and increasing of Popery, especially
Bell borne at Rascal in Yorkshire.
if he would remember an old acquaintance of his, one Sir. Thomas of Rascal
that excrementicall companion, for I know not a man in the parish, that can
better perform it, being furnished with a rude rusticall style, fit for such
a subject: and one that has perfect intelligence of his heavenly conversation,
and righteousness of life. The counts being cast, and the sum set down, what
has he got by his voluntary error, to degorge his malice against us (for his
disposition considered, and the qualitye of the fault, I can not think
otherwise) or what has he gained by his gross girdinge, and filthy fleeringe
at the excrements of Popery.

Bells I. chapter Of this name and word (Pope.)
THE II. VNTRVTH.
DIsputing of this name (Pope) and showing out of S. Ciprian and others, that
it was given in old time to other Bishops, and not only to the Bishop of
Rome, he adds these words. But aster that the Emperor Iustinianus, had in
his legal constitutions, named the Bishop of Rome (Pope), the arrogant
Bishopps of Rome, began to challenge the name, as if it were proper to them
alone. An untruth: why did he not name those arrogant Bishops of Rome, that
challenged the property of this title, or some author of creditt that
reports it? And what reason had the Bishops of Rome to lay hold upon the
Emperors words, rather then the words of the general Council of Chalcedon
(which was many years before) in which he was called by that name, as shall
straight be handled. This therefore must remain for one untruth, until he can
better discharge him self. One thing I must here add, which will little please
the minister, and that is, albeit the name (Pope) was attributed also to other
Bishops, yet was it in such special manner given to him, that it did
sufficiently declare his supreme authority over all other, which appears
first, because when any was called Pope without further addition, it was
understood only of the Bishops of Rome, as is evident out of the Council of
Chalcedon where it Act. 16.
is said: The most blessed and Apostolic man the Pope does command us this
thing. Secondly because the Bishop of Rome was called Pope of the whole
church, as we read in the same Council, where Leo is called Pope of the
universal church: and Liberatus affirms, Act. 16. In Breuiario cap. 22.
that there is no Pope over the church of the whole world, but the Bishop of
Rome. Thirdly because he is called the Pope or father of general Councels, and
of the whole world, but he calls not other Bishops Popes or fathers, but his
brethren or sons, as is apparent out of an epistle of Pope Damasus to the
Eastern Bishops, recited by Theodoretus: and in the Epistle of the Council
of Lib. 5. c. 10.
Chalcedon to Pope Leo. To this may be added, that seeing (Pope) signifies
(father) as Bell according to the truth confesses, it follows that the
Bishop of Rome was in old time reputed superior to all, in that he was
called the Father of fathers: for Steuene Bishop of Carthage, writing to
Pope Damasus in the name of three Counsels, celebrated in Affricke gives him
this title. To Pope Damasus our Epis. ad. Damrsam.
most blessed Lord, exalted with Apostolical dignity, the holy father of
fathers. And this may be the reason; that albeit sometime in the Primitive
Church, the name was also given to other Bishopps, yet seeing in foresaid manner
it agreed peculiarly to the Bishop of Rome, as declaring his soueraigue
authority over others, the former custom ceased, and so it remained alone to
him.

THE III. VNTRVTH.
With the former he has copled an other, saying thus. And so in process of
time the Bishopps of Rome were solely and only called Popes, and of late years
Our holy father, and, His holiness, is his usual name. A gross untruth, for
the name of (his holiness) is not of late years, being long since given to the
Pope by Justinian the Emperor, and Theodoretus writing to In epis. ad Ioa^. 2.
Pope Leo uses the same phrase. Obsecro vestram sanctitatem I beseech your
Holiness says that learned and venerable Epist. ad Leonem Papam.
father: and the Council of Chalcedon in their letters to the same Pope Leo,
inuaighing against Dioscorus the heretic, that presumed to excommunicate the
Pope says thus, Etpost haec omnia. Epist. ad Lenem ^apam.
And after all these things he did also extend his madness against him, to whom
the custody of the vineyard was committed by our Savior, that is against thy
Apostolic holiness. And if S. Ciprian, and S. Augustine, were called most
blessed Popes, as Bell here confesses, can any marvel that the title of
holiness should be given to their superior, and yet does he never make scruple
to say that it is a title only of late years, making it to have sprung up long
after that the title of Pope. was appropriated (as he would have it) to the
Bishop of Rome, which appropriation as he says was about the year of Christ
528. and so the name of his holiness much later: and yet is that title more
ancient then the said year of Christ 528. as is evident out of Theodoretus,
and the Council of Chalcedon, both which were long time before the said time as
Bell will not deny.

THE IIII. VNTRVIH.
PRosecuting his former matter he says. But this Emperor (that is Justinian)
lived after Christ his birth about 528. years, Ergo this point of Popery is
a rotten ragge of the new religion. In which words he venteth out an untruth,
for be it that it was then appropriated to the Pope as he says, yet how can it
be new, which by his own confession was used an eleuene hundred years ago,
that is so many ages before the foundations of his religion were laid, or the
name of a Protestant heard of in the whole world. I omit here how many
ecclesiastical names have been brought into the church as, Homousios or
Consubstantiall against the Arrians, Incarnation against other heretics, the
better by a new name to declare an ancient article of faith. Will Bell for all
that call these words rotten rags of a new religion. He nauer dare offer it,
and yet with no less reason may he do it, then he does here the name of the
Pope.

As for his rustical scoffinge (the special grace of his writing) at the sylly
people for reputing the word Pope a most sacred thing though ignorant as he
says what is me^t by the name I say no more but that he may with like grace
run upon the name of Jesus Christ: for thousands amongst the Protestants
which reverence the^ for sacred, can tell as little what is understood by it, as
we can by the name of the Pope. But we are beholding to Bell that he vouch
safeth to explicate the original of that name, telling us that it signifies
Father: and for that after so terrible a persecution of those few letters, as
though some misterye of iniquity had lurked in them, (in such sort that in the
time of Henry the eight it was rased out of all books) and after many
spightfull terms, and most odius conceits framed in the minds of the vulgar
sort concerning that name, he has discharged it from all suspicion of secret
venim, assuring good people, that it is indede venerable, as that which was
given to most holy and ancient Bishopps, and might in his opinion be given to
him self, could he have the luck to finger that dignitye. Thus much of the
Popes name, now we are come to talk of his office and authority.

Bells II. Chapter Of the Popes superoiall power.
THE V. VNTRVTH.
TO season the beginning of his chapter with a little of his mendacious powder,
he writes thus, Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, and the third of that name, above
six hundred years after Christ, obtained of Phocas then Emperor of Rome, that
Rome should be the head of all churches. Before which time no authentical
writer can be named, who ever ascribed the headship and universal government
of all churches to the church of Rome. To convince this manifest untruth,
something has been said in the precedent chapter: but plentifully have I
proved the contrary in The doleful knell, published not long since against his
Ministership both Page 45. 46. etc.
out of other authorities, as also by the confession of the Lutherane
Centuristes, his dear brethren: and lastly out of his sweet self, that more
cannot be desired. Somthinge also shall be said in the sequel, his own words
ministering just occasion, and here I will adioyne a little more. In the Council
of Chalcedon, Maximus Bishop of Antioch, was Act. 7.
confirmed by S. Leo the first: Pope Julius the first also restored Athanasius
Patriarch of Alexandria to his seat; Paulus Patriarch of Constantinople, and
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, depofed vinustly by an Eastern synod as writes
Sozomenus, whole words be these. For as much as the care of all did belong to
him for Lib. 3. cap. 7.
the dignitye of his sea, he restored to every of them their church: And a
little after. Athanastus and Paulus do return to their seats and sent the
letters of Tulius to the East. Bells best and most spedy answer to these
prooffes will be, to say that he was superior to the Patriarchs, and other
Bishops, but had not any authority over inferior ministers. Alas poor soul,
to what pityfull straights has he brought him self, whiles upon zeal he
lies for the credit of the congregation.

THE VI. VNTRVTH.
IN his arguments propounded against the superiority of the Bishop of Rome
(whereof afterward I mean more fully to entreat) this is one. Seauently the
famous council of Chalcedon gave the Bishope of Constantinople equal authority
with the Bishope of Rome in all ecclesiastical affairs. In which words is one
untruth cunningly couched: for he calls that here the decree of the Council,
which was by the ambition of Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, effected in
the absence of the Roman legates. If Bell can prove that this surreptitious
decree of the Eastern Bishopes, was ever confirmed, then were it some thing
which he brings. But the Bishop of Rome his legates withstood that their
indirect proceedinge, pronouncing it to be contrary to the decrees of the
Nicene Council, and Lucentius in particular Se the 16. Action.
spoke confidently saying, that the Apostolic sea ought not to be abased in
their presence, with other notable words tendinge to the same purpose. And
Pope Leo him self in his Epistle to Anatolius did bitterly inueigh against him
for this his presumption and going against the Nicene canons, admonishing him
also how his legates which in his stead were presidents of the Council, did
withstand that his unlawful attempt, for which cause he disclaymeth utterly
for giving his consent. Far be it ^pist. 53.
(quoth he) from my conscience, that so wicked a desire should be helped with
my labor, and of all that mind not high things, but consent to the humble: and
he gives the reason: because it were (as he says) to infringe the Canons of
the Nicene Council, and to deprive the sea of Alexandria, of being the second
in dignitye, and Antioch of being the third, and all Metropolitan Bishops of
their honor.

About the same matter. he wrott also to the Emperor, showing his great
dislike of Anatolius ambition, putting him in mind, what special favor he had
afforded him concerning his consecration: insinuating plainly, how he deserved
to have been deposed, for falling into the heresy of Eutiches, and for being
wickedly promoted by Dioscorus of Alexandria, to be Bishop of Constantinople:
yet because he renounced his heresy, and at the entreaty of the Emperor, the
Pope dispe^sed with him. We (says Pope Leo) having respect to your faith
Epist. 54.
and intercession, whereas the beginings of his consecration were not sound, by
reason of them that did it, desired rather to be gracious then just, to the end
we might thereby, by applying of remedies pacify all stirs, which the devil
had procured, which things ought rather to have made him modest then
immoderate: and in the end, he exhorts the Emperor to labor about the
repressing of his insolency. Endeavor (quoth he) to do that, which becomes
Christian and royal piety, to wit that the foresaid Bishop would be
obedient to the fathers, have regard to peace, and not to think that it was
lawful for him to ordain the Bishop of Antioch without any example, against
the decrees of Canons as he presumed, which thing we would not make void, for
the desire we have to restore faith and preserve peace.

Lastly writing to the Empress Pulcheria about the same argument, he utterly
makes void whatsoever Anatolius had cunningly caused to be decreed concerning
the Primacye of Constantinople. We make Epist. 55.
void (quoth he) the consent of the Bishopps repugning to the rules of holy
Canons established at Nice by the united piety of your faith with us, and by
the authority of the blessed Apostle Peter do with our general definition
wholly frustrate and make of no effect.

Now, to return to Bell, I say that he ouerreacheth when he enfourmeth his
reader, that the famous Council of Chalcedon, gave the Bishope of
Constantinople equal authority with the Bishop of Rome in all ecclesiastical
affairs: for it cannot truly be called a decree of the Council, which was not
confirmed by the head. Should a Parliament in England make ten several acts,
nine very good and beneficial to the realm, but one clean opposite to former
acts, and prejudicial to the sovereign dignitye of his Majesty, whereupon
he confirmed the nine, but the tenth he did utterly irritate and make void;
would Bell call that an act of Parliament, or could he with out an untruth so
term it in true and good meaning? most certain he could not: what follows
I leave to Bells collecting vain. But it may be he will say, that the
confirmation of the Council belonged not to the Pope. It is not possible that
he dare offer it: will he make Pope Leo so ancient for time, so renoumed for
virtue, so famous for learning, such a simple or arrogant creature, as to send
his legates to be Presidents of the Council in his place, to write unto the
Empress, how he did make frustrate that decree, if his authority had not been
certain in that behalf, and so made him self a laughing stock to the
Empire, and the whole world: and would the Council have admitted of his
legates, or ever have made suite to him for the confirmation of their decrees,
as they did, when they wrote to him in this manner. And we beseech thee (say
they) honor our judgment Act. 3. in fine.
with thy decrees, and as we with willinge minds have agreed together in good
things, so thy highness also would accomplish that for thy children which is
convenient: which Ce^tur. 4. ^ol. 551.
petition of theirs is also formally recorded by the Lutheranes of Magdeburge.

The good reader has also further to note, that this pride of Anatolius was so
exorbitant, that at length he gave it clean over, excusing him self to Pope
Leo, as we read in the letters of the same Pope, which he wrote unto
Anatolius, in which after he had given order about certain things in the
church of Constantinople (an argument of his jurisdiction in that place) he
comes to that excuse which Anatolius alleged in his own behaulfe for having
labored about the primacye of his own church, and writes thus. But as
touching that sin Epist. 71.
which you committed as you say by the persuasion of others concerning the
increase of authority, your charity should more effectually and sincerely have
washed away, if that which could not be attempted without your likinge, you had
not laid only upon the counsel of the clergy: for as offense is committed by
giving of bad counsel, so likewise by giving of badd consent. But it is very
grateful to me most derely beloved brother that your charity professes, that
it does now displease you, which ought not then to have liked you. The
profession of your charity, and the attestation of the Christian Prince is
sufficient for your return into common grace, neither does that amendment
seem late, which is accompanied with so venerable a witness. Let the desire of
unlawful authority which made dissension be wholly cast away. This w^^ at that
time, the end of that arrogant presumption: but had Bell then lived it seems
he would have stood more to his tackling, and never have showed him self so
base minded, as to have given over any title of honor, or any wise submitted
him self to the Pope, who now pleads so earnestly in defense of that
outrageous ambition:

Here also the good reader has to note, that as the minister does make that
the decree of a Council, which as has been said was non at all, so does he
make bold with truth beside a trick of corruption: for no where do I read in
the acts of that Council that it gave equal authority to the Bishop of
Constantinople, with the Bishop of Rome in all ecclesiastical affairs, as
Bell affirms: that word (all) is foisted in by the malice of his
ministership, neither have they the word (authority) but (privileges) which
consisted, for as much as I can learn out of those Acts, in these two
points. The first was, that the Metropolitanes of the dioceses of Pontus,
Asia, and Thrace, should only be consecrated and ordained by the Bishops of
Constantinople, as also such Bishops as lived in the same place amongst
barbarous people. The second was, that Constatinople might have the second
place in dignity next after Rome. These I say were the privileges which
Anatolius desired should be confirmed by the Pope: for to think that he
desired to have every ways superiority, and as Bell writes, equal authority
in all ecclesiastical affairs with Rome is contrary to all reason, and not
agreeable to the recited words out of the Acts, for though Anatolius with
others decreed that Constantinople should have equal privileges, yea in
ecclesiastical matters, yet is that straight limited to the consecration of
Merropolitanes, and to have the second place in dignitye, as before was said
and is evident also out of the 15. Action can. 28. and out of the 16. Action
and lastly out of their relation to the Pope, in which they craved his
confirmation: for there they mention nothing of equal privileges and
aduanceme^t in ecclesiastical causes, causes, but only speak of consecratinge
the Metropolitanes of Asia, Pontus, and Thrace, and of having the next place
after Rome, and yet they affirm that they did there signifye unto him all the
force of the Acts: whereof it follows that other privileges or eminencye in
ecclesiastical dignitye was not then desired: and surely it were mere madness
to think that Anatolius would every way have had equal authority in all
ecclesiastical causes, as the minister affirms, seeing then we must grant
that he desired jurisdiction in Italy and Rome it self; nay what were it else
but to condemn Anatolius of gross foolerye in suyng for that superextrauagant
grace of the Pope to the injury of his own See and dignity.

Much more might be said to the same purpose, but it shall not need, when as
the thing is so clear that our mortal enemies confess it: for the
Magdeburgian historiographers, after relation how the Roman Legates with-stood
the audacious attempt of Anatolius and his confederates, write thus. Wherefore
the judges of the Synod decreed that the Centur. 5. col. 949.
principal primacye and honor, was to be left unto the Bishop of Rome, and
that notwithstanding, something was to be given to the Church of
Constantinople, because that city was adorned with the dignitye of the Empire,
and was called new Rome, that it might have power to ordain Metropolitanes,
in the dioceses of Asia, Pontus, and Thrace, yet so, that it might be lawful
for the Metropolitanes of every province to ordain Bishops. This was that
dignity, and equalitye of privilege which they desired: which notwithstanding
they obtained not, Pope Leo wholly irritating that decree as has been said.
Thus have we not only convinced Bell of lying and corruption, but so far
pr^uayled against him, that by means of that decree by which he would
overthrow the superioritye of the church of Rome, we have abundantly proved
the contrary, and so we may say with the Prophet. The arrows of little ones are
become their wounds. Psalm. 63.
Never had gallant Minister worse fortune, for not only his blow is still
defeated, but his weapon disgratiously beaten back upon his own face. What
says he now to the famous Council of Chalcedon? The Popes authority maugre
his malice is clearly proved out of that as has been said, and so nothing
found there, that can relieve his cause, but such Vnguentum baculinum as he
list not to meddle with all, and that not only touching the Popes superiority
whereof we have spoken sufficiently, but also other matters: for example, that
Council decreed thus Virginem, etc. It is not lawful for a virgin Sessi. 16.
^^n. 16.
which has consecrated her self to God, and likewise a Monk to contract
Matrimonye. But if they be found doing any such thing, let them be
excommunicated. Did Bell for all that never in his whole life hear of any such
creatures, that remain so far from being excommunicated, that they be highly
commended as the principal aduauncers of the Gospel? and does he not know a
dear friend of his, that has written See Bells survey page 231. 235. etc.
in defense of such wicked and filthy wedlock. Gladly then would I be
informed, how his Ministershippe can either defend such sacrilegious wretches,
from the force of that Canon, or his friend from being opposite to the
doctrine of that Council. To deny the authority of that Sinode which him
self urges, calling it a famous Council were a base shift, and nothing
becoming his gravity and constancy, but rather the leuitie of some mutable
minister, especially that being authorized by Act of Parliament, which for
certain reasons he must defend, but how in this case God knows that knows
all things.

THE VII. VNTRVTH.
IT follows immediately in Bells book. Eighthly the Council of Nice prescribed
limits as well to the Bishop of Rome, as to other Patriarchs. This is a
manifest untruth, and that by the judgment of any that is indifferent. The
place he means Can. 6.
(for he notes none) is in the sixth canon in these words Let ancient
customs be kept throughout Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of
Alexandria have power of all these because the Bishop of Rome has that
custom. Out of which words so far of it is, that the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, is confined within any limits, that her ample and universal
superioritye is confirmed: for nothing is here determined concerning the
church of Rome, but that is made the rule of other churches, as Pope Nicholas
the first notes, who also affirms Epist. ad Michaele^.
that the Nicene Council appointed nothing about the Roman church, because
the authority thereof was not from men, but from God. In the former untruth
diverse, times was it mentioned our of Pope Leo, as also out of his legates in
the Council of Chalcedon, that the Grecians went against the Nicene Canons in
their presumpreous attempt. But to make the matter most clear, to w^tt that the
Council of Nice did not limitt the Pope^ jurisdiction, but contrary wise
allowed and approved nis supreme authority, beside the restimony of Pope
Nicholas alread, alleged, I will demonstrate the same out of the Chalcedon
Synod which Bell calls a famous Council (as it was in deed, and therefore
worthyly admitted by our country) In the sixtene session Paschasinus the Popes
legate cited this very Canon for the Popes Primacye, for after the judge had
said: Let both sides propound Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
canons, ^t follows in these words. The reverend man Paschasinus Bishop and
vicar of the Apostolic sea recited The sixth canon of the three hundred and
eightene holy fathers: That the Church of Rome has always had the These
words are more clear in ^h^ Nicene Council ^t self See a little before.
Primacye. But let Egypt hold that the Bishop of Alexandria have power of all,
because the Bishop of Rome has this custom. Behold Paschasinus proves the
Popes supremacye out of that canon, from which Bell would deduce the contrary.
And the Grecian Bishops were so far from contradicting this; (which no question
they would, had the canon been plain to the contrary sen^e, as the minister
ma^ntayneth) that their silence confessed it to be most true. Yea the judges
them selves though desirous to advance the dignitye of Constantinople, yet were
they so overcome with the light of truth shining in that canon, that upon the
former evidence they said. VVeperfectly perceive all primacy and principal
Act. 16.
honor according to the canons, to be kept for the Archbishop of old Rome,
most beloved of God. The true meaning ^nertore of the canon is, that the
Bishope of Rome, before the definition of any Council, used to committ the
government of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, to the Bishop of Alexandria, as
Pope Nicholas the first does expound it, and is plain out of the Council of
Chalcedon: which being so, Bell remains guilty of an untruth, and the Popes
eminent authority confirmed by that very canon, which he brought to overthrow
it. What an unlucky hand has this minister, that striking at others, still
wounds him self.

THE VIII. IX. AND X. VNTRVTHES.
AFter Bell had produced many arguments against the Popes sovereign
superioritye, he makes a recapitulation of them all, but so handsomely, that
for their better grace he does flourish them over with new lies. To stand upon
one, that has a couple of followers. Fourthly (quoth he) seeing Polycarpus, S.
Polycrates, S. Ireneus, and S. Ciprian, with many Bishops of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, contemned the Bishop of Rome his decrees and supposed supremacye. That
S. Polycarpus contemned the Popes decrees is most false, and untruly collected
out of his former argument, in which no mention is made of any decree
concerning the keeping of Easter (the matter then in question) as shall
appear afterward when we come to answer that argument, how could he then
contemn that which was not extant. See the scrupulous conscience of the
minister, because before he passed over the matter without the mark of his
occupation, he has here made lewd restitution clapping three untruths
together, one in the neck of an other. The first is now recited, and to make
it the more manifest I will adioyne what he writes of this matter in his
Motives. His words be these In like manner (quoth he) though with more modesty
dissented Anicetus page 145.
an other Bishop of Rome, from S. Polycarpe, Bishop of Smyrna: where I
desire the good reader to note his malicious dealinge and his rooted hatred
against those Popes, whom he confesses to have been blessed Martyrs. Anicetus
(quoth he) dissented from S. Polycarpe: and why I beseech him does he not
rather say, that S. Polycarpe dissented from Anicetus: I trust he will not deny
but that S. Anicetus had the better quarrel, except he list to condemn the
church of England, and the whole Christian world that observe Easter according
to the custom of Rome. Besides this, is it not most certain that S. Polycarp
was far inferior in dignitye to S. Anicetus, when as so much is evident out of
the premises, in which we have heard how the Patriarche of Constantinople, did
emulate some prerogatives of Rome, and not any of Smyrna. An other trick of
his ra^cour also shows it self, when as the one is with him plain Anicetus,
the other S. Polycarpe, why I beseech him, was not blessed Anicetus also a
martyr as well as S. Polycarpe? it can not be denied: and yet does this
minister out of his damnable devotion to the sea of Rome, entreat him in this
disgratious manner. But sufficient it is for my purpose, that he confessethe
dissension betwixt S. Anicetus, and S. Polycarpe to have been with more modesty
(to wit then it was betwixt S. Victor and the Bishops of Asia) which argues
plainly, that no decree was made by S. Anicetus, for then the dissension could
not have been contained within the limitts of modesty, if Polycarpus had
resisted his decree, neither could he have been in better case then the
Bishopps of Asia were, who withstood S. Victors decree, and so the dissension
had been as immodest: which seeing Bell denies, consequently he grants, that
he has dealt falsy in accusing S. Polycarpe to have contemned S. Anicetus
decree, when as he never published any such, what soever Bell with lying lips
affirms to the contrary. This is the first untruth.

The next is where he says, S. Polycrates contemned the Bishop of Rome his
decrees, for where does he find him enrold for a Saint? not in the Roman
martyrologe, not in Eusebius or S. Hierom. no nor in the Centuries of
Magdeburge where they talk of him. He is a Saint only of Bells canonization,
because he resisted the Pope, which title if it will procure any such grace,
the minister him self is like to prove a great and monsterous Saint, for never
(I dare say) did Polycrates carry him self so insolently, and in such
unspeakable contumelious manner, as Sir Thomas does.

The third untruth is, that S. Ireneus contemned the Bishop of Rome his
decrees, and his supposed supremacy: for what father so ancient as he,
writes more clearly for his supremacye. Speaking of the Roman church these be
his words. To this church by reason of the more potent principalitye, it is
necessary Lib. 3. cap. 3.
that every church should come, that is those faithful people which be every
where, in which that tradition which came from the Apostles, has been kept of
them which be in all parts. Thus he writes in defense thereof: but that ever
he oppugned the Popes decrees, or contemned his supremacy is most falsely
affirmed by Bell, as shall appear when we come to examine his second argument
against the Popes Supremacy, from whence he would seem to have collected this:
but before I come to that point, I must here admonish the good reader, that
whereas Bell desperately affirmed that the Bishop of Romes superioritye was
not heard of till six hundred years after Christ, the contrary has not only
been proved sufficiently before, out of other authorityes, but also out of
those testimonies, which he brings as most clear against it, to wittout of
the Chalcedon and Nicene Councels, and also out of S. Ireneus as in the
premises has been said: and yet further occasion will be offered to verify
the same truth out of some of those arguments also, which come now to be
examined, such is his great grace in beating down of Popery, and writing
against him self.

The rest of his chapter consists of eight arguments culled together, to show
that the Popes supremacy began in the time of Phocas the Emperor, in the year
of Christ 607: which in particular I will discuss. But before I must have a
little crash with him about the title which is of the Popes superroiall power,
for the word (superroiall) I suppose slylye mocketh at that which venerable
antiquity confesses, and him self must not deny. To content my self with
the testimony of S. Chrisostom who speaking not only of Bishops, but inferior
clergy men, instructs them how to deal with secular potentates coming
unworthily to the Sacraments, in this manner. If a duke (quoth he) if a
Consul, if he that wears Hom. 83. in Math.
the crown, comes unworthily, stop and hinder him, thou have greater power
then he: and the minister denies that the late Queen might preach the Gospel
or administer the Sacraments etc. which Motiuos page 80.
functions not withstanding other of their clergy might execute: whereof it
ensues that in these spiritual points their power was above that of the
Queen's, and so truly in a good sense may be called superroiall, which so much
his superscoffing grauitye seems to deride and taunt. Now to his arguments.

An answer to Bells arguments against the supreme spiritual jurisdiction of
the Pope.
FIrst then (quoth he) S. Polycarpus would not yield to Anicetus Bishop of
Rome in the controversy about Easter, which for all that he would and must have
done, if the Bishop of Rome had had any true prerogative over him.

THE ANSWER.
IT more argues the Bishop of Rome his superiority that S. Polycarpus, the
scholar of the Apostles, in his old years undertook so long a journey to
Rome, to conferr with S. Anicetus, then it proves that he was not his
superior because S. Polycarpus retained still his former opinion: for why
should he more have travailed to Rome then S. Anicetus have gone to him to
Smyrna, being a man reverent for his gray hayres, and venerable for his
acquaintance and conversation with the Apostles, had it not been, that he
acknowledged superiority to Anicetus, as being the successor of S. Peter. But
the reason why Polycarpus might still keep his former custom of celebrating
Easter, and also perform due obedience to Anicetus was, because Anicetus would
not for so small a controuersi^ or variety break peace, but was content to
tolerate the same, and therefore false it is, that Bell says, to wit that
Polycarpus would and must have yielded to Anicetus, if he had acknowledged him
for his superior, seeing no such thing was commanded him, but the matter left
to his own election.

Bells II. objection.
SEcondly Ireneus, and other holy and learned Bishopps of France joining with
him, reproved Victor then Bishop of Rome very sharply and roundly, as one
that had not due respect to the peace and unity of the church: which
doubtelesse those holy and learned Bishops would not have done, if the Bishop
of Rome had had in those days the supreme sovereignty over them.

THE ANSWER.
HAd Bell recounted the cause why those Bishopps reprehended so roundly (as he
speaks) Pope Victor, with other necessary circumstances, he had marred all
his market, and proved the Popes superiority by that argument, by which as he
perfidiously handles the matter, he would overthrow it. The blessed martyr
Ireneus, with other reprehended Victor, not for any wrong opinion about the
keeping of Easter (him self, and they being of the Popes mind, as also the
Prorestantes now be) but for that he excommunicated the Bishops of Asia,
refusing to conform them selves to the Church of Rome: neither did S. Ireneus
this upon conceit, that the Pope exceeded the limits of his power, for no
such thing appears in Eusebius from whom this story is fetched, but for that
he did use it out of due season, to the great trouble of the Church, and for a
small matter, as he and they thought: which shows plainly, that they made no
doubt of his authority, otherwise many misliking his fact, would easyly have
contemned his censure, and justly have objected presumption, in usurping that
authority which belonged not to him, where of no mention is made.

Superiors, yea and the Pope him self, may with due respect be admonished and
reprehended, especially by Bishops, if any great scandal or trouble of the
Church be feared. S. Paul resisted S. Peter in face because he was
reprehensible: Galat. 2. v. 11.
whereof our Protestants absurdly gather, that S. Peter had no sup riority over
the Apostles: a collection not known to an iquitye, when as the matter was then
so famous and certain, that wicked Porphiry that Paganicall philosopher,
reproves S. Paul of sawcines, for that he presumed Proaem. com. in Galatas.
and epis. 11. ad Aug. inter epistolas Augustini.
to reprehend Peter the Prince of the Apostles, as S. Hierom reports. S.
Cyprian highly commends the humil^ty of S. Peter, that took so quietly the
reprehension of S. Paul being his inferior. For neither Peter (says S.
Cyprian) whom our Lord chose the first, and upon whom he built the church,
when Paul disputed with him about circumcision, arrogantly took any thing to
him self, saying that he had the primacy, and therefore Epist. 71. ad Quin.
the latter disciples ought rather to obey him. S. Augustine shows excellently
by this example, that S. Cyprian erring about rebaptization could not nor would
not have been offended, to have been admonished by others his followers or
inferiors, much less by Lib. 2. de Baptis. cap. 1.
a Council. We have learned (says he) that Peter the Apostle, in whom the
Primacy of the Apostles by excellent grace is so praeeminent, when he did
otherwise concerning circumcision, then the truth required, was corrected of
Paul the later Apostle. I think (without any reproach unto him) Cyprian the
Bishop may be compared to Peter the Apostle, howbeit I ought rather to sear
least I be injurious to Peter, sor who knows not, that the principalitye of
Apostleshipp, is to be perferred before any dignity of Bishop whatsoever: but
if the grace of the chaires differ, yet the glory of the martyrs is one.

These authorities show two things: the first is, that S. Peter was reputed
with the ancient fathers, head and prince of the Apostles, and also that the
very Pagans were not ignorant of that thing, which I suppose will not greatly
content Bell, for certain deductions that may be drawn from thence. The
second (which is the cause why I have alleged this of S. Peter and S. Paul)
is, that dislike or reprehension of an other man's action, does not argue the
man reproved not to be the others superior, how soever Bell would infer that:
when as has been said, S. Paul inferior to S. Peter, reprehended him. And
therefore the most that can deduced out of the ministers idle discourse is, that
if him self were a Bishop he would look as the devil (God bless us) is
said to have looked over Lincoln: and none might without incurring of is
mortal indignation admonish him of any fault or scandalous demeanure. Great
pity surely it is, that one qualified as he is, and endowed with such an
humble spirit, should not be preferred to an Episcopale or (to use his own
phrase) some ouerseing dignitye, Thus by dismol destiny, Bells argument has
rather hurt him, then given him any help at all.

But one necessary adiunct belonged to this controversy, which he thought good
not to touch, for scalding of his fingers, to wit that S. Victor
excommunicated the Bishopps of Asia as I noted before: for seeing Bell
confesses, that the old In his F^neral. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Bishopps of Rome, were very godly men and taught the same doctrine which S.
Peter had done before them: and most certain that S. Victor was one of those
holy Martyrs, it follows that he usurped no authority, but exercised that
which lawfully he might, neither that he taught any doctrine, but that which S.
Peter had done before him: Out of which and the precedent discourse three or
four memorable notes may be inferred against Bell. The first and principal
is, that the Primacye of the Bishop of Rome, began not six hundred years
after Christ, as before he mayntayned, having been practiced four hundred years
before by S. Victor, and descended to him from S. Peter. The second is, that
Bells argument against the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome, being
duly and truly examined, proves the clean contrary. The third is, that the
minister cunningly co^cealed the cause why S. Ireneus reproved S. Victor, as
nothing fitting his purpose. The fourth may be, that most perfidiously he
infers out of the reprehension of S. Ireneus, that he contemned the Bishop
of Rome his decrees, and supposed supremacy as before has been noted.

I add lastly, that whatsoever S. Ireneus and others thought, yet blessed Pope
Victor proceeded most prudently, for as much as he perceived how that
observation (which in the time of Anicetus was only variety of rite, without
prejudice of religion) began now to corrupt the soundnes of the Catholic
faith, one Blastus (who lived in Victors time, as Lib. 5. hist. cap. 15. De
proscript. in fine.
Eusebius says) under color of that, cunningly laboring to bring in
Iudaisme, as Tertullia^ records. And this sentence of Victor was afterward
approved in the Council of Nice, as is manifest out of Eusebius, Lib. 3. de
vita Constantini. cap. 13. Here Is. 53. Here Is. 75.
and afterward those that held the Asian error, were accounted heretics as
appears in S. Augustine and S. Epiphanius.

Bells III. objection.
THirdly S. Policrates, and many Bishopps of Asia did stoutly withstand the
same Victor then Bishop of Rome in his presumpteous procedings touching
Easter.

THE ANSWER.
ANd how many Emperors and Kings, as we read partly in scriptures, partly in
profane histories, have been resisted, most disgraciusly entreated, and abused
by their subjects: were they not for all that their superiors? yea Jesus
Christ him self suffered many indignities at the Jews hands, was he not for
all that their Creator, king, and Savior? His ca^nonization of Polycrates
rather shows his malicious cunninge then any ways bettereth his cause,
whereof I have spoken before, and here can not but adioyne as a matter of note,
that the letters of Polycrates and other to S. Victor in defense of them
selves, make more for his ecclesiastical superiority, then their disobedient
resistance shows that he had not authority over them, when as many have
withstood their lawful Pastors. For why should they have neded any such
Apologeticall letters more to him, then to any other Patriarch or Bishop, had
it not been for the dignitye of his sea: or can it sincke into any man's head,
that the Asian Bishopps would not have reprehended his usurped authority (had
they been of Bells mind) for censuring them, that were not subject to his
jurisdiction. His terminge S. Victors proceedinges presumpteous, shows his
inueterat malice to that blessed Pope and martyr: and beside declares his
folly in condemning him so deeply, whom else where he commends so highely.

Bells IIII. objection.
SAint Cyprian roundly opposed himself against Stephanus then Bishop of
Rome, contemning his decree and deridinge his reasons.

THE AVNSWERE.
Were not Bell one of Chams co^fraternity, he would never mention that which
turns to the disgrace of that blessed martyr, and nothing touches the
authority of the Pope at all. For that S. Cyprian was in an error I dare say
Bell will not deny, and therefore the more roundly he wrott to the Pope, the
more is his fault increased. Far was blessed S. Austen from the spirit of this
minister, who wholly to take away, or at least to diminish Epist. 48. ad
Vince^^iam.
this stayne of S. Cyprian, says, that either those writings be none of his,
in which these things be found, as some then said, or else that afterward he
repented him of his error, and changed his opinion, though the retractation
be not found. As for the authority of the Pope it does nothing prejudice that
at all, for albeit the Pope commanded that rebaptization should not be
practiced (the point of controversy betwixt them two) yet did he not define
that question, nor pronounce any censure against Cyprian or others of his
opinion, much less was it condemned by a general Counsel, which reason also
S. Augustine brings in his defense, and Lib. 1. do Baptism. cap. 18.
so it was free for him without danger of heresy to persist in his own
opinion especially seeing he had on his side a prouincial Council of fowerscore
Bishops, and as he thought much probability for his part. Many good men no
question both have, and hereafter may be carried away with ignorant zeal to
defend an erroneous opinion, yet with all subjection to the Pope, remaining
all ways with ready mind (when they shall see there error ouerthrown by
Apostolical definition) to submitt them selves with all obedience.

Bells V. objection.
Fifthly the Apostles at Jerusalem, sent Peter and John to confirm the
faithful in Samaria, and consequently if the Pope be not above Peter, but his
supposed successor, he may be sent of Bishopps his brethren as S. Peter was.
But who is that Bishop, and where dwells he, that at this day dares do the
now Pope such supposed villainy.

THE ANSWER.
NOt any supposed, but the true and reale folly of the minister appears in
this argument: for he would infer, because S. Peter was sent of the Apostles
that therefore he was not the chief and Prince of the Apostles: but if his
illation be of any force to bereave him of his superiority, which Bell urges,
it has the like strength to make him their inferior (which I think he will
not grant) for commonly they be such that be sent of others. Wherefore I
answer that although it be no usual thing, yet sometime in great and
important affairs, superiors are sent of their inferiors, not by power and
authority: but by request and entreatie, to which they may yield if they
think it expedient for the common good, or refuse it if they like not to
undergo that charge. A great question arising at Antioch about circumcision
and other legal ceremonies, Paul and Barnabas were sent by the faithful Act.
15.
there to Jerusalem, to conferr about that point with the Apostles: Will Bell
therefore infer, that Paul and Barnabas were their inferiors. Josephus also
reports, how the Jews Lib. 20. Antiq. cap. 7.
having a controversy against Agrippa their king, and Festus their President,
sent unto Nero the Emperor, ten legates of the principal Jews, and with
them Ismaell the high Priest, and Chelcias the Treasurer, who seemed next to
him in dignity. For as much therefore as the conversion of the Samaritans was a
matter of great moment, they being reputed in as bad case if not worse, then
the Gentiles, For which cause our Savior said: Into the way of the Gentiles
go ye not, and Math. 10.
into the cities of the Samaritanes enter ye not S. Peter and S. Iohne were
sent as most mete for that business: S. Peter being the chief and to whom the
managing and disposing of fuch matters appertayned: but not by any authority
or command, but only by request and petition as has been said, in which
manner both in former times, and hereafter in like cases of the common good,
Princes and superiors without any touch of their high office or dignity, may
be sent by their inferiors: their sending proceeding from petition, nothing
empeacheth their high sovereignty, and their willing undertaking such a
charge for the common good, proclayminge their great love to God and their
country.

Bells VI. objection.
Sixthly the fathers of the famous African council, in which S. Austen, that
holy father and most stout champion of Christ's Church was present to the great
honor and credit thereof, would in no wise yield to Celestine then Bishop
of Rome, in the controversy of Appeals concerning Appiarius. And when Pope
Celestine alleged for himself and his supposed soueraygnty, that the
ancient and famous council of Nice gave liberty to appeal to Rome, the
Fathers of the Council answered roundly, that the true copies of the decree
were otherwise: where I wish the reader to observe with me these two points
seriously: Frist that the Pope could not, and therefore did not, allege any
better reason sor his usurped and falsely pretended supremacy, then the
authority and decree of that famous Council of Nice. Secondly that the Pope
Celestine falsified the canon and decree of the Council, so to gain credit
and authority to himself if it might be.

THE ANSWER.
TO the first of these two points I answer; that there was no question betwixt
them, whether the Popes jurisdiction did extend into Afsrike or no: or whether
appeals in rigor might not be made to Rome: but whether it were a thing
convenient: for on the one side, not to allow appeals, seems to give
occasion to Metropolitanes and Bishops, to oppress their subjects: and on to
the contrary to allow appeals, seems the next way to make endless
quarells, and often to vex Bishops without all cause: of which inconvenience
and great trouble of the church, holy men have complained. This doubtful
point then was defined by the Council of Nice, or Sardica, which declared
that it was expedient for Priests, to appeal from their Bishops unto a
provincial Council: and for Bishops to appeal unto Rome: For that it was
lawful and usual before the time of this Council to appeal unto Rome, is
evident out of S. Cyprian, who reports how Fortunatus and Felix deposed by
himself, appealed unto Cornelius Bishope of Rome. Lib. 1. ep. 3.
And one Basilides deposed in Spain, appealed to Pope Stephen, as the same S.
Ciprian recounteth. Not to speak of Marcion that ancient heretic, Lib. 1.
ep. 4.
who excommunicated of his Bishope in Pontus, came to Rome for absolution, as
Epiphanius relates: and Here Is. 42.
therefore Pope Leo calls it an ancient custom to appeal unto Rome. This
was the cause why Epist. 89.
the Bishop of Rome urged especially the decree of the Nicene council, to
show that it was not only lawful, but also very expedient: sor albeit the
Affricane Bishops desired, that Appeals might not easily be admitted, for
the great injury to justice, and vain protraction of suits, which they daily
perceived to follow thereof: yet knowing full well, that they could not
forbid such appeals of them selves, they humbly made petition to the Pope, for
more moderation therein. In their epistle which they wrote to Pope Celestinus,
these be their words. The office of dutiful salutation premised, we
earnestly beseech you that hereafter you would not easily give audience to
such as come from hence. Had they been of Bells mind, they would never have
used any deprecatory petition, but have roundly and readily told him, that he
had no authority to admit any appeals, neither was his jurisdiction over them,
and therefore that they did owe him no obedience or subjection.

But far were they from any such conceit, as being not ignorant of his
jurisdiction over them, according to which belief they proceeded in like
manner, For which cause the same very Bishops of Africa, when this matter of
Appeals and the Nicene council, was one foot, and Pope Sozimus had sent unto
their council three legates, wrote unto Bope Bonifacius the Successor of
Sozimus in this manner. Because it has pleased our Lord concerning such things
as our holy hrethren have handled with us, Faustinus our fellow Bishop, and
Philippe, and Asellus, our fellow Priests, that our humilitye can not write
unto Sozimus a Bishop of blessed memory, from whom they brought both precepts
and letters, but to your veneration, who by Gods ordinance, are succeeded in his
place, we ought briesely to insinuate those things, which by the agreement of
both parts were determined, in which we stayed indeed without breach of
charity, but not without great altercation: in which words making relation of
their Acts to Pope Bonifacius, and testifinge that they had received precepts
or commandments from his predecessor Pope Sozimus, what do they else, but
acknowledge their obedience and subjection to the Apostolic sea. Beside, not
long after this Council ^pist. 87.
Pope Leo writing to the Bishops of Mauritania in Affrike, says that he
restored the communion to Bishop Lupicinus, because he appealed to him out of
Affrike: and likewise that he sent unto them for his legate, Bishop Potentius
who should in his stead, have care of the affairs of Affrike. All which
abundantly testify, both the authority of the Bishop of Rome in Africa, and
that appeals were made to him, and also that the Affricane fathers denied not
this, though for the reason before alleged, they desired more moderation
therein to be used.

And albeit S. Augustine was one of these Bishops, and so his voice passed in
the common letters with others, yet because Bell does here so magnify him, as
though he had been a mighty enemy to the Popes supremacy, I will in particular
show out of that venerable and learned father, what reverence, subjection, and
dutiful respect, he carried to the Pope, contenting my self only with that,
which he writes of this very point, or of the three Popes in whose times
this matter of appeals was handled, and some of which, the minister very
bodly, if not somewhat saucily, but out of all question most falsely,
pronounces to have corrupted the Nicene canons. This holy father writing most
plainly, how him self and other Bishops came to Cesarea, by the commandment
of Sozimus, what does he but clearly proclaim his primacy over Africa. The
same Augustine was most Epist. 157.
subject and dear to Pope Bonifacius as we learn out of the beginning of his
first book, against the two epistles of the Pelagians, directed to the same
Bonifacius. The same Augustine writing to Pope Celestinus, refers the cause
of a certain Africane Epist. 221.
Bishop to him after this manner. O holy Pope, most blessed Lord, venerable
for piety, and with dutiful charity to be received: labor together with us,
and command all things which are sent, to be recited unto thee: and on the
contrary Pope Celestinus does highly commend S. Augustine Epist. ad Gallos.
as one that had always remained in the communion of the Roman church and
had been reputed always of him self, and his predecessors, for a great
Doctor.

Out of that which has been said, the ministers first doubt is solued, why
the Pope rather alleged the decrees of the Nicene Council, then any other
prooffe out of the Gospel, because as I said the question was not about his
supremacy in general, as Bell cuningly or maliciously makes it, but of
Appeals, which though it be a thing consectary to his supreme jurisdiction,
yet for the reasons before mentioned, some doubt might be made about the
exercise thereof: for the satisfying of which, no better resolution could be
devised then of a general Council. The good reader also can not but
sufficiently gather out of the premises, an answer to the second question, to
wit, that neither Celestinus the Pope, nor any of his predecessors forged any
canons, as Bell and such like with lying lips affirm, (who measure others
according to them selves) both for that, they appealed to Rome, out of Affrike,
before the time of the Nicene council, and so little needed they (had they been
so wicked) to forge any thing to prove that which was practiced before: and
for that straight after appeals were likewise admitted, and also for that the
Bishop of Rome, had his Legate there resident amongst them, for the dispatch of
ecclesiastical business, as out of Pope Leo has been declared. The same thing
also appears, in that neither the Affricane Bishops nor S. Austen ever
objected any such crime of forgery to any of those Popes, as the ministerial
fraternity of forgers do, but contrariwise behaved them selves in most
dutiful manner, giving them very reverent and honorable titles, protestinge
also their obedience and subjection to them as has been said: and so they be
far unlike to our Protestant professors, that persecute them with scrrilous
and odius terms. As therefore the unseemly carriage, and bitter accusation of
our Gospellers does manifestly argue their spighte to these Popes, and that
they condemn them as guilty of forgery, so their dutiful and obedient
deportment toward those holy Popes, give the world to understand that they
were far from any such malicious conceit: and therefore albeit I might content
my self with that which has been said, yet more to clear them from the
venim of Bells aspish lips, and to free them wholly from the malicious
imputation of the minister, and that in the judgment of any indifferent reader.

I say further that these canons of the Nicen^ council allowing appeals to
Rome, might be in that Council though now not found there, nor yet extant
then in those copies sent from the East to the Bishops of Affrike: for as much
as most certain it is, that there were diverse canons more, then be now
found, or were sent to Affrike, many being perished either by the malice of
the Arrians, whose power ouerswaied the Eastern churches, and were most
mortal enemies to that Council, which is very probable: else by some other
dismoll accident of fire or otherwise. How soever it be, that many canons be
wantinge is most certain, for one of the canons of that Council, was about
the observation of Easter day, as testifies Constantine in his epistle, and
also Epiphanius Apud Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constantini. Here Is. 69. Epist. do
Synodis Arimin. and Seleucien. Lib. 10. hist. cap. 6. Epist. 110. Lib. 1. cap.
8.
and Athanasius: but this canon is in none of those twenty which be now
extant, and of which only so many years since Ruffinus makes mention in his
history. It was prohibited also in the same Council, that there should be two
Bishops in one place, as S. Austen affirms: but no such canon or decree now
appears. And to omit diverse other particulars: not only other Protestants,
but Bell also both in his other books, and in this pamphlet in the next
chapter, obiecteth out of Socrates that a canon was made in the Nicene council
by the suggestion of Paphnutius, which permitted Priests to remain with their
former wives. but this Canon is no where to be found amongst amongst those
twenty. Wherefore if Pope Celestinus must be condemned for a falsary, because
he cited a canon which is not now extant, nor mentioned by Ruffinus: by the
same reason, must Constantinus, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Augustinus, Socrates,
yea and not other Protestants only, but Bell him self be sentenced of forgery,
for citinge of that canon which is not now extant amongst those twenty.

Albeit that which has been said, may give full satisfaction to any man of
moderation yet more to musle the mouth of the minister, I add and say, that
these canons of appeal being found formally in the Council of Sardica, where
in most ample and plain words, both in the fourth and seventh canons, Can. 4.
and 7.
appellations to Rome are ratified and confirmed: both Pope Sozimus and others,
call them by the name of the Nicene canons, though they be found in the
Council of Sardica: and the reason is, for that these two Councels are
accounted for all one: both because the same fathers that were present at Nice,
were also a great number of them at Sardica, and also for that no new thing
touching faith was there enacted: whereas in other Councels, new heresies were
condemned: and this is the cause, why it makes not any number, for being a
general and approved Council, it should be the second in order, being
celebrated an eleauene years after the death of Constantine the great, as the
Magdeburgians them selves relate out of Socrates, Centur 4. col. 747.
Theodoretus, and Sozomenus: for they solemnly report the whole council
together with these two canons of appellations to Rome, where Bell for his
cold comfort may read them, it should I say be the second, being some years
before that of Constantinople, but that for the reason alleged, it is reputed
all one with that of Nice, and so makes not any number.

This also is confirmed, for that in the copy of one Dionisius, who a thousand
years since, translated the Nicene Council out of the Greek tongue, (yet
extant in the Abbey of S. Vedastus at Arras, Lib. 2. de Roman^ pontif. cap. 25.
as Cardinal Bellarmine reports) all the canons of the Coucell of Sardica
are found adjoined with those of Nice, as of one Council. What marvel then
if Pope Sozimus or Bonifacius, cite the canons of the Council of Sardica, for
the canons of Nice, when as they were accounted for all one, and in all
probability found them in their copies so joined together.

Bells great difficulty is dissolved, and the Pope discharged from all forgery,
and false packing. Now to come upon him, and to beat the end of his own
weapon upon his own face: what says he to the canons of the Council of
Sardica, or Nice, which grant appeals to Rome, as the Legates of the Pope
veryfyed to the Affricane Bishops? were they found formally in the Nicene
council, Bell were overthrown for ever: but they be in the Council of
Sardica, celebrated straight after, which is reputed one with this of Nice, and
of sovereign authority: what starting hole will he find out to avoid this
blow? O miserable minister whose carcass is still beaten like an anuile, with
the hammers of his own arguments. His other reasons out of the Council of
Chalcedon, and Nice, are answered before.

Bells III. Chapter Of the marriage of Priests and ministers of the Church.
THE VI. VNTRVTHE.
THe minister pleading here hard for the wiuing of Priests, has these words.
For this respect did holy Paphnutius stand up in the Council of Nice, at such
times as the Fathers then and there assembled together, thought to have severed
married Priests and Bishops from their wives, and told them according to gods
word, that to forbid marriage to Priests, was too severe a law: He yielded
this reason, because marriage is so honorable in all sorts of men. Thus
writes Cassiodorus, thus writes Socrates, thus writes Sozomenus. And thus
lies the minister, for none of these there speak any one word that
Paphnutius should tell them, that according to Gods word to forbid marriage
to Priests was too severe a law: he speaks not one syllable of such as were
Priests already, as though he would have them permitted to marry as Bell
falsely reports in the fore alleged words, and more plainly in the page
following, where he says that Paphnutius motion was approved of the whole
Council and thereupon the matter was left as indifferent for every Priest
either to marry or not to marry at his own choice. False I say it is, that
either Cassiodorus, Socrates, or Sozomenus speak any one word of the marriage
of Priests, or have any such thing that the matter was left indifferent for
every Priest to marry or not to marry at his own choice. Why did he not quote
the places where his reader might have tried the truth of his relation? what
means this flying of the light? what else, but that he had rather have his
bare word taken, then the matter examined. It will not sorue his turn, that
in the end of his Chapter, he refers the reader to his Suruay, where those
places be cited: for that book is not always at hand, and beside no such
special place is there named, that without difficulty what is desired can not
be found. But view the places who please, and the fidelity and sincere
conscience of the minister will soon appear, for as much as the contrary of
that Bell affirms, remains there upon record.

Cassiodorus the author of the tripartite history in the place quoted By Bell,
cites Sozomenus, from whom he receives that which he there reports which is
this, speaking of the Nicene Council, that it did seem good to some to bring
in a law that Bishops, and Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, should not
sleep with their wives, which they had married before consecration. But
Paphnutius the confessor rising yp in the midst, withstode it, consessing
marriage to be honorable, and saying that the comapny of a man's own wife was
chastity, and he advised the Council not to make any such law, affirminge
that it was a great cause, which might be to them or their wives, the occasion
of fornication. This does he allege out of Sozomenus, leaving yet something
out which that author has, the cause as I suppose (if any place be left for
conjecture) why Bell rather quoted Cassiodorus then Sozomenus. For Sozomenus
adds also these words of Paphnutius immediately following. And that the old
tradition of the church was, that those which were made Priests being not yet
married, should not afterward marry wives: but they which were called to that
order being married, should not be separated from their wives which they had.
The very same thing has Socrates. By which the good reader may judge what a
conscience the minister has, when he blusheth not to say, that the Council
left it indifferent for every Priest to marry or not to marry at his own
choice, when as there is no one word spoken of those that married after taking
of holy orders, but only of those that were ordered after they were married, as
both Cassiodorus out of Sozomenus, and Sozomenus him self together with
Socrates jointly asfirme: nay when as Sozomenus and Socrates both say, that the
old tradition of the Church was, that those which took holy orders unmarried,
might not marry at all. This being so, who will deny that the minister had not
great reason, neither to cite their words, nor quote their places, fathering
so gross an untruth upon them.

But some will say, yet at least it appears out of the former authors, that
those which were married folk, and afterward became Priests, might still use
the company of their wives, which is against the practice of the Romayne
Church. To this I say first, that our question is not now about that point,
but whether Bell has not slaundered these authors, when he makes them to say
that thing, which they say not, but have the clean contrary. Secondly
notwithstanding I answer, that this may seem to make for the custom of the
Grecians, who retain still those wives, which they had married before entering
into holy orders: but it helps nothing at all our late Apostates, that after
their consecration and vow of chastity, without all scruple, nay if we list to
believe them, with the testimony of a good conscience, provided them selves of
young yoke fellows, for the comfort of their declining years, and
spiritual begetting the liberty of the new gospel: yet in truth does it
neither releue the cause of the Grecians: for so much as neither any such
thing is extant in the Nicene Council, and pregnant proffes to show that no
such thing was ever there decreed: for Sozomenus and Socrates being known
heretics, deserve no credit, especially the first of them, being noted by
blessed S. Gregory for Lib. 6. ep. 31.
one that has many lies: and Socrates known for a man of like quality, as I
could easily show, were it not that I desire all convenient breuity, but
principally for that S. Hierom and S. Epiphanius (who lived more nere to the
time of the Nicene Council then the other twain did) affirm so much of the
custom of the Eastern church as can not stand with their former testimonies,
as straight after shall be handled. Wherefore seeing it must needs be, that
either Sozomenus and Socrates err from the truth, or S. Hierome, and S.
Epiphanius, none I think of indiffere^cy, but will prefer Catholics before
heretics: and those that lived nearer to the time of the Nicene Council, then
those that were farther of: and this is so certain, that I durst remitt the
matter to Bell him self, and such like, did it not concern so much their own
freholde, and that the ponderous passion of wiuing without all respect of
reason, did bear down the balance to the wrong side. But howsoever this
shall fall out (whereof by and by I shall have more occasion to speak) Bell
the Ragmaster remains conuicte of a Notorious untruth, notwitstanding his
often protestation of sincerity and plain dealinge.

THE XII. VNTRVTHE.
IN the same third Chapter, pursuing still his former subject, he utters two
untruths with one breath in these words: For this respect was it, that
Priests were ever married in the East Church until these our days, and in
the west church generallye, for the space of three hundred eighty and five
years, at which time Pope Siricius excited by Satan, prohibited marriage as an
unlawful thing. Here (I say) be two rouzinge untruths. The first is, Priests
were ever married in the East church. For S. Epiphanius an ancient father,
and one of the Greek church, testifies the clean contrary. Sanctum
sacerdotium etc. The holy Ad finem operis co^tra hereses.
Preishoode (quoth he) is for the most part of virgins or of unmarried folk,
or if those be not sufficient for the ministerye, of those which conteyne them
selves from their own Here Is. 59.
wives: And in another place. But the Church (quoth he) does not admit the
husband of one wife yet living and begetting children: S. Hierom likewise
writing against. Vigilantius says. What shall the Church of the East do,
what the Church of Egipte, and the Apostolic sea, which take virgins for
their Clerks, or contynent, or if they be married, give over to be husbands.
Will Bell for all this tell us, that Priests were ever married in the East
church, and with out all respect give S. Epiphanius and S. Hierom ^ word of
disgrace: it would beseem him ^^ch better, quietlye to digest it him self,
his just deserts allotting him that special favor.

Out of these two testimonies also the good reader may note, whether Sozomenus
and Socrates are to be credited, affirminge that by permission of the Nicene
Council, Eastern Priests married before orders might still have the company
of their former wives, as in the precedent section was handled. Nay the same is
most certain out of the very Nicene Synod it self, where it Can. 3.
is forbidden Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, to keep any women in their house,
beside their mother, sister or aunt: no mention is made of any wife, which yet
should have been in the first place, if any such tolleration at the suggestion
of Paphnutius had been granted. And if their former wives were, as our
adversaries pretend out of Socrates and Sozemenus, permitted them, why should
the cohabitation of other women be interdicted? Did they allow them their
wives and not suffer them to have maids, for the dispatche of household
business, and bringinge up of the leuiticall frye, which commonly is plentiful
in that generation, if we may guess by those of our time: who so simple as
sees not the incongruitye of these two, or percei^eth not, that the Council
for biddinge any maid seruante to dwell in Priests howses, did never grant
them the cohabitation and carnal company of their wives, as our Protestants
pretend. Furthermore how can it be true, that the Nicene Council permitted
(as the same authors report) Bishops to enjoy the company of their former
wives: when as some hundred years after, in the false Synod of Constantinople
holden in Trullo, Can. 48.
howsoever the raynes were loosed to other of the Clergy, yet Bishops were
forbidden to dwell with their former wives: which conuinceth that no such leave
was granted by the Council of Nice, and so crazeth the creditt of them, which
affirm that Synod to have permitted Bishops, Priests, etc. to remain still
with their former wives.

To these former testimonies and reasones, I will adioyne one more, both
against Bell, that desperately mainteyneth, that the marriage of Ecclesiastical
persons has always been used in the East church, until these our days,
and also against Socrates, and Sozomenus, saying that the Council of Nice did
permit them to enjoy the company of those wives, which they hadd married
before taking of holy orders: and it shall be of a Greek Doctor, that lived in
the time of the Nicene Council, to wit Eusebius, whose words be these:
Veruntamen: Notwithstanding it is meet, that they should Lib. 1. Demonstrat.
euang. cap. 9.
refrain them selves from the company of their wives who are consecrated and
busied in the ministry, and service of God. What plentye of authorities
might be brought, to ouerthro We this palpable untruth: but what need more,
when as these already, tickle the Minister, and fetch blood: for they are so
far of to be avoided any cauillinge shifte, that the Lutheran Magdeburgians
dislike two of these fathers, because they speak not herein according to their
mind, as is evident in their fourth Centurye, where they note S. Epiphanius
as erringe Ce^tur. 4. col. 303.
about that point, citinge part of his words, before by me produced: and
afterward they accuse many doctors for inclyning too much unto that opinion,
yea that they did publiklye profess, that it was not lawful for Priests to
have wives: and amongst others, they tax Eusebius for one, cyting the very
words by me alleged, But what do I dispute in a matter so plain, when as
the erraticall Council of Constantinople, holden in Trullo, (which Bell so
solemnly alleges in his Survey Page 224. and 227.
for the proof of Priests marriage) is in this point directly against him: for
though it allowed such Priests as after marriage received orders, to continue
still with their former wives, yet did it utterly forbid Priests, after orders
to mary, as appears out of the sixth Cano^; Nay to this day, the Greeks have
no such custom, which is sufficient to confound the bold assertion of the
minister, if nothing else were added. Thus much of his first untruth.

THE XIII. VNTRVTHE.
THe next untruth, fellow to the former is, that in the West church, the
marryage of Priests was generally lawful, till the time of Siricius. For
refutation whereof, I have spoken so plentifullye in my late book against Bell,
that it is The Doleful knel. page 51. and page 97. 98.
in vain to say more There I have by irrefragable testimonies proved that
Priests marriage was prohibited before, and by diverse reasons drawn out of
Siricius own epistle, made it manifest, that he was not the first who enacted
that law, but that commanded the due observation of that which Apostolical
antiquity had in that behalf ordained. To that place thefore I refer the
good reader, for I love not always to be iangling of one thing, after the
manner of the great Bell of Rascal. Here sufficient it is, to chamber his
clapper, to oppose unto him the words a little before alleged out of S.
Hierom against Vigilantius, and to choke him with the authority of his
Magdeburgian brethren, who reprehend S. Hierom for writing thus in defense of
his books against Iouinian. The Apostles are chosen either virgins, or
contynent Cent. 4. col. 477.
after marryage: Bishops, Priests, Deacons, are chosen either virgins, or only
such as for ever remain chaste after priosthood: which words of Saint Hierom
they much mislike: and to hamper him with the grave authority of the second
Council of Arles, celebrated about the year of Christ three hundred twentye
six, according to the accounte of the Centuristes Cent. 4. col. 604. Can. 2.
of Magdeburge, which decreed, that non ought to be assumed to Preisthood being
married, unless conversion were promised. What conversion could this be, but the
forsakinge of his wives carnal company?

THE XIIII. VNTRVTH.
SIr Thomas continuing still his declamation in behalf of Priests marriage,
proceeds also forward in lying writing thus. Yea Priests continued still
married in Germany, for the space of one thousand seventy four years, until
the days of the ungracious Pope Hildebrand, who termed himself Gregory the
seventh: so soon as he had crept into the Pope dome by naughty means. What
this graceles gospeller writes of blessed Pope Gregory (whom generally the
Historiographers of that time, and diverse of them saints in heaven do highly
commend) little imports: a sufficient argument for his innoce^cie, and zeal
of true religion it is, that all nouelling sectmasters ba^d against him: never
shall Bell show that he crept into the popedom by naughty means, though most
easy to prove, that his ministership ran from his priesthood upon no holy
motives. But to the matter. An untruth it is that Priests still continued
married in Germany for the space of one thousand seventy sower years, as he
boldlye affirms, which I have proved most demo^stratiuelie against him in the
Doleful knell. For his page 101. 102.
manner is, again and again to inculcate the same thing, and so never lacks
matter for new books, though botched together of such rotten rags, as were
handled else where, so that Bell cann make a new title and a little change of
the order, to begett a new pamphlet at any time upon small warninge. But I
list not to imitate his vain though justly I might, for why may not I
singe the same song, if he fiddle still the same tune; Wherefore referringe the
good reader to the former place I will here only adioyne one testimony not
mentioned before, and it is of Pope Zachary who lived eight hundred years
ago, and so, long before the time he mentions. This good Pope writing to S.
Bonifacius our worthy countryman, then Bishopp, and the apostle of Germany,
has these words, speaking of Priests. From the day of taking priesthode,
they are to be forbidden, yea even from their own wives. Of this decree the
Centur. 8. Cel. 704.
Magdeburgians make mention. True it is, that they score it up for one of his
errors (thatiudgement proceeding from the error of their doctrine) but it
gives us a sufficient warrante, to score up that also for a notorious untruth,
which the minister speaks of the long lawful liberty of Ecclesiastical
wiuinge in Germany.

THE XV. XVI. XVII. XVIII. AND XIX, VNTRVTHES.
Now follows a litter of diverse lies, contained in three or four lines, of
which I must speak in particular. Pleading still for the marriage of the
clergy he says. For this respect was it that many learned and holy bishops
were married in the ancient time, and flourishinge state of the Church, vz S.
Gregory, S. Clement, S. Spiridion. S. Philogonius, S. Eupsichius and others.
This he brings to prove, that they married after receiuinge of holy orders,
or at least used still the carnal company of their former wives, or else he
proves nothing. But in these words is contained a notorious lie, with sieve
followers and others. Why has he not noted in his margent sufficient
authority to justify what he says? will these tricks of trusty sir Thomas
never be left? It serves not the turn to tell us, that he has done it in
his Survey, and that for two reasons. The first is, because many have not that
book, and no reasone can he allege for not addinge the quotations here, but
only that he would have his ignorant reader, to take all upon the report of
his word; Secondly for that I find not in all his Survey any Clement noted
for a married bishop, and yet have I viewed over the third and fourth chapters
of his third part, where he entreats of that matter: But to run over his
particular catalogue.

That S. Gregory, the father of S. Gregory Nazianzen. did marry after he was
Bishopp is one untruth: for he was married before ever he was christened, as he
may learn out of that funeral Oration of Nazianzen, which in his Survey he
Page 222.
cites to prove him a married bishop. That S. Clement after the dignity of
bishopp took any wife, is a second untruth: for I challeng him confidently,
though little knowinge what Clement he means. That S. Spiridion was married I
grant, but Bell must prove, that it was after he was created Bishopp, and not
before, or at least that he used the company of his wife which he will never
do, and so that makes the third untruth. The very self same thing I say of
S. Cheremon, and S. Philogonius which make up the fourth and fifth untruths.

THE XX. VNTRVTH.
OF Saint Eupsichius more consideration is to be had, for Bell not only here
makes him a married bishop, but also in his Survey Page 222.
says, that he was Bishopp of Cesarea and a married man, and soon after his
marryage martyred for lesus Christ. For if this be true, which so confidentlye
he affirms, it seems very plain, that his marryage did follow holy
orders. But out upon the currupt conscience of this casta way. I utterly deny
that he was ever Bishopp, or in any sacred orders at all, being only a lay
man, and of an honorable family. How does he prove the contrary? For
justification of that he says, he quoteth in the margent the Tripartite
history, and Nicephorus. Lib. 6. cap. 14. Lib. 10. cap. 10.
The words of the tripartite history bethese. Furthermore at that time, they
say that Basilius a Priest of the church of Ancyra, ended his life by
martyrdom, and Eupsichius a citizen of Cesarea in Cappadocia having lately
married a wife, being yet as it were a brydgroome. Where is here any mention of
his being Bishop. Sozomenus from whom Cassiodorus (the compiler of the
triparaite history) took those Words says, that Eupsichius was ex patricys,
of the senators or nobility, without any mention of his Episcopal dignity.

Nicephorus his second author delivers the story in this manner Hoc ipso
tempore etc. At this very time Basilius also a priest of the Church of Ancyra
ended his life by martyrdom, and likewise Eupsichius of Cesarea in Cappadocia,
borne of an ancient family, and honorable kindred, who a little before had
married a wife. and was as yet a bridegroom. And this is so certain, that the
Lutheran Centurists who would as willingly hear news of a bishopp married
after his consecration as Bell, but being heerin not so impudent as he (that
seems to be ashamed of nothing but truth and honesty) teporte him only to
have been a noble man. Eupsichius (say they) was Centur. 4. Col. 1430.
of the City of Cesarea, descended of the nobility of Cappadocdia, slain by
the Citizens of Cesarea etc. and they cite Sozomenus before mentioned. Whether
this be not a gallant untruth meet for such a reformed minister, and professor
of the sincere gospel, I refer me to the judgment of the prudent and
indifferent reader: and I cannot persuade my self, but had he not wholly
consumed his conscience, with continual custom of careless sinninge, it
could not posibly be, that he would ever set abroache such manifest, gross,
and shameless untruths.

Bells IIII. Chapter Of the Popish execrable Pardons.
THE XXI. VNTRVTH.
THis chapter though it be but short, yet it lacks not the seal of his
occupation: for his conclusion is adorned with this notable untruth: The Popes
pardon (quoth he) is a rotten ragge of the new religion, brought into the
church after a 1300. years, by Pope Bonifacius the eighte. This very tale he
has told us diverse times before, and therefore the more reason I have to
challenge it for a rotten ly of the Ragge-maister of Raicall. That it is such
a one, I have proved in the foresaid Doleful knelle, both by the testimony of
Page 52. 53. etc.
other catholic writers, and also of Kemnitius the Lutherance of Germany, and
Perkins the Puritan of England, his dear brothers in the Lord. And to say
something in this place, I will add one testimony more, and it shall be of our
mortal enemies the Waldensis, called also Pauperes de Lugduno: Who appeared
to the world about the year 1270. as testifies Claudius Cussordius, and Libro
contra waldenses. Lib. de heresibus. 4. part Examinis page 375.
Guido: one of whose heresies was against the Popes pardons as is most
certain, and Kemnitius confesses, which argues that pardons were long in
use, before the year 1300. and therefore be it known to Bell that he has
often runge out a notorious untruth.

Bells V. Chapter Of Popish Purgatory.
THE XXII. VNTRVTHE.
IN this chapter after he has disputed against purgatory, with the authority
of Roffensis (of which else where I entend to speak more) he comes to his
recapitulation and says. Secondly, that the church of Rome believed it not
(that is purgatory) for the space of 250. years, after which time, it
increased by little and little. This either he means is gathered out of the
testimony of Roffensis and that is not true, for nothing does Roffensis speak
of 250. years, or deny that Purgatrory was always believed in the church,
although he confesses that the doctrine thereof was not generally so well
known as now it is, which is far different from this proposition: Purgatory
was not believed of the church of Rome for the speace of 250. years after
Christ: Or else he affirms of himself, that Purgatory was not believed until
that time, which I make no doubt but it is his meaning, for as much as he
teaches the same thing in other of his books: and then I must be so bold to
tell him, that it is also a manifest untruth, as I have proved against him in
the Dolefulle knelle, out of S. Denis S. Paul's scholar, Page 55. 56.
and Tertullian: yea and to his utter confusion, convinced out of himself: in
this place I will add the testimony of his brother Perkins. Who in his
Problem confesses, that Purgatory in the church was first received by
Tertullian the Montanist, Verbo Purgatorium. page 185.
wherein is one open untruth, to wit that he was the first, for he only
affirms it, but proves it not, and no marueil when he can not, seeing most
certain it is, that it came from the Apostles. Non Hom. 69. ad populum. Prayer
for the doade comes from the Apostles.
temere etc. Not without cause (says S. Chrysostom) these things were
ordained of the Apostles, that in the dreadful mysteryes, commemoration should
be made of the dead: for they know that thereby much gain does come unto
them, and much profitte. Much more to the same purpose, might be produced.

An other untruth he has, but more secretly conveyed vz that the doctrine of
purgatory is a branch of Montanisme: which is most false, none ever of
antiquity notinge that in Tertullian for any erroneous doctrine: which no
question they would, had they reputed that of like quality with the other. Bell
for that great skille which he has in ancient monuments, and great dexterity
in discovering the origin of Popery, whereof Survey epi stle Dedicatorie.
he vaunteth to the solace of his soul, shall do well to justify these two
points of his precise brother: or if his leisure serve him not for so much, at
least let him defend himself from lyinge, when as Tertullian by the testimony
of Perkins confesses Purgatory, who was dead before the year two hundred and
fiftye.

Here the judicious reader may also note how the minister contradicts
himself. In his Suruaye intreatinge of Purgatory he says: Thus by little and
Bell co^tradicteth him solse.
little, it increased, till the late Bishops of Rome made it an article of
Popish faith. Where in the margent he notes the time thus: In the year of
our Lord 250. Here he says, that the church of Rome believed it not for the
space of 250. years; after which (as he tells us) it increased by little and
little: and so in this place he makes the seed of Purgatory not to have been
sown before the year 250, and after ward to have increased till it came to
perfection: there he affirms, that the seed was sown before. and increased
by little and little vntille it became ripe and perfect Popery, which was in the
year 250: and so Purgatory was sown and not sown: grown and not grown: an
article of faith, and not an article of faith, in the same one year 250. I
will not deny but the minister has some skill in botching together of old
ends of divinity gathered out of the ragge markett of Calvin and such like
Ceneua-merchants: yet I fear me it will be to hard for him, so to cobble the
sayings together, that the flawe of a contradiction appears not.

THE XXIII. VNTRVTH.
IN the same place he writes thus. Fistly, that the Primitive Church was never
acquainted with the Popes pardons, nor yet with his counterfette and forged
purgatory. A notable untruth, for not to speak of pardons, but of purgatory:
was it not the Primitive church which believed purgatory, when as himself
confesses, that it was made an article of Popish faith in the year 250.
Survey page 297 Lib. 2. cap. 2. page 3.
at what time all the Popes were martyred for Christ:and in his Funeral he
acknowledges the first thirty for godly men, saying, that both they and diverse
others taught the same doctrine which S. Peter had done before them, and most
certain that one of these thirty lived in the year 250. and so I trow they
were of the Primitive Church. The Minister is full of distinctions, and his
brain a shop of solutions, having many I says for the answer of any
objection: yet it is to be feared, that no devise will free him from a gorsse
untruth, affirming here that the Primitive Church was not acquainted with
Purgatory, and yet teaching in his Survey that Purgatory was made an article of
fiath by the late Popes of Rome in the year 250. I let pass how purgatory
must by his own confession be Apostolical doctrine, when it was taught by
those Popes which he grants to have holden the faith of S. Peter, as I have
urged against him in the Doleful Knell: I omit also how falsely and
ridiculously he calls the Popes that lived 1450 years ago, the late Popes of
Rome. verily it should seem by his writing that he little cares what passes
from his pen, so it be walking against the Pope and Popish doctrine.

Bells VI. Chapter Of Popish Auricular confession.
THE XXIIII. VNTRVTH.
SCotus (says Bell) affirms resolutely, that Popish auricular confession is
not grounded on the holy scripture: but only instituted and commanded by the
Church of Rome. The minister resolutely slaundereth Scotus. Where does that
learned man teach any such doctrine? View his margent and nothing is there
found. Bell is old ipse he, the man that had rather be credited upon his empty
word, then to have the matter com to the trial of his quotation. It helps
him not to say, that he has noted the place in his Suruay, both because many
have not that book, (neither does he here in this particular place of Scotus
referr him to that book) and beside what reason can he give not to quote the
place also here? But to wincke at this malicious cunninge of his, how does he
prove him guilty of this assertion in his Suruay. I will first set down the
doctrine of Scotus, and then examine what Bell brings, for by this means the
good reader shall be the better enabled to judge of the whole matter.

That learned man disputinge of the necessity of confession to be made to a
Priest (not mentioning the word auricular, whatsoever Bell says) In 4. did.
17. quast. 1.
enquireth by what law a man is bound to confession, and determines first in
general, that the precept must grow from one of these laws, either from the
law of nature, or the law positive of God, or the law of Church: and
descending to particulars, he resolves first, that we are not bound by the
law of nature: nextly he disputes whether it grows from the precept of the
Church, and not liking that opinion, he proceeds to the next member and
says. Breuiter etc. To be short, it seems more reasonable to hold the
second member, that confession falls under the positive precept of God: But
then we must consider (says Scotus) whether it be found explicitly (or in
express terms) in the Gospel immediately from Christ, because it is manifest
(quoth he) that it is not in the old law, or whether it be from him expressly
in some of the Apostles doctrine: or if neither so nor so, whether then it was
given of Christ by word only, and published to the Church by the Apostles: And
having made this triple division, how confefsion might com by the precept of
God, that is either first commanded by him in the Gospel: or else secondly to
be found in some of the Apostle writings: or lastly instituted of Christ by
word of mouth only. And having disputed of the first two members with
dislike-of the second, saying: It appears therefore that it is not of the
law of God published by Apostolical scripture. Whereupon he concludes thus:
Vel igitur tenendum est. etc. Therefore we must either hold the first member,
to wit that it comes from the law of God published by the Gospel etc. or if
that be not sufficient, we must say the third, that it is of the positive law
of God, published by Christ to the Apostles: but published by the Apostles,
unto the Church, without all scripture: as the Church houldeth many other
things, published in word only by the Apostles without scripture, etc.

How say thou gentle reader has Bellbelyed Scotus or no, affirminge him to
teach that Popish auricular confession is not grounded on the holy scripture,
but only instituted and commanded by the Church of Rome: When as he
maintains plainly that it is de iure diuino of the law of God, instituted of
Christ himself in the Gospel, or by word of mouth delivered to the Apostles,
and by them to the Church, yea and brings good reasons, which before I
omitted, to show that it was not instituted by the Church, as for that the
Church would not have gone about to impose so hard a precept upon all
Christians, unless it had been the commandment of God: as also for that it
is not found, where this precept is imposed by the Church, but that before it
holy men did think that this precept of consession did bind. For if they
alleadg (quoth Extra de Penitent and remissionibus.
he) that chapter out of the Canon law. Every one of either sex etc. it is
evident that the constitution was made by Innocentius the third, in the
Council of Laterane: but S. Augustine was before that time more then eight
hundred years, who affirmed confession to be necessary, as appears in his
book of true and false penance, and certain authorityes of his are putt here
in the text, and certain in That is of the Master of the Sentences. upon whom
Scotus does comment.
the Canon law.

And not only Scotus his own words now cited do discharge him from the
ministers false imputatio^, but also the minister himself in his Suruay (where
he entreats of this point) wholly freeth him: for having cited Scotus his
words, to prove that confession to the Priest was not found in the law of God
extant in any of the Apostles Epistles, as before has been touched, he
proceeds forward and says: Thus writes their subtle school doctor Scotus,
Survey page 502.
who not able to establishe auricular co^fesiion in the fcriptures, flies to
their last refuge, to wit to unwritten traditions for in the end of all he
adds these words. It appears therefore that it is not of the law of God,
published by Apostolical scripture: Therefore we must either houlde the first
member to wit that it comes from the law of God, published by the Gospel,
or if that be not sufficient, we must say the third, to wit, that it is of
the positive law of God, published by Christ to his Apostles, but published by
the Apostles, unto the Church without all scripture. Out of which words of
Scotus (though recited by Bell in latin only) we learn that he does not only
give himself the lie when he says in his Survey, that Scotus his opinion is,
that confession came unto us by tradition, and affirms here the contrary
saying that Scotus his opinion is that it was only instituted and commanded by
the Church of Rome: but also by the grace of his iugling sincerity, plays two
or three Three pretty tricks of Bell. The first.
other pretty prankes in his Suruay.

The first is, when he says Scotus flies to unwritten traditions, and
specifieth not wat tradition Scotus speaks of, for it is not of any tradition
Ecclesiastical or Apostolical, but of divine tradition coming form the law
of God, and instituted of Christ himself, by his own mouth declared unto the
Apostles, and by them to the church, as before has been said. The second is
this, Scotus (quoth Bell) not able to establishe auricular confession The
second.
in the scriptures, flies to their last refuge, to wit unto unwritten
traditions: for in the words following cited by Bell in his Suruay, Scotus does
as well establishe confession (for the word auricular he has not, though Bell
does forced it in) by the law of God founded in the God spell, as by tradition
coming from Christ, as before has been noted out of Scotus, and this, may
pass for a notorious untruth. The third is, that to conceal, this his abusing
both of Scotus, and also of the The third.
good reader, he cited Scotus his words in latin only, not vouchsasing to putt
them into English, but he is to be pardoned, for that were not only to ly, but
also to hold the candle for other to view his treachery. What sweet stuff
does he preach to his auditors out of the pulpitt, where he is free from all
controulment, that publishes such untruths and plays such cunnicatching
tricks in the view of the whole realm.

THE XXV. VNTRVTH.
AT the heels of the former untruth, follow in the same chapter diverse others,
his words be these: The Popish Gloss, of great credit with the Papists,
tells them roundly, that auricular confession can no way be desended bnt by
tradition of the church: he runs on lying very roundly in this manner.
Panormitanus, Richardus, Durandus, Bonauentura, Hugo, and all the Popish
Canonists generally approve and follow the same Gloss. In which few words be
contained at least three untruths, of that quality that they may justly
deserve the whetstone.

The first is, that Richardus joins in opinion with the gloss, and thinks
sacramental confession, to com from the institution and tradition of the
Church: for he teaches the flatt opposite doctrine. Respondeo quod omnes etc.
I aunsweare 4. Se^ did. 17. ar. 1. ques. 1.
(quoth Richardus) that all are bound of necessity to confess their sins to
the Priest, because Christ has commanded this, etc. and he proves it both
otherwise, and specially out of these words of our Savior Joan. 20. Receive
you the holy Ghost: Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them:
and whose you shall retain, they are retained. There is one notable untruth,
for the minister to tyer upon.

THE XXVI. VNTRVTH.
THe second untruth and that a chopper is, that Durandus is also of the same
opinion with the gloss, when as he does directly maintain the contrary, his
words be these. De consessione 4. Se^ 1. did. 17. quait. 8.
autem stricte accepta etc. But of confession taken strictly, which is a
manisestation of our sins before a Priest, with hope of obtaining pardon, it
is to be said, that it is not of the law of nature, nor of any law that is
pure humane: but of the law of God delivered in the Gospel. And after he has
proved, that it comes no^ from any law that is mere humane: he concludes
thus. Propter quod relinquitur etc. Wherefore remains, that sacramental
confession, of which (...) speak, is only by the law of God: and straight
after h^ inueigheth very earnestly against the gloss, for houlding the
contrary. What may not this Minister prove out of any author, and quickel^
convince us by our own doctors, if when the^ say one thing, he can without
all scruple, maintain them to teach the clean contrary.

THE XXVII. VNTRVTH.
THe third untruth follows, no less shall melesse then the former: so that it
seems that he was now in the right vain of lying: for how does he prove that
against Richardus, and D^randus, which so bouldly he affirms. For proof^
straight after he voucheth his Suruay, with quotation in the margent, and also
his Motives, but without any quotation at all. Coming to his Survey, there he
tells the same tale against Richardus and Durandus, referring him self for
the Survey page 502.
credit of that he says to Josephus Angles, whom he quoteth in the margent
thus: Vide Joseph. Angle 4. S. page prim. I have not missed it one letter, o^
tittle: and yet view that place, he that will, nothing shall be there found:
it may be he would, or at least should have said, page 209. for I make some
doubt, whether ever he meant to cite the place truly, seeing there is in my
conceit, some difference betwixt the number, of one, and the number of 209.
and suppose that this book wear in quarto, which is a larger size, yet must
it much exceed the number of an hundred. Perhapps he would have said, quest.
1. de confessione, for the syllables page and quest resemble one an other so
lively that he might easilye mistake the one for an other.

The truth is this (good reader) if any probable conjecture may be admitted,
that he willingly perverted the quotation: Whether I have reason to judge so or
no, I leave it to thy censure, upon the examination of the matter: not to urge
therefore how in his pamphlet he usually omitteth all citations of the authors
them selves, which ministers just cause of ielousy: nor to speak how unlikely
it is, that he could so grossly mistake it: I stand only upon this, whether
Josephus Angles has any such sentence by him alleged or no: if he has, then
equity wills us to interpret all the the best, but if Josephus has no such
thing, neither does so much as name Richardus or Durandus, then can it not be
denied, but that he has not only belyed those two but also slaundered, and
corrupted Josephus, by foisting in those two names, not found in him, and for
the concealing of this his treachery, quoted him not at all in this pamphlet,
and gave a false quotation in his. Suruay: but the truth is that Josephus
makes not any mention of Richardus or Durandus: In 4. sent. quest. de consess.
ar. 1. page 209. Editionis 1584. apud Bellerum.
his words be these: Confessio sacramentalis is etc. Sacramental consession is
instituted of Christ Jesus, and confequently by the luwe of God etc: There have
been six errors which are confuted in this first conclusion. The first is of
the Gloss of the decret, in the beginning of the fifth distinction: Panormitan
upon the chapter, omnis vtriusque sexus etc. S. Bonauenture (and he cites the
authority of Hugo) all which affirm that this sacrament was instituted by the
Church. How say thou good reader, is not Bell a trusty gospeller, for a
man to rely his soul upon? God grauntall good people to take heed of such an
inward wolf, roabed outwardly with shepes clothing, that is protestation of
truth, and sincerity.

If any object here and say, that at least the Gloss and Panormitan were of
that opinion, I willingly grant them to have been in an error: S. Ciprian
erred about rebaptization, and yet dyed a glorious martyr: if wefollow not the
fathers, though otherwise never so ancient or learned, when they swerve from
the common opinion, and tradition of the Catholic Church: does he thinck
that the erroneous conceit of a modern doctor or two, shall ouersway the
Church, to the following of their particular and private opinions. We
acknowledge no such rule of faith in modern Canonists, adding notwithstanding,
that where obstinacy possesses not the will, but true obedience to the Church
remains, error may be incurred by humane infirmity, negligence, obscurity of
the matter, or the determination of the Church being not yet given, or not
known, but by no means heresy, albeit the thing it self may be contrary to
faith, or good manners. Thus much briefly for their excuse: but how the
minister can be defended is without the conceit of all common capacity. I
might add for a fourth untruth how both here and in his Survey he makes
Josephus also to mention Rhenanus, of whom he speaks nothing at all: But I
have done sufficiently for this Chapter, let us now see what follows in the
next.

Bells VII. Chapter Of Popish venial sins.
THE XXVIII. VNTRVTH.
COncerning his seventh chapter wherein he disputes of venial sins, two
things are to be noted, before we come to his untruths. The first is, that all
Catholic writers both old and new, acknowledge and confess some sins to be
venial, and not to deserve the everlasting pain of hell fire, as by and by
shall more plentifully be proved. The second is, that there be two small things
(commonly called schole questions) wherein diverse follow diverse opinions. The
first is whether venial sins be contrary to the commanundement, or beside the
commandment: some learned men houlding the one opinion, and some embracing the
other: which is a curious quiddity, disputable in schools, and nothing touching
the heart of religion, and besides none of these, but willingly submit them
selves to the censure of the catholic Church: and yet the minister as though it
were some fundamental point, notes here very gravely out of Josephus, that the
one opinion is now more common in the schools, then the other, and out of that
by maine dexterity of learning infers the mutability of our religion: but he
should have done well to have proved first that this concerned religion, that
is any point of faith, as he would have it thought, or else he says nothing to
the purpose.

The second schole question though somewhat greater is, from whence it comes,
that some sins be mortal, some venial, whether from the nature of the sins
them selves, or from the mercy of God. The common opinion, most received and
most sound is, that some sins of their own nature be small or venial, others
great and mortal. Bishop Fisher, and some four other alleged by Bell,
think that all sins of their own nature be mortal: and that it proceeds
from the mercy of God that some be venial, because he would not upon diverse
smaller sins impose so great a punishment. But not withstanding this small
difference, neither B. Fisher, nor any of the others deny venial sins, as
Bell and his consorts does.

This being so let us consider what a notable untruth (and that often
rehearsed) the minister offers to the view of his readers, when he says:
Almainus, Durandus, Gerson, Baius and other famous Papists, not able to
answer the reasons against venial sins, confess the truth with the Bishop
that every sin is mortal. He does cunningly abuse them in leaving out those
words of it own nature, which ought to have been added according to their
opinion, and he like wise does add in citing of Roffensis immediately before:
does not this dealing of his argue that he would have his reader to think,
that these learned men denied all venial sins, which damnable doctrine of
the Protestants they detest: for example Bishop Fisher in his 22. article
against Luther houldeth some sins to be venial: (that is such as take not
away Gods grace) Nec opinor te etc. Neither do I think (says Bishop Cont.
L^ the um art. 32.
Fisher to Luther) that thou will say, but that a mortal sin so soon as it
is committed, banisheth grace from the soul, and does constitute the sinner
him self in the hatred of God: and if a mortal sin does take away Gods
grace, and not a venial, verily it is manifest, that there is no small
difference betwixt a mortal and venial sin. Behold Roffensis teaches some
sins to be venial, and that there is a great difference betwixt a mortal
and a venial sin. Of the same mind be the other, though by his cunning
handlinge he would make the to deny venial sins, and to hold all mortal,
according to the new doctrine of the Protestants.

THE XXIX. VNTRVTH.
AFter this untruth immediately follows an other: Yea the Jesuit S. R. (quoth
he) with the advice of his best learned friends, in his answer to the
downfall of Popery, confesses plainly, and blusheth not thereat, that the
Church of Rome, had not defined some sins to be venial, until he days of
pitts the fifth, and Gregory the thirtenth, which was not fifty years ago: In
which words he blusheth never a whitt to slander that learned man, and wholly
to corrupt his meaning. He says not that the Church of Rome had not defined
some sins to be venial, until the days of pius the fifth, and Gregory the
thirteenthe, as this licentious castaway corrupty fathereth upon him: for he
knew well that to beseue venial sins, was an article long received before
the times of those Popes: but he affirms only that to hold venial sins to
be only such by the mercy of God, was censured and condemned by those Popes:
why did Sr. Thomas his sincerity, cut a way these words by the mercy of God?
forsooth because that without lying and corruption, he can object nothing
against Catholic doctrine.

The same catholic writer, noted him in the place cited by him self of two
untruths, the one for calling B. Fisher the Pope canonized marty: the other for
stiling Gerson, a Bishop: neither of which be true, but he slyly passes over
them, as not knowing poor wretch what to say in his own defense, in to such
straights does this dominiring doctor drive him. self by his talent of
ouerlashinge.

THE XXX. VNTRVTH.
STraight after this trick of treachery, he cries out in the fervor of his
soul. O sweet Jesus what a world is this, that silly foolish Papists should
be so bewitched, as to think Popery the old religion, and in that bitter
pangue was delivered of an other abominable ly, for it follows, VV see it
plainly confessed by our adversaries that for the space of a thowsande five
hundred, and three score years, all sins were deemed mortal. Had not this
minister renounced all modesty and true dealing, never would he putt in print
such palpable untruths: for no one Catholic author can he name since Christ,
that denied venial sins: the ground of this untruth is the precedent, where
he affirmed that the Church of Rome, had not defined some sins to be venial
until the days of Pius the fifth, and Gregory the thirtebth, which being most
false, as was there said, it remains also that this can not be true which so
bouldly here he maintayneth.

Many sentences of ancient fathers and other notable authors do encounter us
every where, teaching plainly and perspicuously some sins to be venial. To
name one or two before the late time he for the confusion of the minister. The
Council of Trent confirmed by pius the fourth, and so in orderly reckoning
before Pius the fifth, has these words Albeit in this mort all life, holy and
sess. 6. cap. 11.
just men do fall somtymes, at least into light and daily sins, which are
also called venial: yet they cease not for all that to be just, for that
saying of just men is humble and true, forgive us our debts. Glorious S.
Augustine, teaches the same doctrine in diverse places: one I will cite, in
which he has the very name. Aly (quoth he) can not therefore In Enthi rid cap.
22.
be sometime commended, because we do sometymely to save others, wherefore it is
a sin, but venial which benevolence does excuse. But there is no better way
to cool the heat of this challenger, then to cause his brother Perkins to
let him blood. How does he like In his Problem verbo Peccatu^^ veniale. page
74.
these words of his? A venial sin that is beside the law not against the
law of God, and that which of his own nature binds only to the guilt of
tempor all pain, was not known to the fathers, at least for seuene hundred
years after Christ, after ward began openly to be taught and defended. This
Minister deals very niggardly with us, yet very bountyfully to prove Bell
alyer for none I think will believe him saying, that we denied all sins to
bemortal for a thousand, five hundred years, when as our mortal enymy
confesses, that venial sins were taught and defended, nine hundred years
ago. This being so, may not I far more truly, treading in his steps cry
out, and say? O sweet Jesus that any Protestant^ should be so bewitched as to
give credit to such^ creature, that has Apostated from his Priesthoo^ and
showen a fair pair of heels to the congregation: on given over so to
shameless lyinge, that no cloak of defense can be found to shroud him nay
when the case is so clear, that his own brother does depose against him: or
that they should be so inueigled by him or others, as to thinck our religion to
be new, which was planted in our dear Catholic religion planted in Englaud a
thousand yea^^s ago
country a thowsande years ago by S. Gregory, as all our Chronicles, and
ancient monuments testify, and the ruins of many Abbeys, do cry out and
lamentably proclaim: and which that holy Pope received from S. Peter, by the
current of his blessed predecessors: or so much as once dream, that Pro
testantisme can be the old faith, which licentious Luther not long since began,
neither the name being The beginning of the Protesta^tes religi^n.
ever heard of before, nor any of that profession known then in the whole
world, nor for many ages before, as their silence being therein urged, makes
them to confess and never indede as we most constantly defend, and can easyly
by inevitable demonstrations convince and prove: and whose doctrine so little
pleases our English Protestants, Luthera religion. detested of English
Protestante^.
namely about the real presence, that draw cutts they will, one part can not
be excused from heesy, and for that crime, be in danger of everlasting
damnation.

Bells VIII. Chapter Of the Popes faith.
THE XXXI. VNTRVTH.
BEfore I come to his untruths, I will speak a little of the entrance of his
chapter, in which he that has changed diverse fayths, will needs dispute of
the Popes faith: and he begins in his coffing gravity, after this manner:
VVisdome with the whole troop of virtues were needesull for him, that should
dispute of the holy fathers faith, or power. Very well, we penetrate his
meaning: neither wisdom nor any virtues be needful for such a one: what then?
it follows I therefore post deosculationempedum, humbly pray to be heard in
defense of truth, wherein I will desire no more of his Holiness, but that only
he will grant me so much to be true, as I shall prove to be true by
thetestimony of the best learned Popish writers. Note good reader the profou^d
wisdom of the Minister: because neither wisdom nor virtue is requisite, for one
to dispute of the Popes faith and power, therefore he will take the matter in
hand. Indeed were it granted that none but so qualyfied as he describes,
were to entreat of the Popes faith and power: all voices I think would go
clear both of his side and ours, that he were the most meet to entreat of
that subject. Of his graceless gyrninge at the kissing of the Popes feece I
have in the Forerunner said so much, that in his pamphlette called the Popes
Funeral (the pretended answer of the Forerunner,) not knowing what reply to
make, he smoothly over slipped that point, as I have noted in the Doleful
knell: and yet still he has Page 247.
it by the end, so much the conceit does please his heart. Agame also he is
flinging at the title of his Holiness, but of that I have spoken sufficiently
before^

His smaller untruths I do not mean shall here make tale, as where he
fathereth a certain book upon the Seminary Priests, and yet a few lines
after, says that the book was written by Watson in the name of all the rest:
whether Watson faith so or no I little know, never seeing my self any such book
of his: but one thing am I most sure of, that most false it is, that any such
book was set out by the Seminary Priests: or that they gave consent to any
such book, seeing very few Seminary Priests or none at all as I verily think
can be named, that liked of that his proceeding, as I have handled abundantly
in the Doleful knell, where the good reader Page 36. 37. etc.
may find, what little creditte is to be given to Watsons infamous works,
which so oftern and sosolemnly this Minister alleges. Now to examine that
which follows.

Bell proceeding forward, collecteth out of the said Watsons books, in this
formal manner. First therefore if we mean to wringe any truth out of the
Popes nose we must have recourse to his Holiness, at such time as he is sober
and not when he is furious, least he become stark mad and forget the knowledge
of the truth: as though Watson had said that the Pope is some time sober, and
sometime furious: he does much wrong him, for his words reported by Bell him
self in this very chapter, contain no such thing: only he says that as the
prudent Greek appealed from Alexander, furious, to Alexander sober, so may the
seculars notwith standing any decree, set down by his Holiness by wrong
information, appeal even from the Pope as Clemens, unto his Hohnes as Peter:
he speaks of Alexander surious and sober: and not of the Pope. Bell she weth
small conscience in belyinge the dead and laying more faults upon him
unjustly, when alas he had other wise too many. Again Watson speaks of
matters of fact, wherein the Pope may by wrong information be deceived, and
not of questions of faith, as the Minister cunningly insinuates, if not
plainly affirms, wherein Watson would never have admitted, that the Pope
might be deceived: and so the foundation of all his cauilling against the Pope,
as a private or public person, falls to ground, as shall straight more
clearly appear.

His rusticall immodesty and childishe scoffinge at the Popes nose, little
becomes the gravity of his ministership, and as I think little contenteth his
best fauourits: but he that is led up and down by the nose like a Buffalo,
by the Prince of this world, must to gratify his master, employ his railing
talent according to his black inspiratio^. God give him true penance, for
these and many more like sins, least fruitles penance in the next world, be
the reward of such monsterous wickedness.

Not long after he has these words For first it is a constant maxim (quoth
he) that the Pope, and none but the Pope, must judge in all controuersyes of
faith and doctrine. Nay it is rather a most constant Maxim, that Bell seldom
writes any thing that is true: false it is that the Pope, and none but the
Pope, is the judge in all matters of faith and doctrine: for a general
Council also is judge, yea and by the opinion of many learned divines, the
Pope iudginge alone without a general Council may err, as shall straight
appear, and that out of Bell him self.

THE XXXII. VNTRVTH.
THe next untruth is contained in these words: That their Pope can not err in
faith iudicially is this day with Papists an article of their faith. An untruth
I say it is, for though the more common and better opinion be, that the Pope in
his judicial and definitive sentence can not err in faith, yet false it is
that this is an article of faith, when as many divines both have, and do hold
the contrary. To prove which thing, I need no better witness then Bell him
self, whose great grace it is, to say that in one place, which he denies in an
other, making the wind to blow, as serves best for the traffic of such a
merchant.

In his motives he sets down this conclusion. Page 47.
Not only the Pope as Pope may err, in his public decrees, when he alone
defines matters of faith or manners, but also when he so defines with a
provincial Romish Council. This conclusion is certain and undoubtedly true,
even by the testimony of best learned Papists, and because Bellarminus does not
deny this to be so, I willalleage his words which be these: Secunda opinio est
etc. The second opinion is, that the Lib. 4. de Roman. Pont. cap. 2.
Pope even as Pope may be an heretic and teach heresy, if he define without a
general Council, and that this in very deed has chanced so. This opinion
does Nilus follow, and defend in his book against the Popes primacye: the
same opinion. have some of the university of Paris follouced: as Gerson and
Almain in their books of the churches power: and of their opinion also are
Alphonsus, and Adrian, who all do not ascribe the infallibillity of judgment
to the Pope, but to the church or to a general Council only, in all matters
of faith.

Out of these words of his I infer, first, that he trippeth when he says:
that their Pope can not err in matters of faith iudicially, is this day with
the Papists an article of their faith, for here he confesses the contrary. I
deduce secondly, that he grossly contradicts himself, affirming that in one
place which he denies in an other. I gather thirdly, that he ouer-reached (as
I noted before) when he affirmed, that we make none but the Pope judge of all
controversies, for generally all Catholics make a Council with the Pope also
the judge, and some as has now been said, in no case make the Pope alone the
judge, but jointly with a general Council.

THE XXIIII. VNTRVTH.
AN other follows immediately in the next words, in which he will needs
prove cut of Sotus, that it is this day an article of faith, that the Pope can
not err iudicially. That their Pope (quoth he) can not err in faith
iudicially, it is this day wit^ Papists, an article of their faith: the famous
Papist Dominicus Soto, shall be the spokes man for the rest: alber says he the
Pope as Pope, can not err, that is to say, can not set down any error, as an
article of faith, because the holy Ghost will not permit that, nevertheless
as he is a private person, so he may err even in faith, as he may do other
sin These words of Soto prove very well, that the Pope as Pope could not
err, which the most an best divines do also maintain, but no word on
syllable has he, that this is an articl of faith: which was the point that
Bell should have proved, and for which he pretended to cite his words, but in
them no such thing appears, and therefore the minister does know what
follows.

THE XXXIIII. VNTRVTH.
IN the words ensuing straight after, he runs upon this doctrine taught by
Soto, and generally houlden of Catholics, vz that the Pope can not err in
faith: and confidently avouches, that it was never heard of, till of late
days: his words be Lib. 2. Doctrina. lis fidei cap. 47. and 48. Lib. 2. Sum
cap. 109. etc.
these. This only will I say, that this Popish article: the Pope can not err
in faith, was never heard of in Christ's Church for the space of a thowsande
five hundred years. A gallante untruth worthy of the reformed minister. Thomas
waldensis, was long before that time, as also Turrecremata, both which hold
that the Pope can not err in faith: and not only late writers but the ancient
fathers have taught the same doctrine, reying them selves upon the promise and
words of our Savior in the Gospel: to name two or three. S. Augustine.
Numerate sacerdotes etc. Number the Priests In psalm. contr. partem Donati.
(says he) yea even from the very seat of Peter: in that order of fathers, see
who succeeded whom: that is the rock, which the proud gates of hell do not
ouercom. S. Cirill, mentioned by S. Thomas Aquinas, speakinge of that promise
In Catena.
of Christ, Math. 16. has these words. According to this promise, the
Apostolical Church of Peter, remains pure from all deceit, and heretical
circumuention. Innocentius the third. He understands (says this holy and
learned Epist. ad episc. Arelatens.
Pope) that the greater causes of the Church, specially such as he about
articles of faith are to be referred to the sea of Peter, that knows how our
Lord prayed for him, that his faith might not fail,

And to be short, his dear brother Perkins once Verbo Primatus number. 17.
more shall testify against him. The Pope (says he) has not infallible
judgment determinatiue: so all have taught yea the Papists them selves for
four hundred years: insinuating sufficiently, that after that time, it was
taught: which though it be an untruth, seeing it was taught before, yet it
serves to prove Bell no sincere minister, who may taineth confidently, that no
such doctrine was heard of till the year a thousand five hundred: To conclude
Bell him self contradicts else where what he says here, and so gives himself
the ly: By the uniform consent Motiutes page 18.
(quoth he) of all learned Papists, (Albertus Pigghius only excepted,) the Pope
in his own private person may be a Judas, a fornicatour, a Simonist, an
homicide, an usurer, an Atheist, an heretic, and for his manifould iniquityes
damnedin hell: That this is the doctrine of all Papists, as well concerning the
Popes private person, as touching his iudicia definitions, is confessed by
Robertus Bellarmnius, Bartholomen Caranza, Melchior Canus, Dominicus Soto,
Thomas Aquinas Antoninus, Caietanus, Couarruuias, and others: but that the Pope
as Pope, and public person can err, that all the said Papists, with their
accomplices, constantly deny, as which only point once confessed, would utterly
confound them, and make frustrate their whole religion. I leave it now to the
good reader, to give his verdicte, whither Bell has no ouer-reached, and also
contradicted himself, affirming both that this Popish article, the Pope cannot
err in faith, was never heard of in Christ Church, for the space of a
thousand five hundred years: and yet affirminge, that Antoninus, and Thomas
Aquinas, maintained the very same opinion, the latest of which, died many a
fair year before the time he mentions.

THE XXXV. VNTRVTH.
THe next is found in that very sentence, which he brings for the proffe of
his former false assertion, to wit, that this article, the Pope can not err
in says, was never heard of in Christ's Church, for the space of a thousand
five hundred years. Many famous Papists (quoth he) I might alleaga, but one
Alphonsus will suffice: we doubt not (says he) whether Lib. 1. de here is. cap.
4.
one may be a Pope and an heretic both together, for I believe there is none
so shameless a flatterer of the Pope, (ever except our Jesuits and Iesuited
Papists) that will ascribe this unto him, that he can neither err, nor be
deceived in the exposition of the scriptures. One main ly, with a pretty trick
of lieger-demayn: for he is to prove out of Alphonsus that the Pope might err
in faith iudicially, for of that is the question, as appears in the
premises: and that this article, was never heard of, for the space of a
thousand five hundred years, and yet in the foresaid words of Alphonsus, no
suehe thing is contained, seeing he speaks in them not of his judicial
decrees, but of private errors, which may befalle him in the exposition of the
scriptures: and that Alphonsus must needs mean of his private opinions in
writing or otherwise, and not of his deflnitiue sentence, is certain: for
otherwise there be, and were in his time, that held the Pope could not be an
heretic iudicially or err as Pope, as in the precedent untruth has been
handled: much less does Alphonsus say, that it was never heard of for the
space of a thousand five hundred years, that the Pope could not err in faith
iudicially, for of this point he has not one word or syllable.

Beside this untruth there lurketh in the same sentence, an other cunnicatching
trick of the Minister, proceeding from his rancour, and inueterate malice: for
these words, ever except out Jesuits and Iesuited Papists are none of
Alphonsus, but a damnable dra^me of his own devotion: for with malicious
slight, has he inserted those words in the very same letter, with the other of
Alphonsus, but included them in a Parenthesis, so that by this artificial
coosenage of his, he has laid a pittefall for the ignorant, and provided a
buckler of defense against any accusation: for what means the printing of
them both in the same character, but to have the ignorant or unwary reader, to
take the^ for Alphonsus his words, directed by him, against the flattery of
Jesuits and other Iesuited Papists as he terms them? Charge him with this
iugling of his, and then he will plead, that he intended no such thing, but
spoke them of himself, and therefore distinguished them by a Parenthesis: but
had not his meaning been corrupt, he would have putt the matter out of doubt,
by printing them also in a distinct letter: Which because he did not, his
devout dependants may think him clear from all sinister dealing: we that are
so well acquainted with his little conscience of puttinge in practice any
slight, and fraudulent invention, that may tend to the disgrace of
Catholics, and Catholic religion, can not but justly suspect him of sinister
and malicious dealinge.

THE XXXVI. VNTRVTH.
IN the recapitulation he takes his leave with a cast of his occupation. And
thirdly (quoth he) seeing this strange faith was not hatched, or heard of in
the world, for the space of a thousand five hundred years, no not in Alphonsus
his days as we have heard already. For in these words he adioyneth an other
untruth vz, that to say the Pope can not err as Pope, was not heard of in
Alphonsus his time, that is about some fifty or three score years ago, when as
Dominicus Soto who lived in his time defends the same opinion, as before was
showed: nay when as Caranza, Canus, Caietan, Antoninus, and S. Thomas teach the
same doctrine, as a little before out of Bell himself was proved, all which were
in his time, or before him: and Alphonsus in the former place alleged, has
not any thing to relieve Bell: for neither does he say there, that the Pope as
Pope may err, and though he did, yet were it a notorious untruth that none
taught otherwise till his time, or in his time, when as Alphonsus says no such
thing: but on the contrary, that many in his days and before, taught that the
Pope iudicially, or the Pope as Pope, could not err, as out of Bell himself
has been proved: and so I leave the minister, plunged into a labyrinth of
untruths.

Bells IX. Chapter. Of the condign so supposed merit of works.
THE XXXVII. VNTRVTH.
THis chapter is bestowed against the merits of good works, wherein diverse
untruths are intermnigled to give it the better outward gloss, and to make
the matter he speaks of more probable to the ignoraunte reader. The holy
Fathers (quoth he) do often use the word meritte, and call the works of the
saithfull meritorious: yet this they do, not for any worthiness of the works,
but for Gods acceptance, and promise sake, who has promised, and will
perform, not to suffer so much as one cup of could water given in his name,
to pass without reward. So he denies the fathers to have ascribed any meritt
to good works proceeding from grace, for any dignity or worthiness in the
works themselves, but only from Gods promise and merciful acceptance, for
the worthiness and merits of his sonnet This I challenge for a manifest untruth,
when as plentiful testimonies want not, to prove that works proceeding of
grace are meritorious, not only for his promise or acceptance, but also for
the dignity of the works: yea the scriptures are evident in this point. Call
the workmen and pay them Math. 10. ^. 8.
their hyer: where reward is given to the works: where of it follows that
works descrued it: likewise our Savior says: Com ye blessed of my father,
Math. 25. ^. 34.
possess you the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world:
for I was an hungered, and you gave me me to eat. Where our Savior signifies,
that heaven was given to good works: for in more usual significant words it
can not be spoken, that heaven is given as a reward to the works of mercy, and
beside in the same place, damnation is given to bad works. Get you away from
me ye cursed (says Christ) Ibidem.
into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the devil and his angles: for I
was an hungry and you gave me not to cate etc. Seeing then the scripture
declares plainly, that bad works deserve danation, and be the cause thereof:
as plainly does it also signify, that good works meritt heaven, and be the
cause thereof.

We find also in scripture that men are said worthy of reward, as: That you may
be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which also you suffer: 2.
Thessal. 1. v. s. Apocal. 3. v. 4. Cap. 16. v. 15. Suruay page 398.
and, They shall walk with me in wh ites, because they are worthy: Yea the
word (meritt) is found in the scripture: in Ecclesiasticus we read thus. All
mercy shall make place to every one according to the meritt of his works. Bell
in his Suruay gives two answears. The first is, that the book is not
Canonical as which (says he) was not found written in the holy tongue. A
pitiful shifte, for who knows not that many parts of the Canonical
scriptures be not written in the Hebrew tongue, as all or almost all the new
testament: and sundry books be written in that tongue, which be fabulous and
of no authority: and where did Bell larne, that a book, could not be
canonical yea in the old law, except it were written in the Hebrew tongue? We
have as good authority to prove it Canonical, as he has for the Apocalips,
which I trust he will not deny: and that is the ancient Council of Carthage,
wherein S. Augustine was Carthag. 3. can. 47.
present: and be it that it were not Canonical, yet is the authority thereof
very weighty, and of more credit then other authors, though learned, virtuous,
and ancient: other wise why is it read in the English Churches, in that very
place and order in which the Canonical scriptures are.

This solution not fully satisfyinge him, he gives a second, which is, that
the text is not truly translated, inuaighing against the vulgar edition, and
the Council of Trent, that authorized the same: for it should have been
translated says he, according to his works: but this is a poor cauil, for in
true sense, what difference is there betwixt these two, according to his
works: and according to the merit of his works: verily the old interpreter,
as learned as Bell, and of as good a conscience, more then twelve hundred years
ago, and S. Hierom not inferior to Bell, in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew,
translateth thus: that we m^ sight against Gabaa Benjamin and render unto it
for to Iudic. 20.
works it deserves, and yet the formal word (dese^ ueth) is neither in the
Greek or Hebrew, but thu according to all the foolishnes which, they have done
Israel. The second place is in S. Paul where h^ says. And beneficence and
communion do not forgett, so Mebr. 13. v. 16.
with such hosts God is promerited: be hold here all the word (meritt.)

But because Bell speaks of the Fathers, will briefly show, that he does
slander the^ when he says that they did term works meritorious, because God
has promised to accept them ^ worthy, for the worthiness of his son, and for
his merits reward them with heaven, as if they had merited the same for they
teach that good works proceeding from grace, and in the virtue of Christ's
moritts, hau^ worthiness in themselfes, and be meritorious, which Bell denies
them to hold, and no marvel when as himself teaches, that good works are
so far from having any worthiness in them, that he maintayneth this
paradoxicall proposition Good works are imperfect, polluted with sin, and i^
rigor Survey page 400.
of justice worthy of condemnation. Wherefore t^ name one of the Greek
Church, and an other Hom. 4. de Lazaro. ^irca medium.
of the latin: S. Chrisostom writes thus. If God (quoth he) be just, he will
render both to them, and these according to their merits. Note that he
acknowledges merits of justice, and so not only of mercy, liberality and free
acceptance: s. Augustine says, Epist. 105. ^d sixta^.
As death is rendered to the meritte of sin, as a stipend: so eternal life to
the meritt of justice, is rendered as a stipend.

More might be produced, but these are sufficient, being of ancient, and
learned fathers: and to say the truth, greatly requisite it is not to labor
about the proof of this point, when as Calvin confesses not only that the
ancient doctors used the name of merit, but also adds that he did most
Institut. cap. 15.. 2.
wickedly provide for the sincerity of faith that first invented that name: for
had they meant no other thing by it, then Bell would persuade us, the sincerity
of the faith had no ways been touched, neither neded he to have used any such
bitter accusation: but this complaint of his, argues that they intended more
by that name, then he did admittt for true, and so I leave Bell convicted of an
vntruh.

But says Bell, the Fathers commonly joined merits and grace together. I
willingly grant it, for without grace, our works are of no price, dignity, or
merit, in the sight of God, and therefore the second Council of Arausica, says
excellently well: Reward is due to good works if they be they be done: but
Can. 18.
grace which was not due goes before, that they may be done. In which golden
sentence, the merit of good works is taught: and the fountain from whence
they spring, openly declared. That which he alleges out of S. Bernard, to
wit: It is sufficient to meritte, to know that our merits are not sufficient:
because it served not his purpose it may be that he did of purpose quote it
false, for it is not in the 18. sermon, but in the 78. sermon upon the
Canticles: and as that which he has all eadged, does nothing help him, so
that which follows, and omitted by him works his bane. It is sufficient to
meritte (faith S. Bernard) to know that our meritts are not sufficient. Very
well, then he acknowledges merits: but that which comes after pertayneth to
beat down presumption of merits, and not to deny them, for it follows. But
as it is enough to merit, not to presume of merits, so enough is it to
judgment, to want merits: and a little after. VVerfore see that thou haste
merits, having them know that they are given thee: had hefaithfully cited all
these sentences, there could no scruple have troubled the reader, what S.
Bernards opinion was about merits. That holy man acknowledges merits, but like
a true spiritual father labors to plant humility, and to keep down pride
and presumption.

THE XXXVIII. VNTRVTH.
TRue it is likewise (says Bell) that not only the fathers generally, but the
best Popish schole doctors also, Durandus, Aquinas, Gregorius Ariminensis,
Dominicus Soto, Marsilius, Waldensis, Burgensis, and sundy other, do vnisormly
and constantly affirm, that no man's works, how holy so ever they be, either
are or can be meritorious pro perly, but only meritorious in an improper, and
large kind of speech, as is already said: This is proved at large, in my
other books. This indeed is handled in his other books: for his special
grace is, with the same matter, to make many new pamphlets: but whether it be
proved or no, is an other question. Should I shake up, and in particular examine
these authors, many untruths would be discovered: but I intend it not, partly
because it would be tedious, partly for that some of those authors, be not as
hand, and lastely for that one S. R. in his learned answer to his Challenge of
The downfall has canuased all these authorities, and laid open his
fraudulent and lying proceeding. To that book Art. 5. chap. 60
therefore for sifting of this sentence, I refer the reader. Here only I say
briefly. First that all these Catholic writers, and all others do acknowledge
that good works are meritorious of eternal life: only some of them named by
Bell, vary about the manner of speech, for they would not have the words
condign or congrual to be used: but only that we should say, that the works
of just men proceeding from grace be meritorious of eternal life, as
waldensis, and Burgensis. Others will have good works to be meritorious
condignely, that word being taken in a large manner. So Durandus and
Ariminensis. Secondly I say that neither Aquinas, Gregorius Ariminensis,
Dominicus Soto, Marsilius, Waldensis, or Burgensis, do allow that good works
proceeding from grace, are not otherwise meritorious, save only for the promise
of Christ, and his free acceptance, as most bouldely he affirms, and
therefore does he therein slander them, when he says that all the former
authors, do affirm works only meritorious in an improper and large kind of
speech as is already said, that is according to his precedent doctrine, that
they be meritorious only for the promise of God, and his free acceptance, and
not otherwise: this is an untruth I say, speaking thus of them all in general,
for one particular instance to the contrary overthrows him, yet I will add a
couple. S. Thomas Aquinas shall be the first, who teaches, that a man in grace
may meritte everlasting life condignely: and he gives the reason, because
everlasting life is rewarded according to the judgment of 12. quest. 114 art.
3.
justice, according to that 2. Timoth. 4. Concerning the rest there is laid up
for me a crown of justice, which our Lord will render unto me in that day, a
just judge. Behold Aquinas acknowledges reward of justice, proving it out of
S. Paul, and so not of mercy only and Gods free acceptance: he confesses also
as is evident out of the very title of his article, meritte of condignity,
which Bell a little before calls a monster lately borne at Rome: so we see
that S. Thomas attributed more to the merit of works proceeding from grace,
then pleases his humor, and consequently that he does greatly abuse him, when
he would have him teach no other merit of works, then by Christ's only promise
and free acceptance.

The second shall be Dominicus Soto, cited here also by Bell, who aknowledgeth
that works proceeding from grace, do merit co^dignely. The works of Lib. 3.
de Natura and gratia. cap. 8.
a just man (quoth he) which are good in their nature and circumstances, all
are condign merits both ofencrease of grace, and also of eternal life. And a
little after, he refuteth two common solutions of Protestants. The first of
which is that-vrged here by Bell, vz that reward is due to our works, not in
respect of them selves, but for the promis of God. Melancthon quoth he) and his
companions do answer, that everlasting life is called a^rewarde, not because
it is due to our works, but to the promis of God: which answer of theirs, he
does there examine and utterly reject. And will the minister for all this tell
us, that Soto does affirm works only meritorious, in an improper and large
kind of speech: that is as Bell says, not for any worthiness of the works,
but for Gods acceptance and promis sake. He may if he please, but he must give
us leave whether we will believe him or no.

They that desire to know more of his iugling tricks, and untruths, touching
these authors may read the foresaid author S. R. in his answer to Bells
downefal of Popery. Art. 5. cap. 9.


THE XXXIX. VNTRVTH.
IN his third paragraphe he cites Josephus Angles, who says, that good works
proceeding of grace without the promise of God are wholly unworthy of eternal
life. This he alleges, as though it were mortal doctrine to us: where as if
himself were this day at Rome, and clear in all other things, never would he
be called in question about that point: and yet does he make a mighty matter
of it, vrginge it almost in all his books. If the good reader desire a more
ample discourse hereof he may find it in the Doleful Knell, where Josephus his
words are thoroughly examined, and the minister Lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 3.
for many mad tricks very handsomely laid out in his colors.

Here I will note only one egregious untruth of his, cunningly commended to the
view of his readers: for having produced Josephus, (though not citing his
whole sentence, but the last words only,) to show that works proceeding from
grace, are not meritorious of eternal life, without the promise of God, but
wholly unworthy: he infers thus. Then doubtelesse the best workess of all,
can no way be meritorious: which is a false conclusion, gathered out of the
premises, for it should have been thus: then doubtless the best works of all
can no way be meritotious without the promise of God: why did he persidiously
curtall a way these words, and make Josephus absolutely to conclude against the
merits of works, when as in that very place, he teaches the merits of works,
proceeding from grace, together with the promise of God? To make his prooffe
the more probable and passable, he would not cite any more of Josephus Words
then were for his turn. This is the sincerity of trusty S. Thomas: and yet
after such a shameful pranke, as though he had given us a great blow, he
adds with triumphant exultation in this manner. When any Papist in the
world, can truly disprove this illation, let me be his bondslaue for his
reward. The illation is disproued, let him therefore provide himself to
perform that pennaunce, which he has said upon himself, and try whether he
that has had such bad speed in the ministry, and ill success in his
Priesthood, can find any better fortune in the new vocation of servitude and
slavery. Of his fourth paragrasse, I shall have better occasion to speak
straight ways: wherefore to his fifth, in which the fourth also shall be
dispatched.

THE XL. VNTRVTH.
TRue it is fifthly (quoth Bell) that the late Popish Council of Trent has
accursed all such as deny, or not believe the condign meritte of man's works,
and confequently it has made that an article of Popish faith, (O wonderment
of the world) which was no point of faith, for the space of a thousand five
hundred and forty years, viz: the condign merit of man's works, a monster
lately borne at Rome. The minister mistaketh the matter: the monster he
speaks of, was borne at Trent in Germany and not at Rome in Italy, as the
beginning of his words do testify: beside it was not in the year one thousand
five hundred and forty, but one thousand five hundred forty and seven, as
appears out of the sixth session of that Council.

But more thoughly to examine, whether this by any such monstrous doctrine as
he speaks of, or whether it was never heard of before, or rather whether he
be not a monster for malice and lyinge, I would know what he means when he
says: the late Popish Council of Trent, has accursed all such as deny or
not believe the condign merit of wans works: and a little after. The condign
merit of man's works a monster lately borne at Rome: for if he understands
such works as proceed from man only, by the force of his own free will, and
nature, without the help of Gods grace (for some cause have I to suspect that
he may mean so, both because barely he terms them man's works, and am not
ignorant, how they commonly infame us with that doctrine) if (I say) that be
his meaning, then does he most shamefully belly the Council of Trent, as I
report me to the very first canon of the sixth Session, which is this. If any
shall say, that a man can be justified before God, by Sess. 6. can. 1.
his works which are done by the force of humane nature, or by the doctrine of
the law without divine grace by Jesus Christ, be he accursed.

Mary if as he ought, he speaks of man's wo^ kes proceedinge from Gods grace,
as I rather su^pose he does, then most false it is, that it is a^ new
doctrine, or monster, as the new monst^ of the ministry would make it, as I
could abu^ dantly show, both out of scriptures and father^ and something has
been touched before: here ^ convince him of a gross untruth. I will have n^
other witness against him then himself: for ^ the precedent paragraffe, he has
these forma^ words: True it is fourthly that the Jesuit S. R. Robert Parsons,
indeed I challenge the man, in his suppose and pretended answer to the
Downfall of Popery, hat^ set down these conclusions against both the Pope,
an^ himself. The first conclusion. There is merit of eter^ nall life, and our
supernatural works done by Gods grace^ are meritorious of eternal life and
glory. The secon^ conclusion. Good works done in Gods grace, are condignely
meritorious of eternal life. The third conclusion, This condign meritt is not
absolute, but supposes the condition of Gods promise, made to reward it.
These are the Jesuits conclusions, set down by the best advise of his best
learned friends, among whom the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmin must needs be
one, which conclusions for all that do evidently prove as much as I desire.

But these words of his, do manifestly prove, that either he little knows or
cares what he desires: before he came upon the Council of Trent, for
accursing all such, as did deny or not believe the condign merits of man's
works, and inuaighed against that doctrine, as a monster lately borne at Rome:
and yet now the same doctrine is against the Pope, and the Jesuit S. R. and it
does evidently prove as much as he desires: and so that doctrine which before
was false and monstrous, is now become sound and heavenly: was there ever such
an other changeable Cameleon, that as it were with one breath, denies and
affirms one and the self same thing? Certainly the poor man has more need
of a cunning Surgeon, to putt his brains in joint, then of ink and paper to
write such lunaticall pamphlets.

Of his false conjecture, proceeding from lofty vanity, in making F. Parsons
the author of the answer to his Downfall, what shall I say, but that it is a
ministerial pangue coming from the rare conceit of his monuments, which must
be also bumbasted by addinge, that he was assisted by the best advise of his
best learned friends, among whom the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine must
needs be one: thus patching only upon an other, for his own credit and
reputation, as though forsooth one learned man were not any match for him,
except he had the help of Christendom, Cardinal Bellarmine himself. A certain
fond fellow of mean fortune, had a conceit, that all the ships that came
into the haven of Athens were his own: and Bell has such a spice of foolery
fallen upon him, that he thinks all the learned Jesuits of Christendom to be
mightily troubled, about the answearing of his books, when he has been so
contemned, that none for many years ever stirred penue against him: and has
lately been so banged and canuased, that I do think h^ has often wished, that
he had been a sleep, or el^playing at the boules, when he published those ri^
diculous and fantastical challenges.

Bells x. Chapter Of Transubstantiation in Popish mass.
THE XLI. VNTRVTH.
TRansubstantiation (quoth he) is not only repugnant to all philosophy, but
also so absurd in Christian speculation, that it was unknown to the Church of
God, and to all approved Councels, Fathers, and histories, for the space of one
thousand, and two hundred years: it was first hatched by Pope Innocentius, the
third of that name, in the late Council of Laterane, which was houlden one
thousand two hundred and fiften years after Christ. A world of untruths be
here packed together, did time serve to range at large: to be as brief as I
may, I say first that the mystery of Transubstantiation is no more repugnante
to philosophy, nor absurd in Christian speculation, then the mystery of the
ineffable Trinity, and other articles of Christian faith: and I make no doubt,
but had Bell lived in the time of Constantius the Emperor, the same argument
should have gone in behalf of Arrianisme, for with as much probability, might
he have urged the same: If he take it not in good part to have his reputation
so touched, to omit his changeable disposition, let him give some reason why
this makes more against Transubstantiation, then against the
consubstantialitie of the son of God.

That Transubstantiation was first hatched by Innocentius, in the year one
thousand two hundred and fiftene, he bouldly affirms, but how truly remains
now to be examined. For either he means only the name, or the thing imported
by the nametyf the first we easyly grant it, as he must also that the name
consubstantiall was not heard of till the Nicene Council: for new names may
be inverted by the Church, the better and more plainly to explicate an
ancient mystery of faith, as Vincentius In suo Comm^nitori^.
Lirinensis that ancient father learnedly teaches: wherefore if he has no
other quarrel against Transubstantiation, but the bare name, it is very
rediculous and foolish: for if the doctrine it self be found in the fathers
and scriptures, a poor spite it is to cavil at the name, and with like grace
may he descant upon the words Consubstantiall, Trinity, Incarnation, Deipara,
or Mother of God, etc. which if he like not to do, then let him neither do it
here, or else give some good reason of his so diverse a disposition.

But if by Transubstantiation, he means the very point of doctrine it self,
that is the chaunginge of the substance of bread, into the body of Christ by
the words of consecration, then is it a most intolerable untruth, that
Transubstantiation was first hatched by many pregnant profes being alleageable
to the contrary. To begin: in the time of Leo the ninth, about the year of
Christ one thousand and fifty, in a Roman Council, Berengarius was condemned:
whose heresy as the Magdeburgians suppose, came then to light, upon the
intercepting of his letters. written to Lanfranc^ concerning his opinion of the
sacrament. Berengari^ Contur. 9. col. 454. 455.
Andegauensis, etc. Berengarius (say they) deacon of Anio^ perceived that it
was not truly taught, that after the speaki^ the words of the supper, the
supper, the substance of the elemen^ did quite vanishe and were transmutated or
changed, in^ the very body and blood of Christ. Behold transubstan^ tiation
by the confession of our mortal enem ye^ was taught in the Church, much more
then a^ hundred years, before the time which he assignet for the first
beginning thereof: The same Berengari^ abiuring not long after his heresy in
the Counce^ of Rome, under Nicholas the second, and yet not lon^ge after
returninge to his former vomitte, and pu^blishing a book in defense thereof,
(such a worth) B^rengarius father of the Sacramentaries, a perjured person.
Cent. 9. col. 459.
pillar, and constant father, have the Sacramentarie^ for their heresy)
Lanfrancus, as the same Magdeburbians report, opposed himself against it
setting forth that book against Berengarius, which is ye^ extant. Primum autem
But first of all (say they) he goet^ about with many words, to defend the
doctrine of Transub^stantiation which which Berengarius did find fault with, to
wit^ that after consecration, the bread was essentially converted into the body
of Christ, and the wine into his blood. Transubstantiation then was not first
hatched at the time he speaks of, when as it was oppugned and defended, many
a fair year before, that is about the year of Christ, one thousand and three
score, as Bells dear brothers confess.

An other brother of his, one Perkins, though^ cast in a more precise moulde,
acknowledges Transubstantiation, about four hundred years before the time he
mentions, for speaking of the ancient fathers thus he writes. Et tene^dum
eos, etc. Rroblem. verbo Realis presentia.
And it is to be houlden, that they knew not Transubstantiation at least for
eight hundred years. False it is, that Tra^substantiation was not taught
before, as shall straight ways be justified against Perkins, but in the mean
time the good reader has to note how he gives thely to Bell, affirming
Transubstantiation to have been about some four hundred years before the
time, in which by Bells calculation it was first hatched.

The former Magdeburgians note S. Chrisostom and Centur. 5. 5. col. 517.
Theodoretus for teaching Transubstantiation. Chrysostomus
Transubstantiationem, etc. Chrysostom (say they) seems to confirm
Transubstantiation, for he writes thus in his sermon of the Eucharist, do
thou see bread? do thou see wine! do they pass like other meats into the
draught? God forbid, do not think so, for even as wax put into the fire
is made like unto it, no substance thereof remains, nothing abounds: even so
think here the mysteries to be consumed with the substance of the body: and to
this same effect they report straight after, certain words out of Theodoretus.

The same authors note how that S. Ambrose in his preparatiue prayers before
the mass, makes mention of Transubstantiation, and application for the
living and the dead. True it is, that they style him only by the name of the
author of the first prayer preparatiue to Mass, amongst S. Ambroses works,
citing nothing else for prooffe, but the censure of Erasmus, as though the
fantastical and partial affection of a modern mutable man, were an
infallible rule, to measure the fathers monuments. Perki^ also very pertly
censureth it for none of S. Ambros^ his works, but yet gives a reason, and
that a pretty one: ibi adoratio sacrame^ti There (quoth he) is adoration of the
sacrament. Let such reasons as these runn^ for sound, they are none of the
fathers worke^ because they are against us and our doctrine, and it will not be
any difficulty at all to answer quickly, whatsoever is produced out of
antiquity, yea or out of sacred scripture it self. Did strong reason more
prevail, then preconceipted fansy, they would rather infer thus: adoration
of the sacrament is allowed by S. Amhrose, ergo it is no false, superstitious
or idolatrous doctrine.

Furthermore the same Lutheran historiographers reprehende Eusebius Emissenus,
(who died in Contur. 4. col. 975.
the time of Constantine, as the same men report out of S. Hierom) about
Transubstantiation. De caena Domini etc. Concerning the supper of our Lord (say
they) he spoke nothing commodiously of Transubstantiation, upon the words of
Christ, unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. Behold a priest
for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, has by his unspeakable power,
turned bread and wine, into the substance of his body and blood. Diverse other
notable authorities might have been alleged, but I made choice of these as
being so plain, that the mortal enemies of Transubstantiation, can not deny,
but that they make clearly for that point: and beside, there is no better
boxing of Bell, then with the holy fistes of his crooked brethren.

Lastly, what man of any insight, not furiously transported with the passion of
noucltie, can persuade himself, satisfy his conscience, or once imagi^e if the
Real presence and Transubstantiation, ^ad not been taught by Christ and his
Apostles, that it could ever have come into the Church, and anished the former
opinion, especially that being mystery so far surpassing the reach of reason,
and ^he other so fittinge common conceit, and easy to ^nderstande. Could (I
say) a doctrine so new and ^ifficult possess the world, and exterminate
former faith, coming from the Apostles, and so easy to ^pprehend, without
infinite garboiles and contradictio^s: or is it possible if any such thing had
been, that it could have escaped the pens of all writers, none ever either of
love to truth, or hatred to falsehood, complaining of that great ruin of
veri^ie, and strange ouerflowe of superstition. The Protestants here can say
nothing, to give true and real satisfaction, to any sincerely desirous of
salvation. On the contrary, we can tell them, that when the doctrine of the
Real presence and Transubstantiation began to be impugned, how it was straight
resisted by learned men, and diverse Councels, as before was touched intreatinge
of Berengarius, which is an argument, that our religion is ancient and
Apostolical, and his a filthy ragge of heretical nouelty.

And thus have I abundantly proved, that Transubstantiation began not under
Innocentius in the year one thousand two hundred and five, as Bell affirms:
but is far more ancient, being taught by the old doctors of Christ's Church:
yea that it comes from our Savior himself, and his blessed Apostles.

Bells XI. Chapter. Of Popish invocation of Saints.
THE XLII. VNTRVTH.
OMitting Sr. Thomas his irreligious and injurious snatching, at that most
constant martyr of Christ, S. Thomas of Canterbury, let us consider what else he
brings. The Papists (quoth he) in their fond Popish invocation ascribe that
to Saints, which is only and solely proper unto Christ himself: I prove it,
because they make the Saints departed, not only mediators of intercession, but
also of redemption. Most false it is, that we make them mediators of
redemption and salvation, as he may learn out of the Council of Trent, where
it is decreed, that it is good and profitable to invoke Saints, S^ss. 25.
and to fly unto their prayers, help and assistance, for the obtaining of
benefits, by his son Jesus Christ our lord, who is our only Redeemer and
Savior. But let us hear what potent prooffe Bell brings. Thomas Becket
(quoth he) sometime Bishop of Canterbury, is inuocated of the Pope, and all his
Popish crewe, not barely and absolutely as an holy man, but as the son of
the living God, and the only Savior of the world. Terrible words, and
fearful speeches: what will be the end of this boisterous blaste? it
follows. This assertion to the godly may seem wonderful, but it is such a
known truth, as no Papist whatsoever he be, can without blushing deny the
same, by that time the matter is examined. I verily think all modest
Protestants will blushe at the impudency of this lying Minister, that makes
such a solemn preface to so notorious and shameless an untruth. Now follows
the deadly crack and terrible threatened thunder clappe. These are (quoth he)
the express words of their ^hymne, which they both say and singe, upon that
day which they keep holy for his praise and honor. Tu per Thomae sanguinem,
etc. By the blood of Thomas which he for thee did spend: bring us thither o
Christ, whether Thomas did ascend.

I utterly deny, that any of these words, or all together, make S. Thomas a
mediator of redemption, or do prove, that we invoke him, as the son o f the
living God, and the only Savior of the world, as the Ministers lying lips
lashe out: nay I add more, that as no words here import any such thing, so some
there be, that on the contrary free us from that imposed blssphemy: for we
invoke and desire Christ, that he would for the merit of his martyrdom
bring us to heaven: but did we make S. Thomas a mediator of redemption, and
invoke him as the son of the living God, as Bell charge us, then would we
not invoke Christ, as his superior, which yet we do, and so a most
outrageous untruth it is, that we make s. Thomas, a mediator of redemption, or
invoke him as the son of the living God, and the only Savior of the world,
as Saintles Sr. Thomas avouches.

I pass over with silence, how falsely he also affirms, that the Pope and
all his Popish crewe, do upon the feast of S. Thomas invoke him in that
manner: Bells lips are his own, he may employ them that way which best
pleases him, for the Pope, and many thousands more, use the Roman Breuiary,
and Missal, in neither of which, any such prayer is contained, and as I suppose
not foun^ but in those of Sarum use, which be now an^tiquated and out of date:
as both that, and all other long since were with Bell: howbeit the words import
not any blasphemy at all, for the meaning o^ the prayer is no other, but that
Christ would bring us to heaven, by that singular and especial merit o^ S.
Thomas, in giving his life and sheddinge his blood for the love of him: for if
one may merit upon earth, as the Catholic Church teaches, that ^ man by the
grace of God and the merits of Jesus Christ may, then none will deny, but the
act of Martyrdom, and shedding of our blood for the testimony of truth is
meritorious, as being the most high, and sovereign work of charity,
fortitude, faith, patience, etc. that we can possibly do in this world. And if
the merits of Saints do profitte us, and we may pray to God by their merits, as
straightwaies shall be proved, then may we pray to Christ by the merits of S.
Thomas, and by that especial merit of the shedding his blood for his honor,
and that without any injury to his merits or blood, S. Thomas his merits being
inferior to the merits of Christ, these being the heavenly fountain, from
whence both the merits of S. Thomas, and the merits of all other glorious
martyra and Saints, have flowed, and received all their force and virtue.

Thus we are freed from the wicked slander of the Minister, that blusheth not
to say, that we make S. Thomas a mediator of redemption, and invoke him as
the son of the living God, and the only Savior of the world: and together is
declared, how the prayer co^tayneth not any blasphemy, but sound and good
doctrine, taken in the true sense, though now not used in the Catholic Church.

THE XLIII. VNTRVTH.
AFter this prayer to S. Thomas, he cites a sentence out of Polanchus added in
the end of Absolution, to wit this. The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
merits of the blessed virgin Mary, and of all Saints, and all the good thou
do, and the punishment thou shall suffer, be to thee for remission of thy
sins, for increase of grace, and for the reward of eternal lise: which words
of Polanchus he does prosecute with this lying gloss. Lo the merits of Saints,
are joint purchasers of salvation with Christ's blood, and our works procnre us
remission of our sins, increafe of grace, and eternal glory. An untruth it
is, that the merits of Saints are joint purchasers of salvation with Christ's
blood, if he mean that the merits of Christ and his Saints do alike avail to
salvation, as he must mean, or else he says nothing: for the merits of Christ,
are as I said before, the wellspring, from whence all the merits of all men's
actions do proceed, and they he for the infinite dignity of the person
acceptable of them felues, in the sight of his father: but the merits of
Saints, are derieued from Gods grace, by the merits of Christ, and are not
grateful in the eyes of God, but for his sacred merits and passion: the merits
therefore of Christ and his Saints, may avail us for the obtaining of
spiritual gists: the merits of Christ, as the principal cause: the merits of
Saints, as dependent of his, and the secondary cause.

And that God and his creatures may in this manner, without any injury to his
name be joined together, we learn out of sacred scripture: Jacob Genes. 48. v.
15. 16.
desired God and his Angel to bless his children. The Israelites cried out;
the sword of our Lord and Gedeon. In Exodus we read thus. They believed Iud.
7. v. 20. Exodus 14. v. 31. 1. Timoth. v. 21. Act. 15. v. 28.
our Lord and Moises his seruante. S. Paul testified before Christ Jesus, and
the elect Angels. And the Apostles doubted not to say: It has seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us. If in these and such like speeches, God and his
creatures be joined together, without being made joint purchasers, (for I trust
Bell has not the courage to utter any such word) but as the creator, and the
secondary cause: in like manner may the merits of Christ, and his Saints be
conjoined, as has been said.

THE XLIIII. VNTRVTH.
AFter a fit of railing at this doctrine of the Catholic Church, in praying
to God by the merits of his Saints, he says: No scripture, no Council; no
approved history, was ever acquainted with this newly invented heresy, never
known to the Church of Christ, for the space of one thousand years and odd.
An untruth it is, that it is any heresy to pray to God by the merits of his
Saints, as the heretical minister bouldly afflrmeth: but alleges neither
scripture, Council or father, or approved history, to give credit to his
assertion, so much he presumes upon his own authority. Falsealso it is, that
it was never known for the space of a thousand years. To prove one and the
other against Bell: In the old testament, for so much as just men then dying
went not straight to heaven their raunsom being not paid, as here I suppose
according to the Catholic doctrine, nor they ordinaryly knowing the prayers
of the living: therefore they did not in those times use to pray unto them
formally saying, S. Abraham pray for us, as we in the new testament do: yet
did they pray unto God by the merits of his servant, as we read in sundry
places: neither does that avoid the argument which Bell answeareth in his
Survey, viz, that Page 318.
not the merits of his Saints were urged, but his own promise and covenant
set before him: for The merits of holy men prescnted before God. Psalm. 131. 3.
Reg. 15.
their merits also be remembered, and not only the covenant of God: for example
Solomon prays to God, by the merits of his father David, saying. Remember o
Lord David and all his meekenes: and a little after: For David thy servant
turn not away the face of thy Christ and in the book of Kings we read: For
David, our Lord God gave him a candle in Israel, that he might raise up his
son after him because that David had done right in the eyes of our Lord. S.
Augustine relying upon these and such like sayings, teaches that the merits of
his Saints may avail us in the sight of God. Quest. 149. in Exodi^.
Admonemur cum merita nostra, etc. we are admonished (quoth he) that when our
own sins do ly heavy upon us, that we be not loved of God, that we may be
helped with him by their merits whom God does love.

In the new Testament we find the same doctrine confirmed. The sick man of
the palsy was cured for their faith, which brought him to our Savior: for the
sacred text says: and Jesus seeing Math. 9. v. 2.
their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, have a good hear^ son, thy
sins are sorgiuen thee. If the faith of hi^ servants living upon earth, and
daily offendin^ him, procured mercy to others, how much more may the burning
charity of his Saints in heaven free from all danger of synning, obtain for
v^ spiritual benefits at the hand of our heavenly father? Much more might be
brought, but not necessary when as Perkins confesses sufficient to overthrow
Bell, for reprehending the ancient fathers as attributing to much unto the
intercession of Saints, he cites these words of S. Leo as offending Problem.
verbo Intercessio, inuocatio, etc.
in that kind. We believe and trust that to obtayn^ the mercy of God, we shall
always be helped by the prayers o^ our special patrones, that so much as we
are kept down by our own sins, so much we may be listed up by the merits of
the Apostles. And yet Bell inuaigheth against this doctrine as blasphemous, and
more confidently then truly affirms, that no scripture, no Council, no
father, no approved history, ever knew it, and that it was never known to the
Church, for the space of one thousand years and odd, how truly how sincerely,
I refer me to the premises.

THE XLV. VNTRVTH.
I Must therefore conclude (says the Minister) with this meuitable illation:
ergo Popish invocation of Saints, but a rotten ragge of the new religion:
and to show ^ow new it is, he quoteth in the marge^t the year, after this
manner: that is in the year of our Lord ^ne thousand four hundred and
seven: which An. Dom. 1407.
^s some two hundred years ago. But I may far ^etter infer, that for gross
untruths and cun^ing lying, he may be let loose to any of the Mi^isterie. what
one of Bells dependants that read ^he former words, or any other, not
acquainted with his tricks, would not verily think, that praying to Saints as
it is used in the Catholic Church, is not above two hundred years old, as the
tenor of his words import? and yet I do not think he will stand to that,
for if he should most certain it is that it is a gross and godless untruth,
as himself I suppose will not deny, when as he tells us in diverse others of
Funeral. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 4. Survey page 536. page 57.
his books, that Popish invocation and adoration, was not known till the
year three hundred and seauenty. which though it be a loud lie, as I have
proved in the Doleful knell. showing the use of inuocacation and adoration,
before the year three hundred and seauenty: yet is it nothing comparable to
this here uttered, making that article a thousand years younger then in his
former books, and plainly contradicting here what he says in those former
places. Content he was, that his ignorant reader should gather that sense, and
for that end delivered the words in such a cunning manner: but let him be
urged with that which he teaches el^ where, and then his refuge will be, that
he speaks not of the invocation of Saints in generall^ but of the particular
manner of praying by their merits, or by the blood of Thomas: such be the^
slightes of the minister. But to prosecute him^ flyinge: albeit that be his
meaning, (if it be so, for^ it may be that I have construed his words, to a^
better sense then ever he intended) yet I say that^ praying to God by the
merits of his Saints, is also^ older then the year one thousand four hundred
and seven, and that both by his own confession, who in the precedent words
says, that it was never known to the Church of Christ, for the space of one
thousand years and odd: signifying that not long after it came in, which is
almost two hundred years before the time here assigned: as also by the verdict
of his brother Perkins, who censureth S. Leo, that lived twelve hundred years
ago for the same doctrine: but according to truth it self, it is as ancient
as the Gospel, and the former days of the Patriarchs and Prophets as before
was said. Lastly that very particular prayer to S. Thomas, which he mentions,
is as I make no doubt more ancient then the time he notes, seeing S. Thomas
was martired more then four hundred years ago, and canonized straight after
his death: and so in no sense his words can by any means be excused from an
untruth, and in that which they represent to common understanding, from a
monstrous ly and palpable contradiction.

Bells XII. Chapter. Of the Communion under one kind.
THE XLVI. VNTRVTH.
THe Minister speaking of the Communion under one kind, and desirous to show
that we have broken the institution of Christ, like a god^esse Gospeller
corrupts the very text of sacred Scripture. And S. Paul (says he) urging
Christ's insti^ution to the Corinthians, tells them plainly and reli^iously,
that they must receive the holy Eucharist under both 1. Corint. 11. v. 27.
kinds, which last words he printeth also in a distinct letter, to show that
they be the Apostles words, and quoteth accordingly in the margent the
particular place vz 1. Cor. 11. 27. but view it he that will, if he find S.
Paul to have those words, we yield him the victory: if not, let his favorites
consider how they venture their souls with such a minister, that offers
violence to the very word of God, which he would seem so much to reverence.
The words of S. Paul be these. Therefore whosoever shall eat this bread or
drink the chalice of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the body and
of the blood of our Lord: which be far different from these: That they must
receive the holy Eucharist under both kinds, affirmed by him to be the very
sentence of S. Paul. The most that can be gathered out of S. Paul's words
truly cited is, that in his time the Eucharist was ministered to lay people
under both kinds, which we deny not: but they prove n^ that it neither was,
nor might be given vnd^ one kind. Mary out of the words as he cite^ them, the
matter is made cocke-sure, and t^ text framed fit for their purpose: give him
t^ leave that he may coin scripture as he plea^ and no question but as he has
upon a doub^ change of religion, always found the word God for his warrant, so
will he still (chaun^ what chance may) never lack it to back him all his
actions.

No shelter can shroud him from the cryn^ of corruption. For to tell us that it
is the me^ning of S. Paul, as it is most false, so can it n^ justify his
falsification: for then might any ci^ the text, according to that
interpretation which he thinks agreeable thereunto, and as the ve^^ words of
the text, which is most impious ^^ be said. For example. The Catholics
alleadge^ against the Arrians, to prove Christ to be of o^ and the same nature
with his father, this sentence of S. John I and the father are one: which pla^^
Joan. 10. v. 30.
in truth by the circumstance of the letter, an^ exposition of venerable
antiquity proves s^ much: yet who ever have presumed, or no^ dare to cite it
after Bells manner, and say, the Evangelist S. John reporting Christ's words
affirms plainly and religiously that Christ an^ his father be all of one
nature and substance for allow this, and the Arrians may with lik^ authority
cite it to the contrary, and rehears^ the tex^ after Bells manner thus: The
Euanelist S. John reporting Christ's words teaches ^laynely and religiously
that Christ and his father be not one in nature and substance but in ^onsent of
will: which licentious proceeding being once brought in, nothing will be found
sincere, nothing true and sound, but the broad gate set open to all corrupt
dealing and falsification.

Let us but acknowledge any tradition of Christ or his Apostles, not expressly
found in the written word, though never so much warranted by antiquity: and
straight in great zeal, he is upon us with the curses and threats out of
Deutronomie, and the Apocalipse, of them that add or take away any thing from
the word: and yet himself, I know not upon what dispensation, corrupts,
choppeth, and changes as has been said, and would be loath for all that, to be
reputed for any other then a sincere preacher of the word, and one that
handles the scripture with great respect and reverence: but I hope such as
carry due regard to their souls, will look better to his fingers, and upon
trial of his treachery, avoid him for a false teacher, and detestable Doctor.

THE XLVII. VNTRVTH.
PRosecuting still the same matter of communicating under both kinds he says.
This was the practice of the ancient Church for the space of one thousand two
hundred and thirty years after Christ: abo^^ which time they began in some
odd Churches, to leave the cup and to minister the sacrament in bread only:
b^ that was done as Aquinas consesseth in some few places onl^ 3. Part.
quaest. 80. art. 12. in Cor.
An untruth it is, that the communion under on^ kind, was not in use till the
year one thousan^ two hundred and thirty, as more bouldly the^ truly he
affirms. Sozomenus and Nicephorus, report Lib. 8. hist. cap. 5. Lib. 13. cap.
7.
how a certain woman infected with the heresy of Macedonius the better to
conceal her religion, came to the Church, and received the sacrament from the
hand of S. Chrysostom, as it were with a mind straight ways to eat it: but
she cunningly gave it to her maid, and received of he^ other bread brought
from home: which when she went about to eat, she found it straight turne^ into
a stone. This fact shows that all then received not the chalice: for then
this woman could not have dissembled, both because the chalice was not given
into her own hands, (as the consecrated host then was) and though it had, no
such evasion is imaginable.

An other example we have in Pope Leo the Sermon. 4. de Qua^irages.
first, who says that the Manichees to conceal their heresy, used to receive
the consecrated host with Catholics, but not the chalice: which argues that
it was free at that time to receive the chalice or not, for had they been all
bound to receive the chalice, the Manichees could not but have been known, as
they which never took the chalice: and therefore S. Leo, commands not to
observe them, who sometime did receive the chalice; and sometime did not, but
those which did ^uer receive it at all: for at that time, it was a ^te of a
Manichee, that sect detesting the drin^^ge of wine, as a thing utterly
unlawful and ^^linge it the devils gall. I omit much more which might be
brought out of antiquity, yea out ^^ scripture it self, some thing before has
been ^^uched, and more to that purpose very strongly ^ight be urged, but
breuity to which I am infor^^d, makes me to pass over many things.

Only for a conclusion, I can not but note, how ^^norant Sir Thomas of Rascal,
entreats lear^ed S. Thomas of Aquine, whom first he makes by ^^nning
insinuation to say, that about his time, ^hey began in some odd Churches to
leave of the ^uppe, and to minister the sacrament in bread ^nly: whereof he
has not one word, and no ^arualle, when it was of far greater continuance ^s
has been said: but more plainly does he ^aunder him, when he makes him to
say that to ^inister the Sacrament in bread only, was done ^n some few places
only, his words are these. Therefore prouidently in some Churches it is
observed that 3. par. q. 40. art. 22.
^he blood be not given to the people to be received, but be ^nly taken of the
Priest: Where he does not say, that ^his was in some few places only, as Bell
makes ^im to speak, but that in some Churches it was ^o observed, which might
be very many, as well as some few, and that this was the real and true
meaning of S. Thomas in the same very place, is gathered out of his own
discourse, for having propounded some arguments after the manner of Schools
against the truth, to wit that it was not lawful to receive the body of
Christ without his blood: he comes to the contrary opinion, which 3. par.
quast. 80. ar. 12.
he there defends and says. But contrary to this i^ the use of many
Churches, in which the body of Christ au^ not his blood, is given to the people
that communicates. In which words blessed S. Thomas enformeth us, that the
body of Christ and not his blood was given to the people in many Churches:
Saintlesse Sir Thomas makes him to say, that the body of Christ was given in
some few places only, when as he has neither the words nor the sense, but the
clean opposite words and meaning. Halensis also more ancient then S. Thomas
(as who was his master) testifies that in his time, it was almost a general
custom to receive under one kind. Very lawful it is (says that learned man)
to receau Part. 4. quast. 11. memb. 2. art. 4. number. 3.
the body of Christ under the form of bread only, alay men do almost every
where in the Church: and yet all this not witstandinge, the minister blusheth
not to father the direct contrary opinion upon blessed S. Thomas.

Bells XIII. Chapter. Of private Mass.
THE XLVIII. VNTRVTH.
THat any Priest in the Primative Church said private Mass, that is received
the mysteries all alone, none being to communicate with him, our adversaries
generally deny, houlding that they ever had other participants in that sacred
ction. This was (says Bell) the use and practice of the hurche every where,
for more then a thousand years together. But afterward when the peoples
devotion began to be remiss, the Priests then devoured up all alone. This
minister that has devoured up all conscience, little areth in what manner he
speaks of those myteries, which antiquity so reverenced, that they would not
speak of them but in covert terms before infidels: and S. Chrysostom calls
treme^da mysteria, Hom. 69. ad Pepulum.
dreadsull mysteries: and yet he speaks of them as homely, as though he were
talking of the English communion, which is had in such high reverence, that the
communion book prescribes, that the fragments remaininge, shall be for the
ministers private uses, and so gives him leave to feed with them his
chickens, or to soppe his pottage.

To the matter: an untruth it is, that private masses were not before the time
he mentions. The twelft Council of Toleto almost nine hundred years ago,
reprehendeth those Priests which offering sacrifice did not communicate. Quale
illud sacrificium etc. what manner of sacrifice is Can. 5.
that (says the Council) of which neither he that sacrifices is known to
be partaker: which words do show that none was present to communicate, and yet
the Council requires only that the Priest himself does communicate. S.
Augustine also records how a Priest offered sacrifice in Lib. 22. de ciuit
cap. 8.
a private farm, for the freeing of that place, from the molestation of wicked
spirits. In so particular and extraordinary a place, and for so particular a
business, no probability that there were any other communicants.

But to com upon him with the authority ^ his brother Perkins, who confesses
that the Problem. verbo Missa priuata.
kind of private masses, were not known to the Church for the space of eight
hundred years: n^ denying but afterward they were used, which ^ two hundred
years more then Bell will graunt^ In the same place he co^fe sseth, that
private masse^ began first in monasteries, for proosse whereof he cites S.
Gregory: which both conuinceth Be^ of ouerreaching, and seems not very well
t^ agree with his former assertion: for how were not private Masses known to
the Church for the space of eight hundred years, if S. Gregory makes mention
of them two hundred years before. The truth is (good reader) that no beginning
here o^ can be showen, nor any authentical author i^ former time, that
complained or opposed himself against any such custom as newly brought in, and
contrary to the practice of the Church or institution of Christ: which is an
argument that it is passing ancient, and was never reputed for false doctrine,
or repugnarite to sacred scripture.

Bells XIIII. Chapter Of Pope Martins dispensation for the brother to marry his
natural sister.
THE XLIX. VNTRVTH.
SVch is Bells malice against the Pope, that when better matter fails, he
fetches lies out of the ^ard flint: his words be these. Pope Martin says
Part. 3. tit. 1. cap. 11. prope finem.
Antoninus the Popish Archbishop and canonized Saint, ^oke upon him to
bispense with one, that he might marry his ^wne natural sister. A magnificall
untruth twice ^ old before, and shall again, if he have any more ^ookes to
publishe: for his latter books, be nothing else but certain rags drawn from
the ^unghill of his former: what he says of Pope Martin is a notable untruth,
as is apparante out of S. Antoninus own words; which for love to sincerity he
would not cite intierely in his Downfall, where this knocker crept first
forth: some he alleged but so corruptly, that having been well canuased for
that his treachery both in the Page 33. 34. etc. Lib. 2. cap. 7. page 226. etc.
Forerunner, and also in the Doleful Knell, and not knowing how to defend
himself, he has for all that still intertayned the untruth, but wholly
concealed the words, for more sure dealing.

S. Antoninus his words be these, having relation to others precedent, which
make also against Bell. Nevertheless it is found that Pope Martin the fifth,
did dispense Part. 3. tit. 1. cap. 11.
with a certain man, who had contracted and consummated matrimony, with a
certain natural sister of her, with whom he had committed fornication: yet
with great difficulty, and because the matter was secret, and the man not fit
for religion, or to remove into any other country, and so scandal would have
followed of the divorce if it had been made. Pope Martin then dispensed not
with a man, to marry his own natural sister, but to remain stille in marriage
with her, whose natural sister, before marriage he had carnally known: this
is so plain and perspicuous, that the good reader can not but behold it, and
perceive that the Minister had good reason not to allege Antoninus words, the
more handsomely to convey the untruth. Of this shameless dealing of his I have
in treated so plentifully in the Doleful Knell Lib. 2. cap. 7.
examining all the particular circumstances of Antoninus his discourse: and
answered also what he^ brings there out of Siluester, Fumus, Angelus, Nauar
and Caietan objected also by him before in his Funeral, that I take it for a
vain labor, to entreat again of the same matter. Wherefore to proceed

Bells XV. Chapter. Of worshipping of Images.
THE L. VNTRVTH.
RVnning with his pen against the veneration given to sacred images, he
says: Ye^ Gregory the great in his time sharply reproved the worshipp^ done to
images, albeit he disliked Serenus the good Bishop of Massilia for breaking the
same in the Church. Neither S. Gregory nor Serenus any thing help Bell and such
I conomachall companions, but both of them stand in mortal defiance against
him S. Gregory Lib. 6. ep. 5.
severely reproved Serenus for his rash breaking down the images of the
church, attempting to do that which as he says, never any Bishop had done
before him. Whereof I infer that images in the Primative Church were in use,
yea and kept in sacred places, and consequently that our English Protestans be
contrary to venerable antiquity, that suffer not any such holy momuments in
the Church, out raze and deface them with all spite and cruelty: contrary also
to S. Gregory who reprehending Serenus though nothing so guilty, would not I
think have spared Bell and his fraternity, for their enormous and impious
proceeding herein. Were I desirous to imitate the minister, very handsomely
might I come upon him, with a concludinge inference in this manner: ergo this
beating down of images, is a rotten ragge of the new Caluinian religion,
borrowed from Jews, Mahometans, and such misbeleeuing miscreants.

But S. Gregory (says Bell) sharply reproved the worship done to images:
true it is, but what kind of worship was it? The minister would have the
reader to think, that it was the same, which the Catholic Church allows and
teaches: which is nothing so, for it was passing far different, for as much as
S. Gregory allowed convenient adoration, as shall straight be said. Cardinal
Bellermin thincketh that this erroneous worship was given by certain new
Christians: and surely such were most likely to fall into that gross sin, of
whom it is not so much to be maruailed if accustomed before to idols, they
behaved themselfes in like manner to wards sacred images, and adored them for
gods, as in Paganism they were taught and practiced. Serenus upon this
abominable accide^t, moved with zeal, but not according to knowledge,
ouerthre, we those images: which S. Gregory reproved in him, for that he ought
to have instructed them, and reformed what was amiss, and not so depely to
have sca^dalized the Church with such a strange fact, as S. Gregory in express
words signifies that he did: and therefore advises himafter due instruction
given to the people, to restore the images to there former places.

This was the adoration which that holy Pope disliked, What adoration of
images S. Gregory disliked.
for that he denied not all kind of veneration is most certain, for writing to
one Ianuaring a Bishop about the image of the blessed virgin and the cross,
which he wills to be taken from the Synagogue of the Jews where they had
been putt, he speaks thus: We exhort you in these words that the image and
cross be taken from thence, with that Lib. 7. epis. 5.
veneration which is worthy. And in an other place writing to one Secundinus,
who had sent unto him for the image of our Savior, his words be these: I know
verily that you do not therefore desire the image of our Savior, that you may
worship it as though it were god: but that by remembrance of the son of
God, you may wax warm in his love whose image you see. And we fall Lib. 7.
epis. 53.
prostrate before it, not as it were before the divinity. What has Bell got
by vouching the authority of S. Gregory? About the retayning of images in
Churches, he is directly against him, as he can not deny: concerning their
adoration also he nothing helps him, but teaches that, which nothing
pleases his reformed spirit, and therefore true it is not, that he reproved the
worship done to images as Bell affirms, speaking of that worship which
the Church allows, as the minister would have his reader to think: for the
other worship we detest as much as he.

Albeit sufficient has been said, to she we that he wrongeth S. Gregory, yet
is not this the untruth which I intended here especially to note, though
willing I was, to purge our Apostle from his false imputation: but it is
touching a learned scholeman, one Gabriel Biel, whom most notoriously he
slaundereth writing thus. Yea Gabriel Biel a religious Popish friar and a very
learned schole doctor, who lived long after Gregory and Serenus, even one
thousand four hundred eighty and four years after Christ, does sharply
inuaigh and reprove the worship done to images. This I challenge for a gross
untruth. Where does Biel thus sharply inuaigh, and reprove the worship done
to images, he quoteth him in Can. Missae ^ect. 40. Where nothing is handled of
any such subject: it may be he would say lect. 49. A small fault especially in
Bell, being one of such known truth that he never uses any such slightes,
unless it be for the better passage of the Gospel. To let that pass, why
has he not cited his words? he may pretend what reason he please, but he must
give me leave to think that there is none other, save only that he knew not
truly where to find them: he shamefully slaundereth Gabriel Biel, he is so far
from sharply reproving worship done to images, that he teaches plainly, that
they are to be worshipped.

That learned man, propou^deth two opinions concerning In can. Missae lect. 49.
this matter: the one of them that hold, that the image is to be honored with
the same honor which is due to the prototypon or first sample: and after he
has bronght authorities for that, with an explication of the same, he comes
to the second opinion, which seems contrary to the former, teaching that
images are not permitted in the Churches to be adored, but to the end that the
minds of faithful people, may be stirred up to reverence and honor those whom
they represent: and this opinion Gabriel supposes to be Holcotes. Having
delivered these two opinions, betwixt which (as he says) there is more
disagreement in words then in the thing it self, and disputed of them both,
and the operation of our soul, as well in respect of that which is represented
by the image, as the image it self, he concludes in this manner. But the
question (quoth he) is, whether that act or operation by which I an carried to
the image, ought to be called adoration: to which I say, that it is called
adoration analogically and improperly, and not properly because it is in
respect of a creature. In which words Gabriel houldeth that images may be
adored, though not properly, that is with that honor and adoration peculiar
only to God, called Latria: but with a lesser kind of adoration, which he
calls Analogicall or improper, because it is infinitely inferior to the
former, and due only to the image, for that respect and relation, which it has
to that which it does represent. Judge now (good reader) whether Bell has not
most grossly slaundered him, when so confidently he avouches that he does,
sharply inuaighe and reprove the worship done to images, when as he is so far
from reproving it, that he allows it in manner before specifyed.

An other thing here occurreth worth the nothing, and that is where as Bell
has the same matter on foot in the pamphlet of his woeful cries Cap. 18.
(as his manner is of the same very matter to make diverse books) he cites as
Gabriels words, those which be not his, but rather Holcots, though alleged by
Gabriel, which also he does interpret to a good sense, as before was said. But
here without ever setting down any words of Gabriel at all, he makes him
sharply to muaighe against the adoration of images (when no such sharp words
he loath or can name) and so injuriously abuses him both in the one place, and
the other, so little respect ^arrieth he to religion or fidelity, though he
would seem to be the only sincere teacher, and of he most tender conscience
in the whole world.

Bells XVI. Chapter. Of Church service in the vulgar tongue.
THE LI. VNTRVTH.
TO prove that the public service of the Church, ought to be in the vulgar
tongue, he cites the names of many authors, without ever setting dowue their
sentences, thinking it sufficient to refer the reader to his Suruay where he
has laid out their words at large. How truly he behaueth, himself in diverse
of them, I know not, having not viewed the quotations, partly for that my
purpose is not to examine his whole Trial: partly for lack of time, partly for
that some of them make not so much as any outward show against us: and
therefore a vain labor to bestow any time that way. One only will I speak
of, and that shall be of S. Gregory our blessed Apostle, whom Bell abuses so
grossly, that it can not but appear straight to the eye of the attentive
reader: for he brings Survey page 477.
forth his formal words, and then prosecuteth them with a false gloss
directly repugning to his words. Pope Gregory himself (quoth he) confirms
the doctrine in these words. Sed and Dominica oration apud Grecos Lib. 7. ep.
25. cap. 63.
ab omni populo dicitur, apud nos autem a solo sacerdot Furthermore among the
Greeks, all the people say the Lord prayer, but with us, the Priest alone
says it. This prouer not that the public service of the Church was in any
other language, then in the sacred tongue of the Greek, Latin, etc. for the
Grecians might understand the Priest though their service were i^ Greek,
because that tongue was to them the vulgar and common. But suppose that it had
been s decayed, that it was not understood of the co^mo people, yet might they
say the Lords prayer with them, for generaly all Catholics at this tym though
ignorant of the latin tongue, can say our lords prayer in latin, and so might
now say it together with the Priest, did the custom permit it.

But I inuit here the good reader, to the noting ^^ a pretty slight, other wise
called a false pranke of S. Thomas. After the former words of S. Gregory, he
adds this gloss of his own, flat opposite to the text. Behold (quoth he)
this Gregory lived five hundred and ninty years after Christ's sacred
incarnation, and yet it his days the people of Rome prayed with the Minister
even the time of mass. S. Gregory tells us, that the Prie^ alone said the
lords prayer: Sr. Thomas maintay neth out of those words of S. Gregory, that
the people prayed with the minister even in the time of mass. What may not his
man prove or disprove, y^ when a father affirms one thing, he can without all
conscience, not only collect an other much different, but also the flatt
contrary.

That the public service of the Church was in ancient time in that tougue
which the people commonly understood not, omitting other arguments, I will
prove it briefly out of the practice of of our country, in which the mass was
always in latin, from the first conversion, until our own memory, If Bell
deny this, let him for that great skille which he has, in hunting out the
original of Popery and superstition, tell us at what time, bet wixt the first
conversion, and the late days of Edward the sixth, the use of latin service
crept in. Shall we think that S. Gregory, whom Bell confesses to have been an
holy Bishop indede, would ever Woeful cry page 62. Survey page 187.
have permitted that custom to have been brought into our country, if he he
had thought it superstitious and wicked, nay if he had not reputed it
requisite, good, and Apostolical.

More then four hundred years before the time of S. Gregory, the ancient
Bryttaines received the same manner of serving God, from the blessed Pope and
martyr S. Eleutherius, that is in the latin tongue, which appears first,
because venerable Bede Lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
reports that there was not any material difference betwixt S. Austen sent by
S. Gregory, and the Britain Bishops, save only in Baptism and the
observation of Easter. Secondly, for that certain it is, that they had also
since S. Austens time, the mass in the latin tongue: but to think that if
they had been once in possession of the service in their own vulgar language,
that they could have been brought from that without infinite garboils,
especially the opposition betwixt them, and the English Saxons, in ancient
time considered, or that if any such contention had fallen out, that it could
have been omitted by the curious pens of our historiographers, it were great
simplicity once to surmise. Wherefore what follows, but that they received
that custom at their first conversion which was within lessen then two hundred
years after Christ: and consequently that by Bells allowance, and the common
co^putation of others it is sound, Catholic, and Apostolical, and no^ any
rotten ragge of a new religion, as this ragge master gableth: and that on the
contrary, to have the public service in the vulgar tongue is a new patch of
Protestanisme, fetched from VVittenberge or that mart of Martinists, the holy
city of Geneua.

A short admonition concerning Bells eleven chapters following.
THese chapters I shall soon dispatch, seeing they concern not any weighty
points of religion, but ceremonies, and such like: in which the Chureh has
authority to ordain, and abrogate, to make, or repeal laws, as shall seem
most meet for the honor of God, and the edification of Christian people. For
prooffe whereof I could allege many Protestants, but I will content my self
only with one, whose authority the minister will not refuse being a dear friend
of his own, the first letters of his name are Thomas Bell, who in a book set
out not long since against the Puritanicall presbitery, called by him The
regiment of the Church, disputes earnestly for Imprinted by T. C. etc. anno
1606. In his Regiment of the church cap. 7. page 53.
the authority of the Church in things indifferent, namely in his seventh
chapter, where he delivers these two Aphorisms. The first of things de facto
altered in the Church: for prooffe whereof he reckons up six particular
points recorded in scripture yet changed by the Church. The first is to
receive the communion in the morning, though Christ did it after supper. The
second is, to celebrate it in leauened bread, though Christ did it in
unleavened bread. The third is, that the Apostles received the communion
sitting, but now it is received kneeling. Fourthly, Christ premised washing of
feet, which is now omitted. Fifthly, the Apostles commanded abstinence from
blood, and that which is strangled: and yet the Church has abrogated that
decree. Sixthly, S. Paul prescribed prophesying to be done with bare head, yet
small account is made thereof.

The second aphorism is of things not expressed in scriture, and yet decreed
by the Church to be observed and kept: and this he proves by the dedication of
Salomons temple, for seauene days: and out of 2. Paralip. 7. Hoster cap. 3.
and 9. 1. Ma chab. 4.
the festival days appointed by Mardocheus and the Machabees: and afterward
upon this ground in his eigth chapter he justifies diverse things in particular
instituted by the Church: as the observation of festival days, kneeling at
the communion, Surplesses, Tippets, and square capps, the ring in marriage, and
such like.

This being so what an old house has this minister brought upon his own head:
never did old Elderton so tickle the Jesuits with gentle iyrks, as Sr. Thomas
has provided rods for the runnigate of Rascal: for if he infer against
our ceremonies as he does, because they were instituted since Christ, though
very ancient, that they be rotten rags of the new religion: what shall
become of their ceremonies, which either be borrowed from us, or of far later
date? what can they be else, but pild patches of Protestanisme, and rusty rags
of the reformed congregation? nay what must their communion book it self be,
never heard of in the whole world, till the late days of king Edward the sixth,
and drawn from our Portesse and mass books, as the thing it self speaks,
and their Geneua Gospellers often cast in their teeth? Was ever brave Ministers
wits so misledde by I know not what night ghost or colepixen, as to say
that in one place with good grace, which in an other turns him to great shame
and disgrace: where is now Sr. Thomas, and how beats his pulse? are
ceremonies instituted since the time of Christ and and his Apostles rotten
rags or no? if not: why is he so hot on foot, to persecute them so eagerly,
and intertaineth them with such homely terms? if they be rotten rags, as
here he says, how can he defend the English congregation, that ruffleth in
such rags, or himself that disputes for the authority of the Church in that
case, or with what face can he ever look upon the Geneua generation of the
mocking Martinists? Certainly were he not habituated to chopping of faiths, and
changing of religion, and that careless contempt had armed him to digest any
disgrace, these news were able to bring the panges of death: but he that has
swallowed down mil-stones, will never make bones at such small choking oisters.
How his Regiment of the Bells books contrary one to an other.
Church, written against Puritanes agrees with The trial of the new religion
published against Papists, or this with that, be curious points of
scrupulosity. Bell cares neither for contradiction, nor conscience, but only
seeks the glory of God and the advancement of that Gospel, which for the
time present, and duringe the same revelation, he firmly believes to be the
everlasting truth. But to run over some of his chapters a little more in
particular.

Bells XVII. Chapter. Of the antiquity of Popish mass and the parts thereof.
THe minister very profoundly scoffeth both at other parts of the Mass, and
also at these following, writing thus. Gregory added the Kyrie eleyson.
Telesphorus Gloria in excelsi is Deo. Gelasius the collects. Hieronymus the
Epistle and Gospel. The Creed was received of the Nicene Council. Pope
Sergius the Agnus Dei: after which he concludes both of these and others which
he there mentions, as the Introite, Halleluia, the commemoration of the dead,
Incense, and the Pax in this manner. This being so, I can not but conclude that
every patch and piece of the Romish Mass is but a rotten ragge of the new
religion So earnest he is to make every piece of the Mass a rotten ragge, that
he has also made many parts of their own Communion book patches and pieces,
and rotten rags, (to the great exultation of all truly devoted to the Geneua
discipline) in which Kyrie eleison. Gloria in excelsis. The Collectes, Epistle
and Gospel, Nicene Creed, and Agnus Dei be found no less then in our Mass
books. I omit here how falsely and blasphemously, he concludes every piece
of the Mass, to be rotten rags: for are the words of consecration, the most
essential part thereof, which came not from any man, but from the institution
of Christ himself, as also the Pater noster, rotten rags? who durst say it
but Sr. Thomas.

And here by the way, the attentive reader may easily answer a common and
frivolous objection of the Protestants, that marvel how we make the Mass the
sacrifice of the new testament to have been ordained by Christ himself, when as
Durandus and others, note at what time, and who they were, that composed the
parts thereof: when as neither Durandus, nor any other make the essential and
very substantial part of the mass, that is the words of consecration, to
have come from any other then the son of God: but they speak of the
accidental parts thereof, to wit either devout prayers, or ceremonies, which
we willingly grant to proceed from the institution of Christ's Church.

The like may be said of the Protestants communion, which they pretend to
derive not from any other, then Christ himself: and yet many of their prayers
and ceremonies which accompany that actio^, they can not show out of Gods
word, but must confess to come from later institution, and can not find more
ancient authors then be alleged for ours, the most of which lived more then
a thousand years since, and be glorious Saints in heaven: and therefore what
does Bell, and such like Ministers, that deride the ceremonies and parts of the
Mass, but frump and flout at sacred and venerable antiquity from whom they
come, as Sr. Thomas here confesses: and mock and mow at their own communion
book and parts thereof, being borrowed from us, or in what they differ can
show no greater antiquity then the late days of Edward the Sixth, at what time
diverse ministers did hammer them in the forge of their own invention.

Bells XVIII. Chapter. Of the profounde mysteries of Popish mass.
IN this chapter the minister makes himself some pastime for that one ceremony
used in former times, is now given over and out of use: as though the Church
has not that authority as before out of Bell was proved. The English
congregation, allowed by act of Parlame^t in king Edwards time the new
communion book, for sound and agreeable to Gods word: and yet was it in the
same kings days, and not long after abrogated, and a new devised, not only
different in ceremonies, but also in points of more importance. For example: in
the first communion book, in the supper of the Lord or new mass, (for that
name also they mention) they pray for the dead, saying: We commend unto thy
Fol. 11^.
mercy o Lord, all other thy servants, which are departed hence Prayer for the
dead in the first Englishcommunion book.
from us, with the sign of faith, and now do rest in the sleep of peace.
Grant unto them we beseech the, thy mercy and everlasting peace, etc. But
this doctrine was straight reformed, and no such thing found in the next. And
the minister himself in one Queens days changed his faith twice, and would I
make no doubt change it twice more, if any new and pleasing revelation should
blow in the sky. He and his congregation, that have made so maine mutations
no ways maintainable, may be silent with shame, and not speak of the change
of a small ceremony, which both according to us and himself, is lawful, and
may be done by the Church, as the honor of God, and edifications of others
shall require the same.

Bells XIX. Chapter Of kissinge the Popes feet.
THis chapter of his, flingeth at the kissinge of the Popes feet, which yet he
confesses here an Emperor to have done, nine hundred years ago. Let him
answer what I wrote of that point in the Forerunner, (for in his Funeral he
has not Page 43. See also the Doleful knel. page 148.
done it, which yet is the pretended answer to that treatise) or for shame
command the clapper to silence.

Bells XX. Chapter. Of prayinge upon Beads.
HEre the minister runs upon Rosaries, and praying upon beads, making the
beginning thereof some five hundred years ago, before that time he says the
people of God used altogether godly books of prayer. And what prayers I beseech
him did they use, that could not read at all, or do now amongst them which
lack that skille? of which sort the number is not few. This inconvenience
with us is avoided by saying of the beads, which none so ignorant but can
use, and so fruitfully spend their time. Mary with the Protestants they must
use books, that can never a letter on the book, or pray by special
revelation. As the Church sets forth diverse books of prayers, for the
benefitt of them that can read: so may she institute the beads, for those
that can not. Let him show, that the prayers upon the beads be not good, or
that no manner of prayer though good may be used, which was not in the Apostles
time (neither of which he will ever be able to show) or else all his babbling
against the beads is not worth a rotten beade. Thomas Sternhold, Robert
Wisdom, and such like, have invented long since the coming up of the beads,
the harmonious canticles of Geneua psalms: will he for all that say as he does
of the beads, that the rehearsal of the original is sufficient confutation,
and call them a rotten ragge of the new religion. Verily I will not deny, but
he may do it truly were it not that their religion indeed is so new that the
ragge as yet can scarce be rotten. The very same objection, which he makes
against the beads, may proceed against the very communion book it self, and
that far more justly, seeing it is a la^ crabstocke of their own planting, as
before hat^ benesaid. It were better for him to look unto hi^ own fripperie
and the cast canions of the congregation, then to meddle with the sacred
wardroa^ of the Catholic Church.

Bells XXI. Chapter. Of changing the Popes name.
IN this chapter, he does revel at the changing of the Popes name: which no
question is a fundamental point of religion. If our Savior Christ
constituting Simon head of the Church changed his name, and called him Peter:
what inconvenience Joan. 1. v. 42. Math. 16. v. 18.
or absurdity is it that the Pope assumpted to that dignity, should imitate the
same, and make choice of some one of his predecessors names, thereby to be
stirred up to follow his virtue and solicitude, in governing the Church of
Christ. Bell himself did but Apostate from his religion and Priesthood, and he
had straight a new name, M. Thomson for sooth the Queens pensioner, and yet
is he carping and cauillinge at chaunginge of names, upon far better ground
and reason.

Bells XXII. Chapter. Of the Paschall torche.
THis chapter of his, is directed against the ancient and laudable ceremony of
the Pas^chall torch, into which upon Easter eve be inserted five hallowed
grains of frankincense crossewise, to signify unto good people, how our
Savior Christ at that time rose from death, with his five wounds, and appeared
sundry times: for representation whereof it is lighted at certain times, and
upon Ascension day at the Gospel, after the Ascension of our Savior into
heaven is readd, that taper is put forth, and not any more used. What is there
in this ceremony, that may offend any that love Christ, and desire to remember
the benefits which he has bestowed upon us? But it was invented first (says
Bell) by Pope Sozimu^, almost twelve hundred years ago: what then, the more
ancient it be, the more venerable also it is, and therefore little does it
become his ministershippe, so lightly to contemn it, especially himself
granting as has been said, that the Church has power to ordain ceremonies,
and being himself a member of that congregation, which had the first beginning
more then a thousand years after.

Bells XXIII. Chapter. Of the Popish Pax, and mysteries thereof.
IN this chapter, he is out of charity and all peace, with the ceremony of the
Pax, given in Mass a little before the sacred communion, both to signify, and
also to put good people in mind that none ought to approache unto that
heavenly banquett but with peace of mind, and charity toward God, and their
neighbor: which ceremony as it is holy and good, so have I heard it much liked
of some Protestants. The institution thereof Bell refers unto Pope
Innocentius the first, who lived according to his own account in this place,
twelve hundred years ago, and therefore the more to be esteemed. But the
principal thing that disgusteth the minister is, for that the Pax is not given
in a Mass for the dead: the reason whereof as he says Durandus assigns, for
that Lib. 4. cap. 53.
the dead are not now in the troubles of this world, but rest hence forth in
the Lord. At which reason as ridiculous, the ridiculous minister makes himself
much sport. For if the with holdinge of the Pax (quoth he) does signify their
rest in the Lord, then doubtless is the Mass idolatricall, which is offered
for their purgation. Again if the souls be in Purgatory and so stand in need
of the Mass, then is their ceremony false and fantastical, which signifies
them to be at rest.

To this fearful and horned argument of his I answer, that the Souls in
Purgatory, be in mu^uall peace and charity one with an other, and without all
fear of falling from that happy state, and this signifies the withoulding of
the Pax or kiss of peace in a mass for the dead: yet are they not in rest
from those torments, which the justice of God inflicteth upon them for their
former sins, and so we pray for their rest in this kind, and offer up the
sacred host for their purgation, and release from those pains. What is now
become of his dilemmaticall argument? the horns have missed us, and be run
into his own sides. The rest of his chapter is the degorging of his malice
against religious men, not worth the answearing. Some thing notwithstanding he
may hear hereafter if God send life and means.

Bells XXIIII. Chapter. Of the Popes Bulls.
HEre he talks of the Popes Bulls, which as he says began to be sealed with
lead, in the year seven hundred seauenty two: is not this a weighty point of
divinity meet for such a Rabbin as Bell? and what if they had never been so
sealed with lead at all, but with wax only. The poor man lacks matter when
he makes his wits to work upon so mean a subject.

Bells XXV. Chapter. Of the Popish Agnus Dei.
THE LII. VNTRVTH.
HIs five and twentyth chapter talks much against Agnus Dei, though he
confesses that he can not find out their original which is no^ small maruail:
for in his Survey he promised lively Survey ^pis. Dedicat.
to discover, when, where, and by whom, and upon what occasion, all Popish
errors, heresies, and superstitions, hau^ crept into the Church: and yet in the
same book he entreated of Agnus Dei (from whence he has borrowed, Survey page
492.
what here he writes) but tells not when, nor by whom, nor upon what
occasion, they crept into the Church: and in this place although he grants
franckly, that he is ignorante of the first author, yet he affirms
confidently, that they began of late years. The Church of God (quoth he) was
above a thousand two hundred years, without the use or knowledge of this Agnus
Dei. And he notes the time in the margent, of the first beginning thereof,
thus. Ann. Dom. 1247. that is in the year of Christ, a thousand two hundred
forty and seven: and his followers, if any he has, may securely believe him,
for though he neither proves what he says, and beside confesses that he
reads not who was the author, yet he assures all his good people, that they
be of no greater antiquity then he affirms. Where he had it, or how he
knows so much, that ^^ttle imports, they must captiuate their
vn^erstandinge, and think that he may have rea^^n for what he says, though
none of them can ^^e it.

Thus Bell like an other Pythagoras, may preach ^^ his own disciples, but he
must give us leave, to ^^kamin his Ministership, where he found this ^^octrine
which here he delivers: Verily ^ood reader no where else, but in his own
^inge storehouse. A shameless untruth it is, and contrary to the knowledge of
his own concience. For the book of the Sodality, which ^e quoteth twice in
this chapter, not only brin^ech very good reason, to show that it is passing
Lib. 4. cap. 13.
^uncient, as instituted in the first spring of Chri^tian religion: but also
in particular notes, how Pope Leo the third, about eight hundred years ^goe,
bestowed an Agnus Dei upon the Emperor, Charles the great.

The ancient book also called Ordo Romanus ^he author whereof, that did
gather it together, Baronius affirms the more constant opinion to Tomo 8.
anno Christi 693.
^e, that it was Gelasius the Pope, who lived about ^n eleauen hundred years
ago. In this ancient book, mention is made of Agnus Dei: for speaking of the
Octaue of Easter commonly called Dominica in Albis (that is, the Sunday in
whi^es, because those which were baptized on Easter eve, put of those white
garments, which they received at their Baptism, as S. Sermon. 110 de te^pore.
Augustine notes) he has these words. In the same Sunday after the whites,
that is in the Octaue of Easter, lambs of wax in the city of Rome are given
to the people, by the Archdeacon in the Church after mass and the communion.
This may serve to reprove the bold l^ centiousnes of the Minister, affirming
their beginning to have been in the year a thousand tw^ hundred forty and
seven.

THE LIII. VNTRVTH.
PRoceeding forward in his declamation again^ Agnus Dei, he says. With this
kind of paltery stuff (such is the phrase of the paltery minister) the world
is so bewitched that infinite numbers do ascribe part ^ their salvation
thereunto: which is an injurious slaun^der, taking it in that sense which I
make no doub^ he does, and the ignorant reader quickly may. For the more plain
explication whereof I say, tha^ our salvation may be ascribed unto diverse
things^ though with great diversity: Men living in thi^ world and subject to
daily sinning, may be said to save us. For this doing (says S. Paul to
Timothy) tho^ shall both save thy self, and them that hear the. And I can 1.
Timoth. 4. v. 16.
not persuade my self, that Bell would quarrel with any, that should say that
he, or his books, ^ had saved many. The principal cause of our salvation is
our Savior Christ, and his merits. Secondary and isntrumental causes are many
things as the sacraments, and men that cooperate unto our salvation: yea other
consecrated things, as holy Water, Agnus Dei etc. though nothing comparable to
Sacraments, may also in a good sense be said to help us to obtain salvation,
by the merits of Christ, for as much as all holy things have force to produce
supernatural effects, as namely to chase ^way wicked spirits, and to
extinguishe the fiery ^artes of the enemy, which none will deny but ^inder us
from salvation, and be the cause of many ^ man's destruction, and so that which
does any ^aies cooperate, to preserve our Soul from the ^enemous infection of
the devil, may be said to ^ett us forwards in the Way of salvation, and be a
^meanes though very remote, and in the virtue of Christ's passion, to bring us
to heaven.

Albeit this doctrine thus expounded be sound, and nothing prejudicial to our
redemption, wrought by Christ: yet in that sense which Bell means it, and it
is commonly taken of good people, I say it is most false, that infinite numbers
ascri^be their salvation or any part thereof to Agnus Dei: and the reason is,
for that when we speak of salvation, all generally understand the principal
cause, and first fountain thereof, which is God himself, and the most
precious merits of his holy life, and bitter passion, and not his sacraments,
much less Sacramentales, and least of all such occasional means, as often
times notwithstanding divine providence uses for the conversion of many. An
other reason is, for that the Sacraments, the conduits of divine grace, and all
holy things, or what else soever, that any ways concur to the good of our
soul and salvation thereof, receive their force and work not any thing, but
in the merits of that most innocent lamb, which takes away the sins of the
world: and so whatsoever herein is attributed either to sacraments, or men holy
things, or what else you will, redoundeth to the honor and glory of Chr^^^ from
the infinite treasure of whose grace and m^^rites all spiritual benefits,
greater or lesser (...) proceed and come. Lastly, for that thousan^^ there be,
that never saw, nor perhaps ever hea^^ of Agnus Dei, and yet notwithstanding,
be sau^^ very well: which shows that when we speak of salvation, our
intention and understanding runs to the principal cause thereof Christ
Ies^^ himself, and not to the sacraments though with out some of them none can
be saved, much less (...) such hallowed things, as Agnus Dei, without which
any may be saved.

THE LIIII. VNTRVTH.
AN other thing that disliketh him about Agnus Dei, he delivers in these
words. He th^^ has an Agnus Dei about him must believe as he is taught (...)
our Jesuits, that he shall be delivered by sea and by land from all tempests,
thunder, earthquakes, from hail, thunde^ boultes sudden death and from all
evil. For the justification whereof, he refers us to the former book of
the Sodality of the Blessed Virgin. He slaundereth the Jesuits most
egregiously: they have no^ such thing of believing the effects he speaks, of
nay they insinuate sufficiently that these effects be not infallible, when
they write thus, in the same place. Wherefore not seldom wonderful effects,
not without divine miracle do follow: and again. For as Lib. 4. cap. 12.
much therefore as experience does passinge often teach us, that these things
are granted of God, these Agnus Dei are not rashely to be rejected, but to be
carried about us with great devotion. In which words they signify, that diverse
times they have not any such effect, and consequently they do not teach, that
men must believe as he faith that such effects shall follow. And the reason
heareof may be given, for that such hallowed things, have not any such force,
by the express couenante or institution of God, as the Sacraments have, and
therefore work not infallibly, but the virtue in them proceeds from the
prayers of the Church, and deuotiou of those that use them: Beside this it is
not always happily couuenient that we should be delivered from such crosses and
afflictions. Howbeit Gods name be blessed, who in these times when such
miscreants as he speak their pleasure both against other holy things, and also
Agnus Dei, he has vouchsafed to work many strange and miraculous effects,
and that in our own country as I could in particular relate, might I do it
as securely, as I may most truly.

Bells XXVI. Chapter. Of Candlemas day.
THE LV. VNTRVTH.
THis chapter is bestowed against the ceremony of bearing candles, in the feast
of our Blessed Ladies Purification. His words be these. The old Pagane Romans
in the Calends of February, used to honor Februa the mother of Mars, whom they
supposed to be the God of battle: the honor they did exhibit unto her, was
this, they went up and down the streets with candles and torches burning in
their hands: in regard hereof, that the Christian Romans should not be
inferior to the Pagane Romans in heathenishe superstition Pope Sergius
decreed, that upon the day of the Purification of the blessed Virgin, being the
second of February, they should go in procession with burning candles in their
hands, thereby signifying the blessed virgin to be pure and free from sin.
For proffe of this, he quoteth Durandus in the margent, whom notoriously he
abuses as also Pope Sergius. For Durandus is so far from saying Lib. 1. cap. 6.
that this was done, that the Christian Romans should not be inferior to the
Pagan Romans in heathenishe superstition, as Bell writes, that he affirms
Pope Sergius to have changed that Paganicall fashion in melius, into a better
thing: signifyinge plainly, that this ceremony was instituted for the
abolishinge of that heathenishe custom which is a thing so far from just
reprehension, that on the contrary it is most highely to be commended, as a
most religious policy, tending to the destruction of superstition, and
increase of piety and devotion. Neither does Durandus make this the only cause
of that ceremony, for the reckons up six in all whereof this is the second
in order.

Bells XXVII. Chapter. Of the doubtful oath which Popish Bishops make to the
Pope.
IN this chapter he complayneth, that whereas Bishops had free access to
Councels to speak the truth out of the scripture in former Anno Do^ 1229.
Decret. Lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 4.
times, Gregory the ninth ordained, that none should have voices in Councels,
but such as swear obedience to the Pope, and promised with an oath to defend
his Canon law: adding that the express words of the oath the Reader may find
in the Downesall of Popery: but he should withal have added also here that
the form of that oath is justified against his cauils, by one S. R. Art. 7.
chap. 14.
in his learned answer to that book of his, where he shows that the like
oath was made to Gregory the great. Bell not having yet devised with himself
what to say in his own defense, dissembleth the answer, though in an other
place of his pamphlett he confesses to have seen S. R. his Chap. 9.
book, and so he is fresh up with this oath, as though it had never been
answered, or he had never spoken of it before, when as he had it also Page 60.
up in his Motives: and in his next work not unlikely but we may hear news
of it again; such is his grace in writing, and the great choice he has of
abundant matter.

Here I am to admonish the good reader of news, which I received lately, and
that is after I had written thus much, Bells reply called The Jesuits Antepast
came piping hot to mine hands, from the palace of his kitching, in defense of
his Douwnesall against the answer of S. R. and therefore making no doubt but
that he had at least attempted, to batter in pieces all that S. R. had said in
defense of that oath, and so spoiled also the grace of that which I had brought
out of him, I thought good to take a taste: whereupon I fell abord with his
Antepast, opened the dishes, and found there a miserable poor pittance, all
the fat through the cooks negligence being fallen into the fire: for S. R.
disputes for the lawefulnes thereof Art. 30. chap. 14.
in this manner. As for the oaths of Bishops made to the the Pope, the
lawfulnes thereof appears, because it is made with all Catholic Princes
consent, and meant only in just and lawful things which are according to Gods
law, and holy Canons, and it has been used above a thousand years ago, as
is evident by the like oath made by a Bishop unto S. Gregory the great: and
S. Bonifacius Lib. 10. ep. 31. Baron. ann. 723. See council. Tolet an. 11. can.
10.
the Apostle of Germany and worthyest man that ever England bredde, did swear
when he was consecrated Bishop, to concur with the Pope and commodities of
his Church, in which words is contained that which I said in defense thereof.
To all which this kitchen minister says not one word, and yet in great
bravery he writes thus. Say on good friar, thou shall be heard with all
favor. To Antepast page 147.
imitate his vain, may I not rather say, it is not so Sir Liar, thou have
curtald a way the beginning of his answer of good moment, and very sufficient
for the justification of that oath in general: is this to be heard with
favor? not so, but it is with coosenage to abuse the good reader, which
carries with it a stinking savor.

The rest of that which he iangleth about the oath, I leave to S. R. yet this
will I briefly say, that for as much I have here readd, his answer stands
sound without the loss of any one drop of blood, notwithstanding the
terrible Ca^non shot of Bells Antepast. And the principal of that which he
mustereth together, for the refelling thereof, is contained in this his Trial
(about which I now labor) in the eight chapter, where he entreats of the
Popes faith. Let that be perused which I have said before in the examination of
that chapter, and it will sone appear that it is not the buckler of his
Antepast, that can defend our new cook from the wounding of his old carcas.

Thus much of his eleauen chapters. Here for a conclusion, I must add a word
or two. The first is, that how truly or falsely he has alleged authors I
know not, having perused the places of few, because the subject was not
weighty, but only of ceremonies or matters of small moment. The second is,
which I noted also before, that grauntinge authority to the Church to ordain
ceremonies, he goes against his own doctrine, in calling them rotten rags
of a new religion, and teaches others how to entertayne those ceremonies
which either they have borrowed from us, or else brought forth by a later
generation. The last is, that where as he confesses many of our ceremonies to
be very ancient, as the Introit of the mass, which was instituted as he says
by Celestine: the Pax brought in by Innocentius: and the Paschall torch
ordained by Sozimus: (all which Popes lived about some twelve hundred years
ago) with what face or grace, can he speak so scornfully of them, calling
them rotten rags, when as disputinge against the Puritanicall fraternity, in
defense of English ceremonies in his book called The Regiment of the Church,
antiquity is urged, the practice of the Church inculcated, and with all his
learning he labors to procure credit to their ceremonial laws
institutions, as is evident out of all that treatise.

And to speak some what in particular, To prove the use of the Surplesse or
albe, he alleges a Can. 14.
Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage which he does highly extol in this
manner. At this Council In his Regiment. cap. 8. page 82.
(quoth he) were present two hundred and fourtene Bishops, of which S.
Augustine was one, and yet all those holy men, living in those days when no
corruption of religion had crept into the Church, affirm constantly, etc.
Behold good reader there chau^gable condition of this Chameleon: The Albe or
Surplesse is a commendable ceremony, and reverent rite, because it was allowed
in the time of S. Augustine, when no corruption had crept into the Church: but
the Introite in the mass: the Pax: the Paschall torche, instituted by those
Popes in S. Augustinus time, are rotten rags, and entreated in all scornful
manner, though no other difference can be found but only the ministers
pleasure, having one doctrine and other principles to follow, when he
disputes against us, and an other, when he argues against the Sea his
Regiment in the Preface.
Puritanes, whom he calls. Cursed broodes, untimely hatched, detested of God,
and irksome to the world. God open the eyes of good people, to take heed how
they follow the ianglinge of such a Bell, that can clincke what religion you
think, and commit their souls to the direction of such a mutable minister.

I omit here, how before he would have the Church straight after S. John's
time to have been Bell co^tradicteth himself.
infected with errors, because that served him well against us in that place:
here the Church was in S. Augustins time, clear from all corruption in
doctrine, which was three hundred years after because it stands him here in
great stead against the Puritanes: for it were an infinite labor to pursue him
in all his tricks, quirckes corruptions, contrarieties, and absurdities,
himself saying that in one place, which he vnsaith in an other: prouinge that
here, which else where he disproueth: sailing with that wind which blows, and
making his commodity of that which may help the present necessity. Such be the
conditions of the reformed minister trusty Sir Thomas.

Bells XXVIII. Chapter. Of the Popish fast of forty days commonly called lent.
THE LVI. VNTRVTH.
Many mad gambols does the minister fetch in this chapter, and among others he
will needs prove, that the lenton fast is hurtful both to the soul and body,
and disputes out of Hippocrates, like a pretty pettisogger in Physike, to
show that it is hurtful to our health. This albeit I dot not doubt but it is
a notorious untruth, yet because it is not my profession to argue of any such
subject, I leave him to the mercy of the Physicians, who I think upon the
feeling of his pulse, are like enough for the curing of such an extrauagant
conceit, to condemn him to Hyppocrates bands. omitting this, let us see
what follows. The fast of the ancient Church (quoth he) was free,
voluntary, and not commanded by any law. An untruth: for it was a tradition of
the Apostles to fast in Lent, ^ so not free. We (says S. Hierom) in the whole
yea^ Epis. ad Marcellam. Sermon. 6. de Quadrages. Sabbato post Dom. Quinquag. de
tempore sermon 62. Sin not to fast in Lent. 4. Instit. cap. 12. 20. Ce^tur. 5.
col. 686.
do fast one Lent according to the tradition of the Apostle S. Leo calls it
also the institution of the Apostle to fast forty days: and S. Augustine thus
exhorts his auditors in the beginning of Lent. beseech you most deerly
beloved brethren, that in this most convenient and holy time, exceptinge the
Sundaies none presume to dine, unless happily such a one, as sickness does no
permit to fast, because to fast on other days is a remedy or reward, not to
fast in Lent is sin. John Calvin speaking of the Primative Church says, that
the superstitiou^ observation of Lent had prevailed every where. And the
Lutherane Centurists reprove S. Augustine, for speaking in commendation of the
Lenton fast: and in the same place, they write of him in this manner. And
verylie in the third chapter of his thirtith book against Faustus the
Manichee, he does expressly say that throughout the world Lent is kept in the
Catholic Church every where with great diligence.

Lastly was not Aerius scored up by S. Epiphamis Here Is. 75. Here Is. 53.
and S. Augustine for an heretic, because he denied the solemn and appointed
fastes of the Church, And yet decree the Apostles what they will, about these
Lent fasts, let S. Augustine call it a sin not to fast in Lent: Let Calvin and
the Lutherans assure us of the observation of Lent in the Primitive Church: To
conclude let S. Augustine and Epiphanius condemn Aerius of heresy, for
maintaining freedom and liberty of fasting: yet will Bell defend that was
free, voluntary, and not commanded by any law: how truly I say no more, but
report me to that which has been said.

That which he brings concerning S. Spiridion his eating of flesh in lent,
all circumstances considered hurts not us, but makes against himself: for we
deny not, but that in some cases flesh may be eaten without violation of that
fast. But that holy Spiridion did most strictly observe it, and that it was
also the common custom of the Church, is gathered out of the same story, which
does condemn the licentiousnes of our fleshly Gospellers.

Bells XXIX. Chapter. Of the annulling of Popish wedlock.
THE LVII. VNTRVTH.
Whatsoever says Bell the Bishop of Rome houldeth and defines, that must
every Papist hold, believe, and mayntaine, as an article of his faith. Though
generally all Catholics do hold the Popes definitions to be infallible, and
the contrary opinion to be erroneous, yet is it not an article of faith,
whatfolloweth? what but that Bell has abused the good Reader with in untruth.
See before page 84. 85.

Bells XXX. Chapter. Of the Popes pretended superiority, over and above a
general Council.
THE LVIII. VNTRVTH.
BEll beginning with false asseueration, to tell us of the late opinion of the
Popes superiorit^ over a general Council, interlaceth also an other
shameless untruth against the Remists. The Rhemists (qhoth he) that Iesuited
brood, tell us plainly if will believe them, that there is no necessity of a
general ^ provincial Council, save only for the better contentation of the
people. Thus he charge them yet not nothing any particular place: but I will
help him: it is in their annotations upon the Acts, where they write thus. If
again it be demanded what need is there to expect Chap. 15. v. 27.
the Councels determination, if the Popes or See Apost dikes indgement be
infallible, and have the assistance of God also as the Catholics affirm? we
answer that sor the catholic and peacable obedient children of the Church,
it is a comfort to have such various means of determination, trial, and
declaration of the truth: and that it is necessary for the^ recovery of
heretics, and for the contentation of the weak, who not always giving over
to one man's determination, yet will either yield to the judgment of all the
learned men and Bishops of all nations, or else remain desperate and
condemned before God and man for ever. And as I said before, this assistance of
the holy Ghost promised to Peter's See presupposes humane means of searching
out the truth, which the Pope always has used, and will, and must use in
matters ^^ great importance by calling Councels, even as here you see ^^eter
and Paul themselves, and all the Apostles though in^^^d with the holy Ghost,
yet thought it notwithstanding ne^^sary, for further trial and clearinge of
truth, and maintenance of unity, to keep a Council.

Let these words of the Rhemists, be compared with those of Bells, where he
makes them to say, that there is no necessitye of a general or prouintiall
Council, save only for the better contentation of the people, and I leave it
to any whether he has not injuriously slaundered them: yea this very note of
theirs in the margent. Though the Sea Apostolic it self have the same
assistance, yet are Councels also necessary for many causes, does proclaim
them innocent from his false imputation: they acknowledge the necessity of
Councels for many causes: he affirms them to teach no other necessity of
them, save only for the better contentation of the people.

This untruth the minister had sert abroach once before, in his Downfall, and
quoteth the place Page 128.
very orderly in this manner: Rhems: test: in act. 15. but being taken up for
halting by S. R. in his answer, Page 418.
and yet not willinge to give over his slaunderinge of Catholic writers, he
has here brought us the same untruth to lightagaine, but without any note
where this place might be found, hoping that by this new kind of brandishing,
it might pass with credit to the Gospel, and not be so subject to the
controlment of the most of his adversaries.

Here I must admonish the good reader as before, that after this was written,
and shortly to go to the press, I was grieted with Bells new Antepast,
whereupon turning to see what he said in his own defense for charginge the
Rhemists (...) falsely, I found him to behave himself in such pha^tasticall In
his Antepast page 158.
fashion, that his friends can not but ashamed of their Minister. Bell (quoth
Bell himself charge you and your Rhemists truly: Thus he standet^ to his
former assertion, but mark for Gods lou^ how effectually he does prove it. It
follows. A^ your religious friar (quoth he) Alphonsus de Castro shall b^ the
vmpier in this mystery: and he cites straight waie^ Alphonsas lib. 1. cap. a.
fol. 4. 1.
after, these words of his, That the Pope alone without the assembly of a
Council may err in things pertaining t^ faith, many divines of good authority
do affirm, yea it i^ sound that some Popes have erred in says: Again if the
authority of the Pope alone were as great as the whole Counce^ fully and
lawfully assembled, in vain were so great labor taken for the gathering
together of a Council. What can Bell fetch from hence, to justify his
injurious charge of the Rhemists. Alphonsus is one of those divines that think
the infallibility of judgment to be in^ Council and not in the Pope alone, as
before wa^ Page 84. 85.
handled: and he brings this reason, because otherwise (quoth he) in vain it
were with so great labor to assemble so many Bishops together

This informs us very well, what Alphons^^ his opinion was, but where does he
say that the Rhemists teach, that the determination of a general Council is
nedelesse, save only for the better contentation of the people, because the
Popes judgment is infallible: he speaks not one word of the Rhemists, that
they should be of the same opinion, and no maruail, for he could not, being
dead many a fair day, before the Rhems testament was published. what can the
reader here think, pondering the matter attentively, but that Bell is given up
into a reprobat sense, when with broad face he would defend one^ly with an
other. I hope the indifferent reader though otherwise affected to him, must in
so apparent an untruth either sentence him to have offended of mere malice, or
else in his excuse plead the weakness of his brain the cause of such crazed
conceits, of which the first can not but condemn him: and the second, if him
self or his friends will confess it, freeth us from further labor of
answearing.

THE LVIII. VNTRVTH.
THe minister maintayneth, that the opinion of the Popes superiority over a
Council is an vpstart faith and doctrine, never known to the Church for the
space of one one thousand four hundred and fiftene years after Christ, that
is to say until the general Council of Constance: and how does he prove
this? it follows immediately in Bell. Which Council defined by a firm and
resolute decree as a matter of faith that a general Council was above the
Pope. So the dexterity: of this minister in disputing. He pretended to prove
out of the Council of Constance that the superiority of the Pope, was never
known tille that time: and he proves the clean contrary. The Council defined
(quoth he) that a Council is above the Pope. What is this to the superiority
of the Pope above a Council which he undertook to justify out of the
Council, and not only that, but also that it was never before. verily had Bell
that care of his credit, which he ought, never would he suffer his discourse to
pass abroad with such with such absurd and fantastical connection.

But not to speak any more of his little grace in formal disputinge, let us
come to the great gift he has in bold lyinge. Cardinal Camer acensis (quoth
he) Abbas Panormitanus, Nicholaus Cusanus, Adrianus Papa, Cardinalis
Florentinus, Johannes Gersonus, Iacobus Almainus, Abulensis, and other learned
Papists generally, (the Jesuits and their Iesuited crewe excepted) do all
constantly defend as an undoubted truth, that a general Council is above the
Pope. In which words for a parting blow, he clappeth two untruths together.
The first is, that the doctrine of the Popes authority above a Council is no
older then the Jesuits, for that sense his words do plainly insinuate. The
second is, that none teach it but the Jesuits and their Iesuited crewe, as he
speaks, both which shall be conuiuced with one and the self same testimonies.
Not to speak therefore of many learned men, that either be now living, or
wrote since the name of Jesuits was of any fame in Christendom, for all these
will be turned over for birds of that feather: I will name only those which
shall hold the ministers nose to the grind-stone. Wherefore to begin. S.
Antoninus and Johannes de Turre cremata, 3. part. ^it. 22. cap. 6. Lib. 2. cap.
93. and 104. Sum ecclesi^.
neither of them being Jesuits but both of the order of S. Dominicke, nor yet
Iesuited, as living before that name was heard of in Christendom, maintain
that the Pope is above a general Council.

To these learned men, I will add the testimony of the Lateran Council under
Leo the tenth, which This Council was holden in the year. 1513. Sess. 11.
delivers the same doctrine in these words. That only the Bishop of Rome,
as having authority over all Councels, has full right and power to call
Councels, to translate them, and to dissolve them, is manifestly certain, not
only by the testimony of sacred scripture, the sayings of holy fathers, and
other Bishops of Rome, but by the confessions of all the same Councels.
Neither can Bell except and say, that this Council was Iesuited where never a
Jesuit was present: nay when as their Society was not yet begone. For Bell
tells us, that they began in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred
and Survey page 535.
forty, which was many years after the time of his Lateran Synod. Diverse
other notable authorities might be produced, but these are sufficient for his
condemnation. Only one remains which I will add, more potent then the former,
especially in respect of Bell, and that is of himself, who when he says that
this doctrine was not known to the Church of God until the time of the
Council of Constance. grants that then it began at least to be taught, and
so neither proceeded from Jesuits or Iesuited persons, as being of longer
standing by his own grant, False also it is, that this doctrine was not
known to the Church before the time of the Council of Constance. The glorious
Martyr, our Did. 40. cap. Si Papu^.
worthy country man S. Bonifacius says, that the Pope is to judge all and to
be judged of none, except he be known to err from the faith. S. Gelasius an
eleauen hundred years ago is a witness of the same truth. Appeals Epist. ad
episcopos Dardani^
(quoth he) may be made to the Apostolic see, from any part of the world, but
none is permitted to appeal from that: and he speaks not only of appealinge
from private Bishops, but also from a Council, for he adds after in the same
epistle, that the Bishops of Rome have loosed them, whom Councels have
vn^iustly bound. And before we proved, how Pope Leo irritated, and made of no
force, a decree enact Page 17.
in the Council of Chalcedon, which argues his s^periority over the Council.
And so I conclu^ that not only in this point, but in so many before mentioned,
Bell has a rare talent in the art o^ ouerlashinge, as I report me to the
particulars of this treatise.

THE CORRECTION OF faults escaped.
Page 6. line 4. read the

Page 7. line 17. read No nor it is to be imagined

Page 33. line 20. read his mortal

Page 36. line 7. read condemning him so deeply

Page 41. line 32. read altercation.


